palestine liberation organization ( plo ) chairman and palestinian authority ( pa ) president mahmoud abbas cites a lack of progress on the two - decades - old peace process with israel as the driving factor behind current plo / pa consideration of alternative pathways toward a palestinian state .

in recent months , plo and pa officials have actively worked to obtain more widespread international recognition of palestinian statehood in the west bank ( including east jerusalem ) and the gaza strip .

over 100 countries have recognized the state of palestine that the plo declared unilaterally in 1988 .

no north american or western european governments that provide significant financial support to the pa and are influential in the middle east have recognized the 1988 claim , and the current palestinian initiative has raised new questions about the positions of these third parties .

plo officials are pursuing action in the united nations ( u.n. ) aimed at solidifying international support for palestinian statehood , and they appear to enjoy support from the palestinian public and several international institutions for their efforts .

proponents of these initiatives at the u.n. support the timing of their efforts by citing both the plan of pa prime minister salam fayyad to reach "de facto statehood" by august 2011 through strengthening pa institutions and economic development , and the goal president obama enunciated in september 2010 for establishing a palestinian state by 2011 as part of a negotiated two - state solution with israel .

according to a september 2011 poll by the palestinian center for policy and survey research , 83% of palestinians in the west bank ( including east jerusalem ) and gaza strip support "turning to the un to obtain support for a palestinian state. .

reports in 2011 from the world bank , the international monetary fund , and the office of the u.n. special coordinator for the middle east peace process stated that the pa has made institutional progress in areas traditionally deemed necessary for statehood , but noted continued impediments: an underdeveloped private sector , constraints — mainly israel - imposed — on movement and access respecting the west bank and gaza , fiscal problems related to a dearth of international donor funding , and lack of progress in negotiations .

plo chairman / pa president abbas initiated action at the opening of the annual u.n. general assembly session that could lead to votes in both the security council and the general assembly .

on september 23 , 2011 , he submitted an application for palestinian state membership — on the basis of the armistice lines that prevailed before the arab - israeli war of 1967 ( commonly known as the "1967 borders" ) — to the u.n. secretary - general , who is expected to submit the matter to the security council for its action on whether to recommend membership .

a positive recommendation would require 9 "yes" votes out of 15 and no vetoes by any of the five permanent council members .

the obama administration has indicated that it will veto a security council recommendation resolution , but in the unlikely event the council were to make a positive recommendation , a two - thirds majority vote would be required in the general assembly to admit a palestinian state to the united nations .

to date , security council deliberations on the palestinian membership application have remained at the committee level , and the council could take additional weeks to review it .

in an alternate or parallel scenario , an existing u.n. member state supportive of plo plans may sponsor a resolution in the general assembly .

a general assembly resolution could recommend the recognition of a palestinian state based on the 1967 borders — either as - is or based provisionally on those lines subject to future israel - plo negotiation — and change palestine's permanent observer status in the united nations from that of an "entity" to that of a "non - member state" with a simple majority vote .

deferring the establishment of permanent borders to future negotiations could help the palestinians obtain more widespread support for u.n. action from european and other countries .

additionally , the executive board of the u.n. educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) voted in early october 2011 to have unesco's general conference consider the question of palestinian membership — see " united nations educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) " below for further discussion .

a session of unesco's general conference , at which a vote on palestinian membership might occur , is scheduled to convene from october 25 to november 10 , 2011 .

admission of a palestinian state to membership in unesco might trigger a legal requirement for the united states to discontinue contributions to unesco .

section 410 of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l .

103-236 ) is a currently codified legal provision that states that the united states shall not make contributions to "any affiliated organization of the united nations which grants full membership as a state to any organization or group that does not have the internationally recognized attributes of statehood. .

given that the u.s. currently contributes roughly 22% of unesco's budget , discontinuance of u.s. contributions could impact the organization .

many members of congress are actively interested in the question of possible u.n. action on palestinian statehood .

congress could try to influence u.s. policy and the choices of other actors through the authorization and appropriation of economic and security assistance and through oversight of the obama administration's diplomatic efforts .

the united states may be faced with a choice between backing its vigorous opposition to u.n. action with possible changes to u.s. aid to the pa , the u.n. , and individual u.n. agencies ; and taking more of a wait - and - see approach by reserving possible ultimatums for what follows the u.n. outcome both diplomatically and on the ground .

both approaches contain risks .

by unsuccessfully mounting strong opposition to u.n. action , the united states may lose credibility and leverage with key actors .

a restrained response , however , could lead these actors to perceive u.s. flexibility as weakness open to further exploitation .

either way , the outcome and aftermath of u.n. action on palestinian statehood could present further challenges to u.s. efforts to pursue a negotiated two - state solution that secures u.s. interests , is acceptable to the palestinians , guarantees israel's security , and is credible to both parties and the international community .

this section provides information on the u.n. framework and process for options being discussed , including the following topics: the united nations and recognition of states , observer status in the united nations , and criteria and process for gaining united nations membership .

the following discussion sets forth various possibilities regarding the nature of potential u.n. action or alternatives to such action .

security council action has begun , but even so , continuing diplomacy might lead to deferral , withdrawal , or modification of a potential resolution .

several actors — including the united states , the plo , israel , the european union , arab states , and turkey — could influence developments .

the two main decisions for the plo will be: in which u.n. venue ( s ) ( the security council , the general assembly , or both ) will it pursue or continue to pursue its efforts ? .

what will be the substance and wording of its request ( s ) ? .

the following discussion sets forth possible implications stemming from the process , outcome , or aftermath of u.n. action on palestinian statehood .

such implications could include consequences for day - to - day interactions between israelis and palestinians , precedents that could lead to further international action on behalf of the palestinians , and ramifications for possible future negotiations and internal israeli and palestinian political developments .

plo diplomatic efforts in 2011 are unlikely to lead to u.n. membership for a putative palestinian state because of a near certainty that the united states would veto a security council membership recommendation vote .

however , most observers believe that the plo has majority support for a possible general assembly resolution that would upgrade palestine's permanent observer status in the u.n. to that of a "non - member state. .

additionally , action by u.n. - affiliated agencies such as unesco to grant membership to a palestinian state is possible .

the united states , israel , and european countries are likely to focus on influencing palestinian decisions on the venue of u.n. action and / or the substance and wording of a possible resolution — with special attention to the question of statehood and to the permanence or provisionality of borders along the 1967 lines .

the future implications of u.n. action on palestinian statehood — beyond its potential symbolic value — are unclear .

although such action is unlikely to immediately resolve any of the core issues of the israeli - palestinian dispute , it may affect developments on the ground .

for example , tightened israeli security measures with respect to the west bank and gaza and popular unrest or civil disobedience among palestinians could ensue .

although plo chairman / pa president mahmoud abbas maintains that he seeks an eventual return to u.s. - backed israel - plo negotiations , chances for a meaningful resumption of talks remain dim .

an upgrade to palestinian statehood status at the u.n. could lead to subsequent efforts to apply greater political and international legal pressure on israel to change its posture on the ground , especially if the plo gains greater access to international courts — such as the icj or icc — or other forums in order to bring action against israel .

such legal action could focus on israeli military and security practices and israeli settlements and infrastructure in the west bank and east jerusalem .

israel has expressed concern that additional palestinian access to such institutions will further expose israeli military leaders to the types of war crimes charges that have become more common following israel's military actions of the past decade — possibly affecting the military's morale and operational freedom .

u.n. action on palestinian statehood or its aftermath may affect the willingness of israel to offer concessions in a negotiating process , especially in light of ongoing , widespread change in the arab world and the volatility and possible deterioration of israel's political and military relationships with egypt and turkey .

nominal palestinian sovereignty gained through u.n. action might serve israeli interests by relieving the sense of international urgency for further action on the issue .

if the u.n. outcome does not meet the expectations of the palestinian people , the plo could face internal challenges — from popular movements , hamas , or other organized militant groups — to its continued control of the west bank and status as the international representative of the palestinian people .

congressional decision - making on future budgetary assistance to the pa and other forms of aid could be tied to plo efforts to pursue u.n. action , to the outcome of security council and / or general assembly votes , to what follows the u.n. outcome both diplomatically and on the ground , some combination of these , or none of these .

resolution of these questions could depend on congressional views of how maintaining or changing aid levels could affect u.s. leverage and credibility in future regional and global contexts .

appendix a. timeline and documentation for three recently admitted member states appendix b .

the uniting for peace resolution some observers have expressed the opinion that in the absence of positive security council action relating to an independent palestine , such as a council recommendation to the general assembly on an application for u.n. membership by palestine , the issue might be referred to the assembly for approval of a membership application .

this section briefly discusses the uniting for peace resolution process and application , in light of the u.n. charter's express requirement that assembly consideration of an application for u.n. membership is predicated on prior favorable council recommendation .

the general assembly adopted resolution 377 a ( v ) on november 3 , 1950 , as an option in the event that the security council was unable to act on a matter dealing with the maintenance of international peace and security .

after military forces from north korea invaded the republic of korea in june 1950 , the council recommended that u.n. member states "furnish such assistance ... as may be necessary to repel the armed attack and to restore international peace and security in the area. .

adoption of s / res / 83 ( 1950 ) was possible because the ussr had boycotted meetings of the council .

however , from august on , a soviet delegation was present at council meetings and cast a negative vote on a u.s. draft resolution condemning the action by the north korean authorities .

in the resolution , the general assembly 1 .

resolves that if the security council , because of lack of unanimity of the permanent members , fails to exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in any case where there appears to be a threat to the peace , breach of the peace , or act of aggression , the general assembly shall consider the matter immediately with a view to making appropriate recommendations to members for collective measures , including in the case of a breach of the peace or act of aggression the use of armed force when necessary , to maintain or restore international pace and security .

if not in session at the time , the general assembly may meet in emergency special session within twenty - four hours of the request therefor .

such emergency special session shall be called if requested by the security council the vote of any seven members , or by a majority of the members of the united nations ; the aforementioned world court advisory opinion ( see " united nations membership: criteria and process " in the main body of the report ) appears to refute use of the uniting for peace resolution approach in connection with the possible admission of states to u.n. membership .

the resolution was intended to be applied in instances involving maintenance of international peace and security .

appendix c. possible legal implications of u.n. action on palestinian statehood for previous israeli - plo agreements some israeli analysts believe that plo pursuit of a u.n. security council or general assembly vote on palestinian statehood violates or contradicts previous israeli - plo agreements .

a may 2011 jerusalem report article stated that a former legal advisor to the israeli foreign ministry is contending that "the palestinians are in serious breach of the 1995 oslo interim agreement , which set up the palestinian authority [pa] , the presidency and the parliament , on the understanding that all remaining differences would be resolved through negotiations. .

as discussed below , palestinian claims that israel has breached the "oslo agreements" also are possible .

the interim agreement and the 1993 declaration of principles , two of the main oslo agreements , both contemplated that israel and the plo would negotiate a "permanent settlement based on security council resolutions 242 and 338," both of which support the principle of israel withdrawing from territories that its military occupied during the june 1967 war in exchange for "just and lasting peace" with its arab adversaries .

article xxxi , clause 7 of the interim agreement reads: neither side shall initiate or take any step that will change the status of the west bank and the gaza strip pending the outcome of the permanent status negotiations .

plo pursuit or acceptance of a u.n. vote on palestinian statehood for the west bank and gaza outside of an israel - plo negotiating context could be interpreted as contradicting the above clause .

israeli sources have argued that , by allowing the u.n. to vote on the issue rather than issuing its own unilateral declaration of statehood , the plo might seek to receive sovereignty for "palestine" while maintaining that it is not taking active steps that constitute a breach of article xxxi , clause 7 .

whether the plo has an ongoing requirement to abide by the above clause and the rest of the oslo agreements may be subject to debate .

the plo could argue that any requirement pertaining to negotiations that might have existed under the oslo agreements no longer applies because the oslo agreements contemplated that the transitional period under which negotiations would proceed and the pa would govern specified areas of the west bank and gaza strip would "not exceed 5 years. .

the continuing applicability of the agreements beyond the initial 5-year period is unclear ; one could argue that the agreements remain in force unless explicitly terminated , or one could argue that they are no longer binding .

israel might argue that by continuing the pa's administrative duties in the west bank and gaza beyond the initial 5-year - period , the plo has implicitly accepted the continuing applicability of the oslo agreements in their entirety .

this , however , also could lead to palestinian claims — likely to be disputed by israel — that israel has breached obligations under the agreements .

for example , palestinians could allege that israel sought to change the status of gaza when it withdrew its military forces and settlers in 2005 , that it failed to treat the west bank and gaza as a single territorial unit , or that continued building of settlements and infrastructure in the west bank and east jerusalem is tantamount to a change in status .

for previous u.n .

resolutions a potential u.n. general assembly resolution on palestinian statehood could be seen as contrary to the letter or spirit of u.n. security council resolutions 242 and 338 because these two resolutions are commonly seen as the foundational international legal basis for a negotiated "land - for - peace" peace process contemplated under the oslo agreements ( as discussed above ) .

recognizing palestinian sovereignty within the 1967 borders in connection with a general assembly resolution could be interpreted as satisfying the palestinians' claims to land without requiring them to make commitments for peace with israel or otherwise address security considerations , and therefore as undermining unscrs 242 and 338 .

because general assembly resolutions , however , are generally seen as non - binding as a matter of international law , or at least less binding than security council resolutions , such a general assembly resolution on palestinian statehood might not legally conflict with the two unscrs in question .

the plo and other actors supportive of a general assembly resolution could argue that pursuing palestinian statehood does not conflict with "land - for - peace" principles because nominal sovereignty alone would not alter israel's control over lands beyond the 1967 borders .

mahmoud abbas asserted in a may 2011 new york times column that a sovereign palestinian entity could actually be better positioned than the non - sovereign pa to negotiate a final land - for - peace compromise with israel .

analyzing the matter similarly , though from a different viewpoint , one prominent israeli analyst stated that "abbas' move is aimed at shaping the political context of the diplomatic struggle between israel and the palestinians in the future in the palestinians' favor… .

this is as much a struggle about political consciousness as it is about international law. .

another prominent israeli analyst has related the idea of potential international recognition of palestinian statehood to the concept of an "independent palestinian state with provisional borders and attributes of sovereignty" proposed by the united states and the other members of the middle east quartet ( united nations , european union , russia ) in 2002-2003 in phase ii of the performance - based road map to a permanent two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict ( "roadmap" ) .

appendix d. congressional action regarding palestinian statehood: 1988-2000 following the plo's declaration of statehood in 1988 , congress included a section ( section 414 ) in the foreign relations authorization act for fy1990 and fy1991 ( p.l .

101-246 ) that prohibited u.s. funding for the united nations or any u.n. agency to the extent those forums accorded the plo "the same standing as member states. .

in the context of yasser arafat's threat to declare a state in may 1999 at the expiration of the initial five - year interim period of the oslo accords — which arafat did not ultimately carry out — the house of representatives ( in march 1999 ) and senate ( in april 1999 ) passed h.con.res .

24 , which contained the following three resolutions: the final political status of the territory controlled by the palestinian authority can only be determined through negotiations and agreement between israel and the palestinian authority ; any attempt to establish palestinian statehood outside the negotiating process will invoke the strongest congressional opposition ; and the president should unequivocally assert united states opposition to the unilateral declaration of a palestinian state , making clear that such a declaration would be a grievous violation of the oslo accords and that a declared state would not be recognized by the united states .

in september 2000 , in the context of another arafat threat — also not carried out — to declare a state following the breakdown of u.s. - brokered israel - plo negotiations , and just prior to the outbreak of the second intifada , the house passed the peace through negotiations act of 2000 ( h.r .

5272 ) , which , if enacted as law , would have established the following provisions in the event of a subsequent plo unilateral declaration of statehood: downgrade to the status of the plo's office in the united states ; prohibition on u.s. aid to a unilaterally declared palestinian state , the palestinian authority , or any successor or related entity ; prohibition on u.s. program or project aid ( except humanitarian aid ) in the west bank and gaza strip ; authorization of the president to reduce contributions to international organizations that recognize a unilaterally - declared palestinian state ; and prohibition on use of funds to extend u.s. recognition to a unilaterally declared palestinian state .

h.r .

5272 also sought to require the united states to oppose membership by a unilaterally declared palestinian state in any international financial institution and to oppose any such institution's extension of loans or other financial or technical assistance to such a state .

appendix e. united nations observer status — the holy see and palestine: a comparison of capacities the following table is intended to provide information on the capacities of observer status in the united nations ( u.n. ) for the holy see ( sometimes referred to as the vatican ) , which has non - member state observer status , and for palestine , which is an entity with observer status .

originally , the holy see gained permanent observer status in the u.n. general assembly in 1964 when it established a permanent observer mission and requested access to the general assembly from the u.n. secretary - general .

that status was and is listed in the blue book , the permanent missions to the united nations publication .

the palestine liberation organization , later designated by the general assembly as palestine within the u.n. system , was given observer status in 1974 and received enhanced capacities in successive assembly resolutions .

in 2004 , the assembly adopted a resolution on the status of the holy see in the united nations , that gave the holy see enhanced capacities that are nearly identical to those palestine has received .

