the development of super pacs is one of the most recent components of the debate over money and speech in elections .

some perceive super pacs as a positive consequence of deregulatory court decisions in citizens united and related case speechnow .

for those who support super pacs , these relatively new political committees provide an important outlet for independent calls for election or defeat of federal candidates .

others contend that they are the latest outlet for unlimited money in politics that , while legally independent , are functional extensions of one or more campaigns .

this report does not attempt to settle that debate , but it does provide context for understanding what super pacs are and how they are relevant for federal campaign finance policy .

the report does so through a question - and - answer format that emphasizes recurring public policy questions about super pacs .

now that super pacs have become established players in american elections , this updated report focuses on the background and policy matters that appear to be most relevant for legislative and oversight concerns .

the report discusses selected litigation to demonstrate how those events have changed the campaign finance landscape and affected the policy issues that may confront congress ; it is not , however , a constitutional or legal analysis .

finally , a note on terminology may be useful .

the term independent expenditures ( ies ) appears throughout the report .

ies refer to purchases , often for political advertising , that explicitly call for election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate ( eg , "vote for smith," "vote against jones" ) .

campaign finance lexicon typically refers to making ies , which is synonymous with the act of spending funds for the purchase calling for election or defeat of a federal candidate .

parties , traditional pacs , individuals , and now , super pacs , may make ies .

ies are not considered campaign contributions and cannot be coordinated with the referenced candidate .

super pacs are only one element of modern campaigns .

regular media attention to super pacs might give an overstated impression of these organizations' influence in federal elections .

nonetheless , super pacs have joined other groups in american politics , such as parties and 527 organizations , that are legally separate from the candidates they support or oppose , but whom some regard as practically an extension of the campaign .

as with most campaign finance issues , whether congress decides to take action on the super pac issue , and how , will likely depend on the extent to which super pac activities are viewed as an exercise in free speech by independent organizations versus thinly veiled extensions of individual campaigns .

