this report reviews estimates of fiscal impacts to the federal , state , and local governments of the foreign born who reside in the united states .

by fiscal impacts , the report refers to both tax - funded expenditures for public services such as public education and public health programs , and tax revenues received through payroll withholdings on income , property taxes , sales taxes , and other taxes .

the analysis of tax - funded expenditures and tax revenues together is referred to as the net fiscal impact .

congress has had a long - standing interest in the fiscal impacts of the foreign born .

congressional interest has emphasized two public policy issues: immigration policy , particularly what categories of foreign nationals and what number should be granted admission into the country ; and to a lesser extent , budget concerns over the cost of public services used by the foreign born .

for instance , concerns about consumption of public services by unauthorized aliens and other foreign - born persons caused congress to pass the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora , p.l .

104-193 ) , which statutorily barred many legal permanent residents and other noncitizens from many federal assistance programs .

this report focuses exclusively on literature that examines fiscal impacts of the foreign born .

however , it does not address the following topics: economic impacts of the foreign born , such as their effect on industrial competitiveness , economic development , or the employment prospects , wages , and working conditions of u.s. workers ; demographic impacts of the foreign born , such as their effect on the size and composition of the u.s. population ; socio - cultural impacts of the foreign born , such as their effects on language use and civic participation ; and environmental impacts of the foreign born , such as their effects on pollution generation , public goods consumption , and traffic congestion .

nor does it address , for the unauthorized alien population , costs to the federal government of enforcing immigration laws , such as investigating , arresting , detaining , and removing unauthorized aliens from the united states .

the report examines the academic and policy literature on fiscal impacts of two populations: the entire foreign - born population and the unauthorized alien population .

while many studies have been conducted to estimate fiscal impacts of just the unauthorized alien population , few have estimated fiscal impacts of just the legally residing foreign - born population .

for example , the new americans , an authoritative report discussed extensively below , considers all foreign born without analyzing populations separately according to legal status .

consequently , the first portion of this report evaluates studies of all foreign born , irrespective of legal status .

the second portion evaluates studies of only the unauthorized alien population .

this report is not an exhaustive review of the literature .

reviewed studies were generally selected if they included attempts to quantify the cost of public services and benefits received by the foreign born and / or tax revenues contributed , and they explained their methodologies for computing estimates .

hence , studies that applied excessively simple , incomplete , or undisclosed methodologies were generally not included .

this report also excluded studies that intended to show only a favorable or unfavorable portrait of the foreign born , unless their methodological sophistication warranted their inclusion .

the span of methodologies used in the analyses presented in this report ranges from basic arithmetic computations to sophisticated microeconomic and macroeconomic models .

moreover , the report distinguishes between cross - sectional studies that consider the fiscal impacts of the foreign born at a particular year , versus longitudinal studies that attempt to capture fiscal impacts of the foreign born across longer periods or several generations .

with the exception of studies discussed in a 1995 general accounting office ( gao ) report that assess fiscal impacts of the unauthorized alien population , studies reviewed herein were completed after 1996 .

studies within each section are generally reviewed in chronological order , with the earliest studies evaluated first .

the appendix summarizes findings for all studies reviewed .

because of differences in research scope , methods , specific populations analyzed , and other factors , the report refrains from synthesizing these results beyond what is presented in its conclusion section .

the report begins by discussing challenges of enumerating the foreign born , including the unauthorized alien population , and estimating fiscal impacts of the foreign born .

next , it reviews four sets of studies .

the first , included in a national research council ( nrc ) report entitled the new americans , represents an evaluation of short - and long - term fiscal impacts of the entire foreign - born population that served as a touchstone for subsequent research assessing the impact of u.s. immigration .

the second part of this report reviews scholastic research on fiscal impacts of the total foreign - born population published after the nrc report .

these scholastic analyses , published mostly in peer - reviewed academic journals , generally encompass greater analytic rigor than policy studies .

the third part of this report reviews policy studies of fiscal impacts of the total foreign - born population conducted at the national and state levels that were undertaken by policy organizations .

the fourth part considers the unauthorized alien population by first discussing a seminal policy debate between 1993 and 1995 assessing fiscal impacts of unauthorized aliens , and continuing with a review of policy studies conducted mostly at the state level on fiscal impacts of unauthorized aliens .

analysts have long attempted to estimate the fiscal impacts of immigrants to the united states .

their work has produced useful conceptual and analytic frameworks to guide such research .

these frameworks typically describe elements necessary to produce accurate and comprehensive impact estimates: defining precisely the foreign - born population analyzed ; distinguishing among the foreign born by legal status , education , decade of u.s. arrival , or other policy - relevant criteria ; determining an appropriate unit of analysis for computing fiscal impacts ; deciding which public service costs and tax revenues to include ; making assumptions about the extent to which the foreign born use public services and contribute taxes relative to native residents ; and deciding over how many generations to compute impacts .

studies can be evaluated on the extent to which they incorporate or address such elements .

however , analysts face a number of methodological hurdles to incorporating these elements into fiscal impact studies .

this section reviews selected studies that examine fiscal impacts to federal , state , and local governments of just the unauthorized alien population .

similar to the section of this report above that reviewed studies of the entire foreign - born population , this section begins by reviewing an authoritative report that reflected a prominent policy debate in the mid - 1990s on the fiscal impact of unauthorized aliens .

it is followed by policy studies that quantified fiscal impacts of just the unauthorized alien population .

only studies with clear explanations of their estimate methodologies were included .

fiscal impact analysis for unauthorized aliens poses greater challenges than that for all foreign - born persons .

two reasons explain the absence of reliable estimates .

first , reliable estimates of public service costs and tax revenues of unauthorized aliens require the following: accurate counts of unauthorized aliens and accurate measures of their socioeconomic characteristics , reliable and complete information on public service utilization and associated costs , and reliable and complete information on tax and withholding revenue generated by unauthorized aliens .

since these data generally do not exist , many studies are based on assumptions of the very items they are trying to estimate .

without additional data , net fiscal impacts of unauthorized aliens remain estimates , with varying and unknown margins of error .

second , as with research on the total foreign - born population , studies of unauthorized aliens analyze different services and revenues , hindering cross - study comparisons .

state and local governments bear much of the cost of providing public services to unauthorized aliens residing in their jurisdictions .

the most expensive public services are public education , health care , and law enforcement , although such spending for unauthorized aliens often makes up a small proportion of these governments' total spending .

given these challenges , researchers attempting to quantify the costs and revenues of unauthorized aliens used more circumscribed methodologies .

not all studies estimated both public service costs and revenue contributions .

many studies analyzed limited geographic regions , such as border communities and states , and / or limited their analyses to discrete issues , such as the cost of medical care or criminal justice services .

many relied on published data and quantitative modeling to estimate fiscal impacts .

some overcame the lack of legal status information in conventional data sets by surveying immigrant communities and asking immigration status or by asking local agencies to estimate the cost of public services provided to unauthorized aliens .

other studies used proxies to determine unauthorized status , such as the combination of being foreign - born and earning low wages .

each method has strengths and limitations , and none provided estimates that all researchers accept .

as congress addresses issues related to the current economic downturn and budgetary constraints , attention might be given to the fiscal impacts of changes in immigration policy .

while such considerations have been a long - standing interest of congress , they receive renewed attention in times of fiscal stress because they represent the intersection of two prominent public policy issues: immigration policy governing the categories and numbers of foreign born admitted to the united states , and budget concerns over public service costs .

concerns about public service use by the foreign born partly explain why congress passed the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) , which statutorily barred many legal permanent residents and other noncitizens from many federal assistance programs .

despite the limited scope , computing net fiscal impacts of either the total foreign - born population or the unauthorized alien population — the difference between taxes paid and the cost of public services consumed — remains challenging .

methodological hurdles limit the degree to which analysts can produce viable results comparable across time periods , geographies , and populations .

obstacles include datasets that have limited information on legal status , differences in the costs and revenues analysts chose to analyze , and the treatment of u.s. - born children .

while a number of state - level policy studies reviewed in this report began with pew hispanic center estimates of the unauthorized alien population , they diverged in what public service costs and revenue streams were analyzed .

in some cases , the lack of data influenced what was quantified .

nevertheless , several recurring themes appeared throughout many of the studies considered in this report .

studies of both the total foreign - born population and the unauthorized alien population suggest that foreign - born residents' age composition substantially affects their net fiscal impact .

the foreign born , like the native born , impose their largest costs on u.s. taxpayers as children through their consumption of public education , and as the elderly through their consumption of public health services from programs like medicare and their receipt of social security retirement benefits .

yet , the majority of the foreign born who come to the united states as young adults and reside permanently pay taxes and contribute to programs like social security for most of their working lives .

the relatively young ages at arrival for most foreign born help explain why many fiscal impact studies reviewed by the authors of the new americans , for example , found that foreign - born residents over the long term generated net fiscal surpluses .

educational attainment of the foreign - born population also remains a critical determinant of net fiscal impacts .

findings from the seminal study , the new americans , which received empirical support from several subsequent academic studies reviewed in this report , bear reiteration .

the study estimated that foreign - born residents with less than a high school education created a long - term deficit of $18,000 , while those with more than a high school education generated a long - term surplus of $275,000 .

these figures illustrate the degree to which one sophisticated estimation procedure yields substantially different fiscal impacts by varying one key characteristic: education .

fiscal impacts differ at the state and federal levels .

differences varied according to which contributions and public services were considered , what time frame was used , and the taxing scheme of the state in which the study was undertaken .

hypothetically , a legal permanent resident could contribute more federal taxes than the cost of social security , medicare , and other federal public services he and his family consume in a given year , yielding a net fiscal surplus at the federal level .

however , if his children attended public schools , whose costs are borne by local residents through state and local income and property taxes , he and his family could generate a net fiscal deficit at the state level during the same year .

foreign - born residents' relatively young age distribution accentuates the degree to which states and localities incur greater fiscal costs from the foreign born than the federal government .

federal programs such as social security and medicare are oriented toward assisting the elderly , while state and local level jurisdictions are often responsible for services consumed by younger persons , such as public education and criminal justice administration .

studies of the fiscal impact of unauthorized aliens reach less consensus than those of the total foreign - born population .

three national estimates of the net fiscal impact of unauthorized aliens evaluated in a 1995 gao report varied considerably and left the agency unable to definitively quantify such impacts .

subsequent state - level studies emphasized fiscal impacts from the most costly public services: public education , health care , and law enforcement .

many also estimated tax and other fiscal contributions .

studies estimating fiscal impacts for unauthorized aliens were more likely to yield estimated net fiscal deficits than those that estimated fiscal impacts for all foreign born .

on average , unauthorized aliens tend to be younger and less educated , thereby earning lower wages and salaries than all foreign - born workers .

as a consequence , they are more likely to use public education for their children and contribute relatively less in tax revenues compared to all foreign born .

however , deriving more specific conclusions or estimates from studies of unauthorized aliens reviewed in this report remains elusive due to differences in study methodology and variation in costs across states where these analyses were conducted .

policy analyses reviewed in this report illustrate two key findings .

first , both the noncitizen foreign born and many unauthorized aliens can generate significant fiscal expenditures .

moreover , the relative pervasiveness of document fraud among unauthorized aliens working in the formal economy suggests that some portion of those nominally ineligible for public services can still obtain them .

second , these analyses also indicate that the noncitizen foreign born and many unauthorized aliens pay taxes at all government levels and contribute to the social security program from which they may never obtain benefits .

