behavioral health disorders affect a large number of people and contribute costs to the health care system , even as indicated treatment is often not received by individuals in need .

in the united states , an estimated 26% of non - institutionalized adults experience behavioral health disorders in a given year ; over the course of a lifetime , the estimate rises to 46% .

one study estimated spending on behavioral health care in 2005 to be $135 billion , of which $40 billion was paid by the federal government ( including $10 billion by medicare ) and $44 billion by state governments .

both higher and lower cost estimates have been found in other studies .

among u.s. adults suffering from a behavioral health disorder severe enough to interfere with major life activities in 2009 , 40% received no treatment .

despite spending on behavioral health care , adults with unmet need report numerous barriers to access , including factors such as cost , lack of time , and not knowing where to go for treatment , among others .

the federal government has a role in both the financing and the delivery of behavioral health care services , as a payer , regulator , and provider .

it pays for behavioral health care services through the medicare and medicaid programs and , in its role as regulator , has required the establishment and coverage of a minimum set of benefits , including behavioral health care services , for many private health plans , as well as the medicaid program .

it supports the delivery of safety net services as a direct provider ( eg , indian health service ) and through the development and training of safety net health care providers ( eg , the national health service corps ) .

the federal government supports both clinical training for the behavioral health workforce as well as programs to alleviate provider shortages .

given the investment in these programs , among others , the financing and the delivery of behavioral health care services are likely to be of interest to congress .

congressional interest in behavioral health care is reflected in the recently enacted health reform law ( patient protection and affordable care act [ppaca] , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

although transforming the behavioral health care delivery system was not an explicit focus of the law , it includes sections that are expected to increase access to behavioral health services through changes to the financing and the delivery of health care services .

changes to financing affect both financing arrangements ( eg , public programs like medicare and medicaid , as well as private health insurance ) and coverage of specific services ( i.e. , covered benefits ) under those arrangements .

changes to the delivery system affect ( among other things ) the delivery of safety net services and the development of the health workforce .

ppaca includes sections that are specific to behavioral health , as well as broad reforms to health care financing and delivery that will affect behavioral health .

this report provides an overview of sections in ppaca identified as having relevance to behavioral health .

it first discusses these sections broadly in the context of both financing and delivery of behavioral health care services .

it then presents relevant sections from the law , and selected information about each section , in a series of eight tables ( see tables 1 through 8 ) .

access to health care services is determined by multiple factors , including ( among other things ) financing arrangements and covered benefits .

addressing both components concomitantly may increase access to care more efficiently than addressing each component independently .

for example , if existing financing arrangements are augmented or new arrangements are created , access will increase only to those services that are covered .

similarly , if benefits under existing financing arrangements are expanded ( as through a coverage mandate ) or the terms of those services are altered ( as through mental health parity law ) , these changes are relevant only for those individuals participating in the financing arrangement .

this section briefly discusses sections in ppaca that address these dimensions of access to care and that are relevant to behavioral health .

access to care is not merely a matter of financing ; it also depends on the health care service delivery system .

ppaca contains sections that are likely to affect the way in which health care services are delivered .

two major aspects of the health care service delivery system addressed by ppaca are the safety net and the health care workforce .

in addition , a number of sections establish models of patient - centered care that aim to improve health outcomes , increase coordination of care , and integrate behavioral health care services into mainstream clinical settings .

this section briefly discusses sections in ppaca that address these dimensions of the health care service delivery system and that are relevant to behavioral health .

sections in ppaca identified as being relevant to behavioral health care have been divided into nine tables .

the first five tables address topics described under " ppaca and financing of behavioral health care ": ( 1 ) essential health benefits ; ( 2 ) mental health parity ; ( 3 ) private health insurance ; ( 4 ) medicare ; and ( 5 ) medicaid .

the remaining tables address topics described under " ppaca and delivery of behavioral health care ": ( 6 ) safety net services ; ( 7 ) workforce ; and ( 8 ) miscellaneous sections ( eg , sections on research , education or community - based services , among others ) .

relevant indian health service ( ihs ) sections are in appendix a .

in each table , sections are presented by relevant issue area ; for example , the private health insurance sections are divided into those relating to ( 1 ) private market reforms and ( 2 ) the health insurance exchanges .

each table then presents a description of the section , its section number , and whether it is a new or existing authority .

finally , each table indicates whether the section is specific to behavioral health ( noted with "s" ) , or is general in nature ( noted with "g" ) , but affects behavioral health care providers or their patients .

sections may appear in multiple tables , where relevant , as the tables are not mutually exclusive .

appendix a. indian health service sections relevant to behavioral health in the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) appendix b .

search strategy this report provides information about sections in the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( ppaca , p.l .

111-148 ) that relate directly or indirectly to behavioral health .

in order to identify relevant sections , a search was performed of the consolidated act using the following terms: "behavioral," " mental," "psych," and "substance. .

in consultation with other crs analysts , the resulting list of sections was revised by including additional sections that would have an impact on behavioral health care providers and their patients , and excluding sections that would not .

because there is neither a specific part of ppaca dedicated to behavioral health nor standard language applied to all relevant sections , crs is unable to ensure that the listing it has provided is comprehensive .

appendix c. acronym listing the following acronyms appear in this report: area health education center ( ahec ) centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) community health center fund ( chcf ) department of health and human services ( hhs ) department of the interior ( doi ) federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) food and drug administration ( fda ) health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ) health professional shortage area ( hpsa ) home and community - based services ( hcbs ) indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) indian health service ( ihs ) indian tribe ( it ) institutions for mental disease ( imd ) long - term care ( ltc ) medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa ) national health service corps ( nhsc ) patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( ppaca ) pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) public health service act ( phsa ) school - based health center ( sbhc ) social security act ( ssa ) substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) tribal organization ( to ) urban indian organization ( uio ) .

