carrying a concealed firearm is an activity traditionally regulated by the states .

generally , each state has its own concealed carry eligibility laws and requirements , and determines which out - of - state concealed carry permits it will recognize .

although regulating concealed carry has been left to the states , congress has passed a few laws that authorize certain individuals to carry concealed firearms across state lines , notwithstanding individual state provisions .

in addition , it has enacted a measure that permits individuals to carry concealed firearms on federal lands that are units of the national park system and national wildlife refuge system .

yet , in the past few years , congress has considered measures that would permit nationwide concealed carry and continues to consider legislation that would allow concealed carry on other federal lands .

this report first provides an overview of how concealed carry is generally regulated among the states .

it then summarizes the federal laws regulating concealed carry .

lastly , it examines the concealed carry legislation pending before 112 th congress .

this report does not address carrying firearms on military installations by military personnel .

carrying a concealed firearm is basically the ability of an individual to carry on his or her person a firearm , typically a handgun , in a concealed manner .

regulations pertaining to concealed carry vary by state .

states that issue concealed carry permits are generally either a "shall - issue" or a "may - issue" state .

among these states , some issue permits only to residents , while others issue permits to both residents and non - residents .

in "shall - issue" jurisdictions , the issuing authority is required to grant an applicant the concealed carry permit ( ccp ) if he or she meets the statutory requirements .

in "may - issue" jurisdictions , the issuing authority generally has the discretion to grant or deny a ccp based on a variety of statutory factors .

for example , the state of north carolina is a "shall - issue" jurisdiction .

it provides: "the sheriff shall issue a permit to carry a concealed handgun to a person who qualifies for a permit under g.s .

14-415.12 .

the permit shall be valid throughout the state for a period of five years from the date of issuance. .

 ( emphasis added ) .

by comparison , the state of california is a "may - issue" jurisdiction .

it provides: "the sheriff of a county , upon proof that the person applying is of good moral character , that good cause exists for the issuance , and that the person applying satisfies any one of the conditions … may issue to that person a license to carry a pistol …" ( emphasis added ) .

because states with "may - issue" laws typically grant permits at their discretion , obtaining a permit in "may - issue" states is arguably more difficult than in "shall - issue" states .

there are , however , jurisdictions which utilize the term "shall - issue" in statute but could be considered "may - issue" jurisdictions because they typically require the applicant to provide evidence of good character or demonstrate proper cause in his or her need for the ccp .

for example , rhode island law states: "the licensing authorities of any city or town shall … issue a license or permit to carry concealed upon his or her person a pistol or revolver … if it appears that the applicant has good reason to fear an injury to his or her person or property or has any other proper reason for carrying a pistol or revolver , and that he or she is a suitable person to be so licensed. .

only the state of illinois and the district of columbia prohibit concealed carry .

on the other hand , states like alaska , vermont , arizona , and wyoming do not require their residents to have ccps to carry a concealed firearm ; though , some of these states ( e.g .

alaska and arizona ) continue to issue ccps to their residents so they may carry concealed in other states which require permits for the purpose of reciprocity .

each state decides which out - of - state permits it will honor .

this is done via reciprocity and recognition agreements that can be either written or unwritten .

states tend to recognize or enter into reciprocity agreements with other jurisdictions where the concealed carry requirements are similar to their own .

for example , the state of washington mandates that it will recognize concealed carry permits of other states only if the licensing state ( 1 ) does not issue to persons under the age of 21 ; and ( 2 ) requires mandatory fingerprint - based background checks of criminal and mental health history .

reciprocity agreements can change periodically .

for instance , the state of florida's department of agriculture and consumer services , division of licensing announced: the division of licensing constantly monitors changing gun laws in other states and attempts to negotiate agreements as the laws in those states allow .

this list was last updated on january 1 , 2011 , when the state of iowa was added to the reciprocity list .

note: effective july 1 , 2009 , nevada was no longer reciprocal with florida .

authorities in nevada notified the division of licensing that as of that date nevada would no longer honor florida concealed weapon licenses .

therefore , in accordance with the reciprocity agreement provision set forth in section 790.015 , florida statutes , florida could not longer honor concealed weapon licenses issued by the state of nevada .

notably , some states only honor out - of - state permits if the licensee holds a permit from his state of residence , otherwise an out - of - state visitor would have to apply for a non - resident permit , if offered , of the state in which he wishes to carry .

for example , colorado , a "shall - issue" jurisdiction , provides that another state's ccp is valid if it is issued to a person who is 21 years of age or older , and "a resident of that state that issued the permit , as demonstrated by the address stated on a valid picture identification that is issued by the state that issued the permit and is carried by the permit holder. .

there are also other states that that honor out - of - state ccps irrespective of whether that individual is a resident or non - resident of the state from which he obtained his license .

utah , for example , provides that its unlawful carrying penalties do not apply to any person to whom a permit to carry a concealed firearm has been issued by the state or by another state or county .

carrying a concealed firearm should be distinguished from transporting a firearm in a vehicle .

states generally provide an exception to their ccp requirements if the individual is transporting a firearm in a vehicle for specific purposes and the firearm is unloaded and disassembled .

the state of michigan requires individuals to obtain a ccp in order to possess , carry , or transport a pistol in the state , unless the individual is "carrying a pistol unloaded in a wrapper or container in the trunk of his or her vehicle … [or that the pistol is] unloaded in a locked compartment or container that is separated from the ammunition for that pistol from the place of purchase to his or her home or place of business or to a place of repair or back to his or her home or place of business , or in moving goods from [one] place of abode or business to another place of abode or business. .

maryland similarly makes it unlawful to transport a handgun , concealed or open , unless one is licensed to do so .

other exceptions where lawful transportation is permitted include if the handgun is unloaded and carried in an enclosed case and if the individual is transporting the handgun between certain locations .

yet , in the state of new york , for example , it is unlawful for an individual to transport a firearm without being licensed by the state to do so , and there do not appear to be any exceptions .

there is , however , also a federal safe harbor that permits individuals to transport a firearm in a vehicle between states without fear of being prosecuted for violating the carrying / transportation laws of a state through which he travels .

at the federal level — apart from the three laws that are discussed in this section — federal law enforcement officers , or federal agents , generally are authorized by statute to carry a firearm .

such statutory provisions commonly state that they are authorized to carry firearms "for the purpose of performing duties. .

while federal agents are likely authorized to carry their firearms nationwide pursuant to enforcing federal laws , policies on carrying firearms off - duty appear to be left to the discretion of the agency .

this section discusses the armored car industry reciprocity act of 1993 , the arming pilots against terrorism act of 2002 , and the law enforcement officers safety act of 2003 .

these laws authorize certain persons to carry a concealed firearm across state lines , notwithstanding individual state provisions on the carriage of concealed firearms .

several types of concealed carry bills have been introduced in 112 th congress .

one , h.r .

822 , would require states to recognize out - of - state concealed carry permits so long as a person is carrying a valid state - issued ccp and a document with photographic identification .

the second , h.r .

2900 , is a broader bill that would authorize nationwide concealed carry .

the third , s. 176 , is another type of concealed carry bill that would require states , which issue ccps , to establish minimum standards of who could carry concealed .

lastly , s. 1588 , similar to the national parks law , would permit an individual to carry a firearm on federal lands that fall under the jurisdiction of the army corps of engineers .

representative cliff stearns introduced h.r .

822 , the national right - to - carry reciprocity act of 2011 .

during mark - up of the bill in the house judiciary committee , representative trent franks offered an amendment in the nature of a substitute that was adopted on october 14 , 2011 .

the house of representatives passed this bill on november 16 , 2011 , by a vote of 272-154 .

under h.r .

822 , as amended , an individual would be allowed to carry a concealed handgun into another state as long as he or she is carrying a "valid identification document containing a photograph of the person" and a valid state - issued ccp .

in meeting these two criteria , an individual would be able to carry concealed in "any state" that either ( 1 ) has a statute permitting residents to obtain a ccp to carry concealed firearms , or ( 2 ) that does not prohibit the carrying of concealed firearms .

thus , the bill would not allow an individual to carry concealed in the state of illinois , as that state expressly prohibits the carrying of concealed firearms , nor does the state issue ccps to its residents .

likewise , it appears unlikely that an individual could carry concealed into the district of columbia under the first condition of the bill because dc law provides no mechanism by which an individual can obtain a ccp .

although individuals may no longer obtain a ccp in the district , dc law does not expressly prohibit residents from carry concealed , because the provision states "[n]o person shall carry within the district of columbia either openly or concealed on or about their person , a pistol , without a license issued pursuant to district of columbia law...." while this leaves open the possibility that an individual who had obtained a ccp in the past may still lawfully carry concealed under this provision , ccps issued by the district were only valid for one year from the date of issuance .

it is therefore unlikely that any person who had previously obtained a ccp can lawfully carry concealed , as it is likely that his ccp expired .

thus , even though there appears to be an understanding that the bill would not apply to the district , an individual could argue that because dc does not expressly prohibit the carrying of concealed firearms , that it falls under the second condition of h.r .

822 , thereby allowing an individual to carry concealed in the district with an out - of - state ccp .

however , it is unclear whether a court would look solely at the district's statutory language or also consider that the overall practical effect of dc's laws precludes concealed carry by any individual .

furthermore , under the bill , an individual , not otherwise eligible in his state of residence for a ccp , would not be allowed to obtain an out - of - state , or non - resident , ccp in a state with less restrictive eligibility requirements , and use that permit to carry concealed in his state of residence .

for example , a majority of states issue ccps to individuals who are at least 21 years of age or older , while only a handful of states issue ccps to individuals who are 18 years of age or older .

thus , residents from states such as california , florida , or colorado who do not meet the state's age requirement would not be able to obtain a non - resident , out - of - state , ccp , from states ( e.g .

idaho , indiana and maine ) that issue non - resident permits to individuals 18 years and older , and use that ccp to carry back in his state of residence .

as discussed in the beginning , eligibility requirements vary among states , as does reciprocity .

thus , under h.r .

822 , although states would retain their own eligibility standards and permitting schemes , it seems the bill would have a preemptive effect .

for example , the state of oregon , a "shall - issue" jurisdiction that considers carrying concealed without a non - oregon permit to be a misdemeanor , would be required to honor all other out - of - state permits .

likewise , some states such as colorado or south carolina that have chosen to recognize out - of - state ccps only if the individual is a resident of the issuing state would be required , under the bill , to recognize the out - of - state ccps of an individual who is not a resident of the issuing state .

moreover , it appears a "may - issue" state would be required to recognize permits from "shall - issue" jurisdictions , and "shall - issue" jurisdictions that do not recognize each other would also be required to recognize each other .

for example , states like california and new jersey , which are "may - issue" jurisdictions and do not recognize any other out - of - state concealed carry permits , would appear to be required to recognize all other states where one is entitled to carry concealed .

in addition , while the bill would preclude an individual from obtaining an out - of - state ccp to carry concealed back in his state of residence , as discussed above , it may also be possible that an individual , who obtains a ccp from his state of residence and subsequently moves into another state , would not be able to use that ccp when he becomes a resident of the state where he moved .

h.r .

822 , as amended , further provides that an individual who takes advantage of nationwide concealed carry would be subject to "the same conditions and limitations … that apply to the possession or carrying of a concealed handgun by residents of the state" who are either licensed by the state to carry or not prohibited from doing so .

the amended bill , however , makes explicit that an individual who carries pursuant to the bill would not be required to meet the "eligibility [requirements] to possess or carry , [that are] imposed by" the state into which the individual travels .

for example , the state of ohio generally prohibits possession of a firearm in any establishment licensed to serve alcohol , in a court house , in government buildings and airports .

under h.r .

822 , an individual who is otherwise allowed to carry in these locations in his state of residence would be required to abide by ohio law when carrying concealed in ohio .

additionally , h.r .

822 , as introduced , stated that where an issuing authority is allowed to impose additional restrictions on individual concealed carry permits , a firearm carried in that state would be carried "according to the same terms authorized by an unrestricted license of or permit issued to a resident of the state. .

the franks substitute does not include this provision .

a state that issues restricted ccps , therefore , could attempt to argue that visitors would be subject to the restrictions that are placed upon its own residents on a case - by - case basis .

h.r .

2900 , the secure access to firearms enhancement act of 2011 , was introduced by representative paul broun .

this bill is arguably much broader than h.r .

822 as it would permit any person who ( 1 ) "is carrying a valid license issued pursuant to the law of any state and which permits the person to carry a concealed firearm" ; or ( 2 ) "is entitled to carry a concealed firearm in and pursuant to the laws of the state in which the person resides carrying a concealed firearm in his state of residence" to carry concealed in any state "subject to the laws of the state in which the firearm is carried concerning specific types of locations in which firearms may not be carried. .

thus , residents from states such as vermont , alaska , and arizona would not need to obtain a concealed carry permit to carry into another state .

moreover , it would be possible under this bill for an individual to obtain an out - of - state ccp and carry in his state of residence in the event he is not initially eligible for a ccp in his state of residence .

senator barbara boxer introduced s. 176 , the common sense concealed firearms permit act of 2011 .

under the bill , each state that allows residents to carry concealed firearms would be required to establish a permitting process that requires its residents , who wish to carry concealed , to obtain a ccp and meet certain eligibility requirements that would be established under the bill .

at a minimum , an applicant must be a legal resident of the united states ; 21 years of age or older ; demonstrate good cause to the local law enforcement agency for requesting a ccp ; and demonstrate that he or she is "worthy of the public trust to carry a concealed firearm in public. .

thus , under s. 176 , it appears that states such as vermont and alaska , which permit concealed carry but do not require its residents obtain ccps to carry within the state , would be required to amend its laws to require residents to obtain ccps .

moreover , some "shall - issue" states would have to add "may - issue" type requirements .

the bill does not explicitly provide that it would allow holders of the state - issued ccp to carry in another state .

s. 1588 , the recreational land self - defense act of 2011 , was introduced by senator jim webb .

it would prohibit the secretary of the army from promulgating or enforcing any regulation that prohibits an individual from possessing a firearm , including an assembled or functional firearm , at water resources development projects managed by the army corps of engineers .

under the bill , an individual must not be prohibited by law from possessing a firearm , and the possession of the firearm must be in compliance with the law of the state where the water resources project is located .

thus , similar to the national parks concealed carry legislation from 2009 , an individual would bear responsibility for knowing and complying with all applicable concealed carry laws of the state or states where the water resources development project is located .

