the horn of africa region , which includes djibouti , eritrea , ethiopia , kenya , and somalia , is facing its worst drought in 60 years .

the situation is critical with more than 13.3 million people affected , 4 million in acute need of humanitarian assistance , and 250,000 who are thought to be in dire need of food and at risk of starvation .

conditions in somalia have created an escalating refugee crisis , primarily in kenya and ethiopia .

despite considerable efforts by the united states and the international community to respond to the emergency , the needs of those affected are unlikely to be met in the coming months and may not stabilize until 2012 .

key priorities include food , water and sanitation , health , and protection .

the united states is the largest bilateral donor of humanitarian assistance to the region , having provided over $650.5 million in life - saving assistance in fy2011 .

so far in fy2012 , it has provided nearly $220 million .

it is also working on long - term responses to break the disaster cycle in the horn .

the urgency and scope of the humanitarian emergency , coupled with other contributing factors , such as poor infrastructure , insecurity , and internal unrest , began to command the attention of the international community in the second half of 2011 .

the 112 th congress has so far focused on the crisis in hearings , legislation , and congressional correspondence with the administration .

it is anticipated congress will continue to follow and respond to events as they unfold in the horn .

although the drought had been developing for some time in the horn of africa region , its effects reached crisis proportions in july 2011 .

on july 20 , mark bowden , the united nations humanitarian coordinator for somalia , issued a famine declaration for two regions of southern somalia .

the united nations identified three additional areas in southern somalia in early august and another in early september .

also on july 20 , the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian assistance ( unocha ) elevated the status of the horn of africa drought crisis to a major , large - scale emergency , which brought internal resources and focus to bear within unocha , such as surge capacity and additional staff .

during september , drought conditions persisted .

the humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate and 750,000 people living in famine - affected areas were believed to be at risk of starvation .

in october , a shift in the severity of the crisis began to take place .

by mid - november , three of the previously identified famine areas were declared to be at pre - famine levels .

improvements are believed to have been due to the provision of assistance through a massive operation undertaken by the international community , despite access constraints in somalia .

the effectiveness of the response relies on local and international partners that have had long - term widespread presence in the various areas in the region .

famine persists in three areas in somalia – middle shabelle and among the internally displaced populations ( idps ) in afgooye and mogadishu – while other areas remain extremely fragile .

the number of persons at risk of starvation has been reduced to 250,000 but an estimated 4 million somalis remain in acute food and livelihood crisis countrywide .

unocha also reclassified the status of the drought crisis from catastrophe to emergency .

the october – december 2011 rains brought some relief to drought - affected areas in the region and enabled planting activities to take place and for cattle and livestock production .

the rains also had a negative impact on populations in crisis , in some areas creating flooding and displacement , and to many already vulnerable populations , bringing risk of a rise in water - borne respiratory diseases and malaria .

the rains negatively impacted relief efforts causing logistical problems for the delivery of assistance .

deterioration of security conditions along the kenya - somali border , security incidents within the dadaab refugee camp complex in northeast kenya , increasing restrictions on humanitarian access and a ban on 16 aid agencies in somalia by al shabaab , an al qaeda - linked militant islamist insurgent coalition , continue to have an impact on the relief effort .

kenyan operations in southern somalia and retaliation by al shabaab , while complicated in and of themselves , also have a huge potential impact on populations already displaced and those who will be forced to move or are displaced multiple times .

the situation in the horn of africa remains the worst humanitarian crisis in the world .

the impact of the drought , combined with conflict and insecurity , make it likely that it will continue well into 2012 .

some experts say drought conditions could increase as the dry season sets in , and that the overall situation may get worse before it stabilizes .

new consolidated appeals for funding reflect the ongoing severity of the situation and need for sustained attention by the international community .

in recent decades , humanitarian crises in the horn of africa have been caused not only by natural disasters , such as drought and famine , but also by violent internal political turmoil and periodic conflict between states in the region .

much of this violence has been fueled by poor governance , corruption , and economic mismanagement .

borders throughout the region remain in dispute , and small arms are available in abundance , further contributing to regional and localized insecurity .

several domestic and transnational terrorist groups currently operate in the horn .

with the exception of kenya , the countries of the horn rank "not free" on freedom house's freedom in the world 2011 survey .

all these factors add to the development challenges facing the region .

the countries in the horn are among the world's poorest , with low human development indicators .

many of their people rely largely on rain - fed subsistence farming , leaving them particularly vulnerable to drought and erratic rainfall patterns .

with the exception of djibouti , which has almost no arable land , over three - quarters of these countries' populations earn their living through agriculture or nomadic pastoralism .

parts of the region are chronically food insecure .

aid groups contend that while poor weather conditions have contributed to the scope of the current disaster , the humanitarian crisis also results from poor planning and policies that have made populations more vulnerable to drought .

in addition to providing emergency relief , the international community has responded to previous droughts by establishing early warning systems and "safety nets" to mitigate the types of impact poor climate conditions are having on the region .

without these mechanisms in place , experts say the current crisis would have been worse .

and yet , rapidly rising food and fuel prices in the past year have left many families struggling to cope , and poor infrastructure and insecurity continue to limit humanitarian access in some areas .

the united nations , along with other partners , including the united states , has a strong presence in the horn of africa , and remains at the forefront of the current humanitarian response .

all major u.n. relief agencies and international ngos , together with dozens of smaller actors , are operating relief projects in the horn .

in somalia , for example , between national and international staff , the humanitarian community has almost 900 people on the ground .

international recovery efforts are typically complex because they require coordination among numerous different actors and international entities .

in the current crisis , apart from u.n. agencies , those responding to the complex emergency include international organizations , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , private voluntary organizations ( pvos ) , and bilateral and multilateral donors .

the drought currently plaguing the horn of africa region has triggered what is considered the worst international humanitarian crises in the world .

funding has so far been forthcoming to address critical needs in the near term .

sustaining the humanitarian effort through to the end of this crisis remains a huge concern .

the united states is the largest single bilateral donor to meet this emergency at a time when it faces its own substantial budgetary pressures .

no one can predict the weather , so no one can state with any certainty when the drought - driven factors of the crisis will end .

the humanitarian crisis is not caused solely by natural disaster , however .

internal conflicts and conflicts between and among states are major contributing factors .

delivering humanitarian food , medicine , and fuel is never easy or unfettered .

the horn of africa region offers up its own unique set of challenges .

areas of somalia , in particular , stand out for their complicating factors .

how to effectively and efficiently deliver life - saving assistance in an environment of pirates , bandits , terrorists , poor - to - nonexistent infrastructure , and a poor - to - nonfunctioning state , is the riddle the united states and its international partners strive to solve .

appendix a. evolution of the nutrition situation in somalia — january to august 2011 appendix b. african union mission in somalia ( amisom ) the current mandate of the african union mission in somalia ( amisom ) is outlined in u.n. security council resolution 1772 ( 2007 ) , adopted august 20 , 2007 , as follows: ( 1 ) to support dialogue and reconciliation in somalia by assisting with the free movement , safe passage , and protection of those involved in the political dialogue ; ( 2 ) to provide protection to the transitional federal institutions to help them carry out government functions and to provide security for key infrastructure ; ( 3 ) to assist within its capabilities in the re - establishment and training of all - inclusive somali security forces ; ( 4 ) to contribute , as requested and within its capabilities , to the creation of the necessary security conditions for the provision of humanitarian aid ; and ( 5 ) to protect its personnel , facilities , installations , equipment and mission , and to ensure the security and freedom of movement of its personnel .

on january 16 , 2009 , the council , in resolution 1863 , expressed its "intent to establish a united nations peacekeeping operation in somalia , as a follow - on force to amisom. .

in this context , it requested the u.n. secretary - general to "provide a united nations logistical support package to amisom including equipment and services ... " on april 7 , 2009 , the u.n. general assembly adopted resolution 63 / 275a , financing of activities arising from security council resolution 1863 ( 2009 ) .

this resolution established a special [assessed] account for the support of the african union mission in somalia ( amisom ) , including the united nations support office for amisom ( unsoa ) proposed by the secretary - general to coordinate the delivery of the logistical package .

the u.n. security council , under resolution 1964 ( 2010 ) , authorized the mission to increase its troop size from 8,000 to 12,000 .

the council most recently renewed amisom's mandate on september 30 , 2011 , unanimously adopting resolution 2010 ( 2011 ) to extend its authorization of amisom until october 31 , 2012 .

the resolution supported achievement of the authorized level of 12,000 troops and encouraged development of a guard force within amisom's mandated troop levels to provide security , escort , and protection services to personnel from the international community .

it also expressed the council's intention to review the possible need to adjust troop levels of amisom once the mission reaches its mandated level .

appendix c. funding status of u.n. appeals for horn of africa crisis ( as of january 5 , 2012 ) appendix d. historical background and u.s. policy in the horn of africa overview and contributing factors to the crises the horn of africa is by far the most unstable region in sub - saharan africa .

this region has been marred by civil wars , internal political turmoil , inter - state wars , famine , and man - made humanitarian disasters in recent decades .

the horn has also emerged as a region that is highly vulnerable to terrorist attacks and is considered a safe haven for international terrorist groups .

the humanitarian crises in the horn of africa are not caused solely by natural disasters .

internal conflicts and conflicts between states are major contributing factors to humanitarian crises .

moreover , a range of other factors , such as high rates of poverty , unemployment , and population growth ; scarce resources and economic mismanagement ; and interference in the internal affairs of neighboring countries , corruption , and poor leadership also play significant roles in deteriorating conditions .

efforts to resolve the number of conflicts in the horn have led to important peace agreements , but these agreements have not contributed to lasting peace and stability .

for example , ethiopia and somalia have fought major wars in recent decades .

eritrea and ethiopia were at war in 1998-2000 , in which over 100,000 people were killed and many more displaced .

they remain at war , despite a peace agreement signed in 2000 .

somalia is in a state of anarchy , despite a peace agreement reached in 2004 that led to the formation of the transitional federal government ( tfg ) .

the council of islamic courts ( cic ) took control of mogadishu in june 2006 .

ethiopia's intervention in december 2006 to oust the cic and install the tfg in mogadishu made somalia more unstable than it was during the six months the cic was in power .

conflict and famine in somalia in the early 1990s in somalia , united nations officials and human rights groups have long considered humanitarian conditions among the worst in the world .

it has been marred by factional fighting and humanitarian disasters since the collapse of the central government in 1991 , when famine and lawlessness ensued , and an estimated 300,000 somalis died of starvation during the civil war that followed .

after lengthy delays , due to security concerns in 1992 , the u.n. security council established the united nations operation in somalia ( unosom i ) to facilitate humanitarian relief .

the deteriorating security situation eventually left the u.n. mission unable to deliver food and supplies to those in need and led to a u.n. appeal for military support for the humanitarian operation .

the role of the united nations and united states in somalia entered a new stage in december 1992 , when the council , acting under chapter vii , authorized the secretary - general and u.n. member states , under u.s. command to "use all necessary means to establish ... a secure environment for humanitarian relief operations in somalia. .

the council provided for liaison between this operation , named the unified task force ( unitaf ) , and unosom i .

in december 1992 , president george h. w. bush ordered 25,000 u.s. troops into somalia as part of a major coalition operation under u.s. - led unitaf , named operation restore hope by the united states .

experts believe u.s. and international intervention at the time saved many lives and averted a major humanitarian disaster .

when president bill clinton took office in january 1993 , he reduced american involvement .

in march 1993 , the council expanded the size and mandate for the u.n. operation in somalia , designating it unosom ii .

the united states transferred command of unitaf to unosom ii ; u.s. troops remained in somalia .

the deaths of 18 american soldiers in a firefight with forces of general mohammed farah aideed in october 1993 , along with congressional pressure , prompted the clinton administration to end u.s. participation in peacekeeping in somalia .

u.s. troops left somalia in march 1994 , and the unosom ii ended its mission in the spring of 1995 .

somalia in the decades after the 1990s famine in october 2002 , the inter - governmental authority for development ( igad ) , led by the government of kenya , launched a peace process designed to end factional fighting in somalia .

in september 2003 , the parties agreed on a transitional national charter ( tnc ) .

in august 2004 , a 275-member somali transitional parliament was inaugurated in kenya .

in october 2004 , parliament elected abdullahi yusuf ahmed as the new president of somalia .

in june 2006 , the forces of the islamic courts union ( icu ) took control of the capital , mogadishu .

during the six - month rule by the icu , mogadishu became relatively peaceful , but efforts to bring peace did not lead to a major breakthrough .

on december 28 , 2006 , ethiopian troops captured mogadishu with little resistance from the icu .

in 2008 , fighting between insurgent groups and ethiopian - somali transitional federal government ( tfg ) forces intensified , and by late 2008 , the tfg had lost control of most of south - central somalia to insurgent groups .

in late december 2008 , president yusuf resigned from office and left for yemen .

in january 2009 , the somali parliament elected the leader of the alliance for the re - liberation of somalia ( ars ) , sheikh sharif sheikh ahmad , as president .

in january 2009 , ethiopian forces completed their withdrawal from somalia .

u.s policy in previous crises in the horn of africa the united states has been actively engaged in the horn of africa region for over 50 years .

the united states and ethiopia established diplomatic relations in 1903 and have maintained good relations , except during the military dictatorship under mengistu haile mariam in the 1970s and 1980s .

the united states also had relations with the siad barre government in somalia , although relations were poor for most of the 1980s .

in recent decades , the united states has played key roles in conflict resolution and provided significant humanitarian assistance .

the united states was actively engaged in 1991 in ethiopia after the collapse of the mengistu regime and later in mediating the border dispute between eritrea and ethiopia .

u.s. engagement in somalia , however , has been marginal and largely influenced by counter - terrorism concerns over the past decade , although the obama administration has been actively engaged in support of the tfg .

relations between eritrea and the united states are currently poor .

relations between ethiopia and the united states are strong , although some members of congress have been critical of ethiopia's human rights record and the government's handling of the 2005 and 2010 elections .

some members of congress have also actively followed issues in the horn of africa and traveled frequently to the region .

at the height of the humanitarian crisis in somalia in 1992 , congress held nine hearings and later passed the horn of africa recovery and food security act , which was the most far - reaching legislation on africa in the 102 nd congress .

in 1992 , then - senator nancy kassebaum argued for more active u.s. engagement in somalia and called for the united nations to appoint a special envoy .

kassebaum and senator paul simon traveled to somalia in july 1992 and upon their return recommended that the united nations send a peacekeeping force to somalia , with or without the consent of the warlords .

the select committee on hunger and the senate and house subcommittees on africa were very active on political , humanitarian , and human rights issues in the horn of africa region .

congress remains active in following events in the horn of africa .

the house and senate subcommittees on africa held several hearings in the 111 th congress and passed a number of legislative proposals focused on horn countries ; the 112 th congress has held several hearings .

appendix e. the u.s. government emergency response mechanism for international disasters the united states is generally a leader and major contributor to relief efforts in response to humanitarian disasters .

the president has broad authority to provide emergency assistance for foreign disasters and the u.s. government provides disaster assistance through several u.s. agencies .

the very nature of humanitarian disasters — the need to respond quickly in order to save lives and provide relief — has resulted in a rather unrestricted definition of what this type of assistance consists of at both a policy and an operational level .

while humanitarian assistance is assumed to provide for urgent food , shelter , and medical needs , the agencies within the u.s. government providing this support typically expand or contract the definition in response to circumstances .

funds may be used for u.s. agencies to deliver services or to provide grants to international organizations ( ios ) , international governmental and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and private or religious voluntary organizations ( pvos ) .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is the u.s. government agency charged with coordinating u.s. government and private sector assistance .

it also coordinates with international organizations , the governments of countries suffering disasters , and other governments .

the office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) in usaid's bureau for democracy , conflict and humanitarian assistance ( dcha ) provides immediate relief materials and personnel , many of whom are already abroad on mission .

it is responsible for providing non - food humanitarian assistance and can quickly assemble disaster assistance response teams ( darts ) to assess conditions .

ofda has wide authority to borrow funds , equipment , and personnel from other parts of usaid and other federal agencies .

usaid has two other offices that administer u.s. humanitarian aid: food for peace ( ffp ) and the office of transition initiatives ( oti ) .

usaid administers emergency food aid under ffp ( title ii of p.l .

480 ) and provides relief and development food aid that does not have to be repaid .

oti provides post - disaster transition assistance , which includes mainly short - term peace and democratization projects with some attention to humanitarian elements but not emergency relief .

although not currently applicable to the horn of africa crisis , the department of defense ( dod ) overseas humanitarian , disaster and civic aid ( ohdaca ) funds three dodd humanitarian programs: the humanitarian assistance program ( hap ) , humanitarian mine action ( hma ) program , and foreign disaster relief and emergency response ( fdr / er ) .

ohdaca provides humanitarian support to stabilize emergency situations and deals with a range of tasks including providing food , shelter and supplies , and medical evacuations .

in addition the president has the authority to draw down defense equipment and direct military personnel to respond to disasters .

the president may also use the denton program to provide space - available transportation on military aircraft and ships to private donors who wish to transport humanitarian goods and equipment in response to a disaster .

generally , ofda provides emergency assistance for 30 to 90 days after a disaster .

the same is true for department of defense humanitarian assistance .

after the initial emergency is over , assistance is provided through other channels , such as the regular country development programs of usaid .

the state department also administers programs for humanitarian relief with a focus on refugees and the displaced .

the emergency refugee and migration account ( erma ) is a contingency fund that provides wide latitude to the president in responding to refugee emergencies .

assistance to address emergencies lasting more than a year comes out of the regular migration and refugee account ( mra ) through the population , migration and refugees ( prm ) bureau .

prm assists refugees worldwide , conflict victims , and populations of concern , often extended to include internally displaced people ( idps ) .

humanitarian assistance includes a range of services from basic needs to community services .

appendix f. congressional action legislation in the 112 th congress focused on the horn of africa crisis h.res .

361 .

this resolution commends the contributions of the u.s. government in responding to the drought and famine in the horn of africa region , as well as creating a 5-year program in areas of somalia to promote stability , mitigate conflict and strengthen relations between residents and their government .

the resolution also calls on the u.s. government to continue to provide resources to the region to alleviate poverty and hunger and to provide long - term development assistance .

this resolution was introduced on july 20 , 2011 and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

on october 25 , 2011 , the bill was referred to the subcommittee on africa , global health , and human rights .

h.r .

2112 .

the house passed the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act , 2012 on june 16 , 2011 and included $1,040,198,000 for food for peace title ii grants .

s.rept .

112-73 , issued on september 7 , 2011 by the senate committee on appropriations , recommended an appropriation of $1,562,000,000 for the grants , and cited the famine in the horn of africa region , as well as an increase in the price of food and transportation , to justify the increased amount .

the senate passed the bill with the committee's recommended appropriation on november 1 , 2011 .

the bill , enacted as part of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2011 , p.l .

112-55 on november 18 , 2011 , appropriated $1,466,000,000 for food for peace title ii grants .

in the conference report 112-284 , the conferees stated they were concerned about the limited amount appropriated for the title ii grants , particularly because of the famine in the horn of africa region .

they noted this amount was $200,000,000 less than what the president had requested and was short of grants appropriations in the past few years .

however , the conferees cited the constraints imposed by the budget control act of 2011 .

they plan to continue to check on conditions in africa so they may take "whatever steps are available" if conditions change .

h.r .

2055 .

conference report 112-331 , issued december 15 , 2011 to accompany the military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations act , 2012 , provided $150,000,000 for international disaster assistance so the united states may respond to "crises resulting from conflict" in such areas as afghanistan , pakistan , iraq , yemen , and the horn of africa .

this bill became part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 and enacted as p.l .

112-74 on december 23 , 2011 .

the public law includes $150,000,000 for international disaster assistance but does not specify in what countries or regions these funds will be used .

congress designated the funds to be used for overseas contingency operations / global war on terrorism .

outlook in somalia , before the house committee on foreign affairs , subcommittee on africa , global health and human rights and subcommittee on terrorism , nonproliferation , and trade , july 7 , 2011 .

u.s. - africa defense and security partnership , house committee on foreign affairs , subcommittee on africa , global health and human rights , july 26 , 2011 .

drought and famine in the horn of africa , before the senate committee on foreign relations , subcommittee on african affairs , august 3 , 2011 .

usaid's long - term strategy for addressing east african emergencies , before the house committee on foreign affairs , subcommittee on africa , global health , and human rights , september 8 , 2011 .

appendix g. links for further information about the horn of africa humanitarian crisis u.s. government agencies united states agency for international development ( usaid ) http: / / www.usaid.gov / hornofafrica provides a list of non - government organizations ( ngos ) that accept donations for relief efforts .

also provides information on the u.s. response to the crisis with fact sheets and maps .

http: / / www.usaid.gov / fwd provides detailed facts and information about the crisis .

embassy of the united states , addis ababa , ethiopia http: / / ethiopia.usembassy.gov / news - events / horn - of - africa - drought.html horn of africa drought: u.s .

response: a compilation of official statements , fact sheets , and maps prepared by the u.s. government .

famine early warning systems network ( fews net ) http: / / www.fews.net / pages / default.aspx u.s. mission to the united nations and other international organizations in geneva http: / / geneva.usmission.gov / category / humanitarian / united nations food and agriculture organization of the united nations ( fao ) http: / / www.fao.org / crisis / horn - africa / home / en / irin news a service of the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs: http: / / www.irinnews.org / united nations children's fund ( unicef ) unicef in eritrea: http: / / www.unicef.org / infobycountry / eritrea.html unicef in ethiopia: http: / / www.unicef.org / infobycountry / ethiopia.html unicef in kenya: http: / / www.unicef.org / infobycountry / kenya.html unicef in somalia: http: / / www.unicef.org / infobycountry / somalia.html unicef usa fund: http: / / www.unicefusa.org / work / emergencies / horn - of - africa / united nations high commissioner for refugees http: / / www.unhcr.org / pages / 4e1ff4b06.html united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) http: / / www.unocha.org / crisis / horn - africa - crisis world food programme http: / / www.wfp.org / crisis / horn - of - africa red cross movement the american red cross http: / / www.redcross.org / portal / site / en / rco_search ? q=africa the international committee of the red cross http: / / www.icrc.org / eng / where - we - work / africa / somalia / index.jsp the international federation of red cross and red crescent societies http: / / www.ifrc.org / news - and - media / opinions - and - positions / opinion - pieces / 2011 / horn - of - africa / other resources action against hunger http: / / www.actionagainsthunger.org / blog / updates - our - work - horn - africa - focus - somalia african development bank http: / / www.afdb.org / en / american jewish world service http: / / ajws.org / bbc news east africa hunger crisis http: / / www.bbc.co.uk / news / world - africa - 14248278 care http: / / www.care.org / campaigns / accessafrica / index.asp ? s_src=haitijan2010donor catholic relief services http: / / crs.org / emergency / east - africa - drought / index.cfm chf international http: / / www.chfinternational.org / node / 36358 christian reformed world relief committee ( crwrc ) http: / / www.crcna.org / pages / crwrc_idr_eadrought.cfm episcopal relief & development http: / / www.er - d.org / eastafricaresponseaugust2011 food security and nutrition analysis unit – somalia ( fsnau ) http: / / www.fsnau.org / the hunger project http: / / www.thp.org / where_we_work / africa / ethiopia / overivew interaction http: / / www.interaction.org / horn - of - africa - crisis international medical corps http: / / internationalmedicalcorps.org / page.aspx ? pid=376 islamic relief usa http: / / www.irusa.org / emergencies / east - africa - crisis / lutheran world relief http: / / lwr.org / site / c.dmjxkioyjgi6g / b.7549057 / k.7558 / east_africa.htm medecins sans frontieres ( doctors without borders ) http: / / www.msf.org / mercy corps http: / / www.mercycorps.org / hornofafricahungercrisis oxfam international http: / / www.oxfam.org / eastafrica relief international https: / / www.ri.org / newsroom / news - article.php ? id=30 relief web http: / / reliefweb.int / horn - africa - crisis2011 provides updated fact sheets , news , and maps issued by a variety of organizations .

save the children http: / / www.savethechildren.org / site / c.8rklixmgipi4e / b.7539035 / k.b9fb / africa_drought_sparks_food_shortage_child_hunger_and_humanitarian_crisis.htm world bank http: / / www.worldbank.org / foodcrisis / world concern http: / / www.worldconcern.org / crisis / world vision http: / / www.worldvision.org / # / home / main / hunger - drought - horn - africa - 1-1374sdfjklseajfkl ; skl ; .

