each year , in october , the energy information administration ( eia ) publishes the short - term energy and winter fuels outlook ( stewfo ) .

the purpose of the stewfo is to provide estimates of expected average annual heating fuel expenditures in comparison to previous years .

while the stewfo provides estimates of average annual heating expenses , individual expenses may vary regionally , by energy source utilized , by home size , energy efficiency , and individual temperature preference ; by market size ; and by local weather conditions .

average annual heating fuels expenditures depend on the price of the fuel used , with natural gas , heating oil , propane , electricity , and wood products constituting the main heating fuels in the united states .

expenditures also depend on the quantity of fuel used , which is based on a variety of individual consumer decisions .

weather conditions , measured by heating degree - days , are the other key factor in determining expenditure levels .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides heating degree - day estimates to the eia for the stewfo .

the stewfo is not a forecast in the statistical sense , but a projection based on assumed values of key variables .

if , for example , the underlying fuel price estimates prove to be incorrect , or weather conditions vary from forecast trends , actual average heating expenditures will reflect those differences .

noaa forecasts a 0.3% reduction in heating degree - days for the 2013-2014 heating season compared to 2012-2013 for the united states as a whole .

regional differences in weather , along with regional fuel usage patterns , can cause regional expenditure projections to vary from the u.s. average .

in the northeast , heating degree - days are expected to increase by 3.4% , while in the west they are expected to decrease by 3.1% .

estimated heating degree - days are expected to rise by 0.1% in the south , and decline by 1.3% in the midwest .

on average , the eia projects that u.s. household expenditure on heating fuel for the 2013-2014 heating season will rise for households heating with natural gas , electricity , and propane while those using heating oil will see their expenditures decline .

the increase in expenditures reflects higher fuel prices for all fuels except heating oil , and the quantity usage effects of generally similar weather patterns .

table 1 provides a summary of the percentage changes in the key components of average annual heating fuel expenditures by fuel .

regionally , the eia expects expenditures on natural gas to increase the most in the northeast , at 18.3% , and to increase by 12.8% in both the midwest and the south , and 7.1% in the west .

expenditures on heating oil , used primarily in the northeast , are expected to decline by 2.2% .

expenditures on propane are expected to increase by 10.6% in the northeast and by 9% in the midwest .

electricity expenditures are expected to increase by 4% in the northeast , 1.6% in the midwest , 2.1% in the south , and by 1.5% in the west .

due to changing market conditions for primary fuels , the prices assumed in the stewfo can differ from actual prices .

price volatility in the world oil market can have direct effects on the cost of heating oil and propane .

variations in natural gas prices can directly affect those households heating with that fuel , while indirectly affecting electricity prices .

projected consumption levels are likely to be affected by variations in the weather .

if the observed weather is colder , or warmer , than forecast by noaa , or if consumers change their consumption habits at any given price level , or at any given number of heating degree - days , consumption levels would differ from those projected in the stewfo .

the u.s. natural gas market is part of a north american regional market .

the united states draws about 94% of its natural gas supplies from domestic sources .

over 90% of imports arrive by pipeline , from canada , and small quantities of liquefied natural gas supplement supply , mostly from trinidad , but also from many other countries .

consumers of natural gas include households and commercial customers that largely use natural gas for space heating .

electric power generators , especially those that satisfy peak load demand , use natural gas as a fuel to power generators .

industrial consumers use natural gas as a raw material , for example in fertilizer production , and as a heat source in industrial processes .

household , commercial , and electric power generators are those consumers whose consumption is most likely to be affected by winter conditions .

table 2 presents average household natural gas consumption and price data for the winter heating seasons 2009-2010 through projected values for winter 2013-2014 .

on a per - household basis , as presented in table 2 , winter consumption of natural gas has been relatively stable .

similarly , consumer prices have been relatively stable , but falling from 2009-2013 , and increasing somewhat in the projection for 2013-2014 .

the price - consumption relationship suggests that natural gas demand may be price inelastic in the household sector , implying that consumption might not be expected to respond proportionally to changes in price .

an inelastic demand relationship is likely because home heating is typically considered to be a necessity by consumers .

in addition , existing metering systems do not provide consumers with easy access to real - time quantity and price data .

lack of real - time information could result in consumers making ill - informed decisions with regard to heating expenditures .

income levels and the unemployment rate might also be important in determining natural gas consumption .

approximately 50% of all u.s. households heat with natural gas .

on the national level , overall consumer groups , total natural gas consumption rose by about 9.6% from 2008 through 2012 .

over the period , the electric power generating sector's consumption rose by about 36.6% .

residential and commercial usage showed small consumption losses , while industrial demand increased by about 8.3% .

the stewfo projects an increase in total natural gas consumption of less than 1% from 2013 to 2014 .

most of the increased consumption is expected to occur in the industrial sector .

the stewfo projects an increase in u.s. natural gas production of about 0.06% for 2014 compared to 2013 , and a 1.1% increase from 2013 to 2012 .

the relative weakness of wellhead natural gas prices from 2010 to 2013 reflects the increased production resulting from shale gas and other non - conventional sources .

however , these lower prices , and the growing price spread between petroleum liquids and natural gas , has shifted exploration and drilling activity in the direction of liquid deposits , slowing growth in natural gas .

imports of natural gas are expected to decline by about 3% from 2012 to 2013 , mostly on pipeline imports from canada .

lower natural gas prices in north america than in asia and europe will continue to make liquefied natural gas imports a small component of the u.s. gas picture as the united states prepares to become an exporter of liquefied natural gas .

natural gas demand from households and commercial customers peaks in the winter , and to a lesser extent in the summer .

this leads to accumulation of natural gas in storage facilities in the off - peak seasons .

at the beginning of the winter heating season , october 1 , 2013 , natural gas in storage was approximately 3.5 trillion cubic feet , above the five - year average storage quantity .

home heating oil is a middle distillate , derived from the same part of the refining process as diesel fuel .

as a result , the price of home heating oil is closely related to the price of crude oil as well as the price of diesel fuel .

approximately 5.8% of u.s. households heat with oil , and most of these consumers are in the northeast , where about 80% of u.s. heating oil consumption takes place .

the eia expects average home heating oil expenditures per household to decline by $46 , or 2% , for the winter 2013-2014 .

this dollar , and percentage , decline is relatively small compared to the total cost of heating with other fuels identified in the stewfo .

oil represents the highest total expenditure for any winter fuel , $2,046 per household .

the projected amount for winter 2013-2014 is over three times as high as the total for a household heating with natural gas , which is projected to spend $679 on average for the season .

diesel fuel , a product almost identical to home heating oil , has been more expensive than gasoline in 2013 , averaging about $0.30 per gallon higher .

a $0.10 per gallon premium has been observed in 2013 when comparing the price of home heating oil to the price of gasoline .

these price differentials result from u.s. refiners' emphasis on gasoline production for the u.s. market and the relatively high level of world demand for diesel fuel .

the cost of gasoline , diesel fuel , and home heating oil are all directly related to the price of crude oil on the world market .

the eia projects the refiner's acquisition cost of crude oil to fall to $101.70 per barrel during 2014 , compared to their 2013 value of $103.95 .

the spot price of west texas intermediate , a reference crude oil , averaged over $98 per barrel for the first three quarters of 2013 , and was trading at about that level during the first months of the winter heating season .

the key risk factor for home heating oil consumers is the price of crude oil .

oil prices can be volatile .

the economic recession , beginning in december 2007 , and accompanied by record high crude oil prices in 2008 , served to decrease demand .

overall liquid fuels consumption in the united states is projected by the eia to remain about constant in 2014 compared to 2013 , and to have risen by 0.08% compared to 2012 .

within these overall increases , gasoline consumption is expected to remain relatively constant from 2013 to 2014 , declining by about 0.4%,while distillate consumption is expected to increase by 2.4% .

the relative increase in distillate consumption is likely to maintain , or increase , the price premium of these fuels over gasoline , and could create possible upside price risk over the stewfo projection for heating oil consumers .

propane provides primary home heating for approximately 5.5 million households in the united states , about 4.7% of the total households .

propane consumers are projected to experience a $120 , or 9% , increase in heating expenses during the 2013-2014 winter heating season .

these cost increases make propane the second most expensive fuel among those covered in the stewfo .

the number of households heating with propane has declined every year for the past five years , suggesting that propane is not a preferred fuel choice .

the eia expects a further decline of 2.1% in the number of households using propane for 2013-2014 .

the eia sees propane expenditures rising by 9% in the midwest , and 10.6% in the northeast .

propane price can vary ; for the northeast in 2013-2014 the stewfo projects a price of $3.23 per gallon , while the midwest is projected to see a propane price of $1.92 per gallon .

while consumption in the two regions is expected to be , on average , within 90 gallons of each other , the difference in price leads to heating season expenditures of $1,453 in the midwest compared to $2,146 in the northeast .

propane is unique compared to other fuels covered in this report in the sense that it is a by - product , and not directly produced itself .

the production of gasoline and natural gas both contribute to the supply of propane .

as a result , when the supply of those fuels is high , so is the supply of propane .

many of the same factors that affect natural gas and home heating oil prices influence expected propane prices .

however , in the case of propane , the relationship is indirect because propane is a by - product .

propane prices , unlike the other fuels covered in this report , are affected by distance and dispersion of consumers .

the reason is that because the distribution process usually requires the delivery , by truck , of relatively small quantities , it tends to be high - cost .

electricity prices are related to natural gas and coal prices as well as the availability of nuclear and alternative fuel generating capacity .

in addition to electricity being generated using natural gas , direct combustion of natural gas is also a competitor to electricity as a home heating source .

approximately 40% of u.s. households use electricity as their primary heating source .

in the northeast , electricity use is lowest , at about 14.2% , while in the south it is highest , at 64% .

overall growth in the number of households using electricity for space heating is expected to be 3% year on year , driven by further expansion of market share in the south .

in comparison , the number of propane and heating oil customers is declining , by an expected 2.1% and 3% , respectively .

natural gas is also a heating source with an expanding customer base , expected to rise by 0.6% in 2014 .

the eia projects increasing heating expenditures for areas heating with electricity .

in the northeast the increase in expenditures is expected to be 1.3% , in the south 2.1% , and in the midwest 1.6% .

expenditures in the west are expected to rise by 1.5% .

in general , electricity prices have shown less volatility than many other heating source prices .

wood and wood pellets are projected to provide primary home heating for approximately 2.6 million u.s. households in 2014 .

the eia estimated wood provided a secondary heating source for about 8.8 million households , over 8% of total households in 2009 .

eia data show the number of households heating with wood has increased steadily over the past five years .

u.s. census data show the number of occupied housing units using wood growing by about 1.6% to 2.1% per year between 2000 and 2010 , resulting in a cumulative growth of about 22% .

the stewfo projected that residential wood biomass would increase somewhat between 2013 and 2014 , from 0.185 to 0.211 quadrillion btu .

the eia has not started tracking price data for wood and wood pellets as of the october 2013 release date of the stewfo .

as a result , no seasonal heating expenditure projections for this fuel source are included in the stewfo .

the primary risk factors concerning the stewfo are weather and economic conditions .

total household expenditures on home heating are equal to the price of the fuel times the quantity of the fuel consumed .

the weather , measured by the number of heating degree - days , largely determines the quantity of fuel used .

conservation , in the form of reduced temperatures inside the home , also reduces the quantity of fuel consumed , but for a given desired temperature inside the home , heating degree - days are the key factor .

the 2013-2014 winter heating season is expected to be colder in the northeast and south and milder in the midwest and west .

while the 2013-2014 noaa heating degree - day estimates may prove to be accurate , data from november 2013 suggest that the central part of the nation and the northeast experienced below normal temperatures .

the other component of total heating expenditures , the prices of the various fuels , is determined by a complex web of related prices , market conditions , expectations , and other economic variables .

in a period of relatively weak economic growth , with persistent high unemployment , the key relationship may be that between the level of economic activity , measured by the real growth rate of gross domestic product , and the prices of natural gas and crude oil .

a higher price for crude oil directly increases the price of home heating oil and propane .

natural gas supplies tend to be reduced as a larger spread develops between oil and natural gas prices .

electricity prices are directly affected by natural gas and coal prices .

even in the face of a growing reserve base and increased production , u.s. natural gas prices are expected to increase by about 11% for consumers , on average , this heating season .

the low income energy assistance program ( liheap ) is the primary federal government program to supplement home heating expenditures .

liheap is composed of two parts: funding for block grants to states and emergency contingency funds .

for fy2014 , the administration has proposed $2.8 billion for liheap regular funds and $150 million for emergency contingency funds .

the fy2013 total was $3.255 billion in regular funds .

citgo , the u.s. subsidiary of the venezuelan national oil company pdvsa , has operated a low cost heating oil program , without any connection to the u.s. government .

the program , operated in conjunction with a nonprofit , the citizens energy corporation , began in 2005 .

during the 2010-2011 heating season , 25 states and the district of columbia participated in the program , which discounts the delivered cost of home heating oil by almost 40% .

citgo estimates that 1.7 million households and hundreds of homeless shelters have benefited from the program since 2005 .

it has not been announced whether the program will continue in the 2013-2014 winter heating season .

the stewfo projects that americans will generally face increased heating costs during the winter of 2013-2014 .

fuel prices are generally expected to be higher , which will support the effects of colder temperatures for key regions .

any change in the level of economic activity , or changes in the price of fuels , coupled with variability in the actual weather experienced during the winter heating season , could change the expenditure projection .

uncertainty concerning the funding level of liheap , and concern as to whether the citgo program will continue in 2013-2014 , contribute to the potential burden of high heating costs for lower - income americans .

