the united states is threatened by a wide array of hazards , including catastrophic natural disasters , acts of terrorism , viral pandemics , and manmade disasters such as the deep horizon oil spill .

the manner in which the nation prioritizes limited resources to prepare for disasters can significantly influence the ultimate cost to society , both in the number of human casualties and the scope of economic damage .

the post - katrina emergency reform act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-295 , hereafter pkemra ) mandates that the president develop a set of national policies to guide preparedness for these hazards , with the goal of reducing or preventing potentially devastating consequences .

on march 30 , 2011 , president barack obama issued presidential policy directive 8: national preparedness ( henceforth ppd - 8 ) initiating the development of national preparedness policies that will fulfill many aspects of the mandate .

consistent with pkemra , the ultimate purpose of ppd - 8 is to: strength[en] the security and resilience of the united states through systemic preparation for the threats that pose the greatest risk to the security of the nation , including acts of terrorism , cyber attacks , pandemics , and catastrophic natural disasters .

according to the administration , this policy vision will be gradually implemented through a series of supporting documents to ppd - 8 , only a portion of which are currently finalized .

cumulatively , ppd - 8 and its component policies are to guide how the nation "will prevent , protect against , mitigate the effects of , respond to , and recover from those threats that pose the greatest risk to the security of the nation. .

as required by pkemra , ppd - 8 component policies include a national preparedness goal and a series of policies that are to collectively establish a national preparedness system .

the practical impacts of ppd - 8 and component policies are potentially far - reaching .

ppd - 8 policies could significantly influence the daily operations and priorities of homeland security officials , emergency managers , and first responders at the federal , state , and local government level .

further , ppd - 8 policies may impact federal assistance and grant allocation decisions , guide the federal and nonfederal efforts to build homeland security and emergency management capabilities , and establish a national baseline for hazard preparedness .

in future years , ppd - 8 policies may also influence the administration's budget requests and priorities .

establishing national preparedness policy through a presidential directive has considerable precedent .

ppd - 8 rescinded the existing homeland security presidential directive 8: national preparedness ( henceforth hspd - 8 ) , which was released and signed by president george w. bush on december 17 , 2003 .

prior to being rescinded , hspd - 8 and its supporting documents also instituted a strategic national preparedness policy that fulfilled many of the pkemra requirements , even before they were passed into law .

before hspd - 8 , other administrations used directives to assign federal preparedness responsibilities , such as executive order 12656 issued under president ronald reagan .

ppd - 8 policies are not considered a repudiation of hspd - 8 policies ; rather they are viewed as a policy evolution from the chain of national preparedness policies that has preceded it .

ppd - 8 policy evolves from hspd - 8 by: expanding the scope of the end - state objective in the national preparedness goal to include mitigation as a key mission area for national preparedness , in addition to prevention , protection , response , and recovery ; modifying the capabilities - based planning approach through a reduced focus on national planning scenarios ; identifying a different set of national capabilities needed to achieve national preparedness in each mission area ; and directing the creation of national planning frameworks for all identified mission areas of national preparedness .

this report explains the importance of this evolution , and provides a summary of the implementation status of the directed activities of ppd - 8 .

further , the report discusses the possible content of the future national planning frameworks being produced by the executive branch pursuant to ppd - 8 requirements .

finally , the report provides a summary of some of the issues congress may wish to consider when it oversees the development and implementation of national preparedness policy .

these include evaluating: how ppd - 8 policies conform with pkemra statute ; how federal roles and responsibilities have been assigned to implement and execute ppd - 8 policies ; how non - federal resources and stakeholders will be impacted by national preparedness guidance ; and how the overall federal budget may be reprioritized by a new national preparedness goal .

during the development of the national preparedness goal , fema solicited public comments on a draft version in late august , early september of 2011 .

the draft was then revised , and the final version of the goal was released in late september .

the end - state objective for national preparedness , as identified in the finalized national preparedness goal , is: a secure and resilient nation with the capabilities required across the whole community to prevent , protect against , mitigate , respond to , and recover from the threats and hazards that pose the greatest risk .

the end state objective in ppd - 8 does not dramatically differ from that of hspd - 8 .

however , ppd - 8 notably differs from hspd - 8 in that it addresses mitigating threats and hazards .

this places added emphasis on reducing the consequence of potential disasters , both before and after an incident , by increasing the nation's overall resilience to adversity .

as defined in the directive , mitigation includes capabilities both before and after a disaster , that transcend the preparedness spectrum .

on one hand , some might argue that having a separate mission area for mitigation will provide heightened awareness of its importance in each of the other mission areas , leading to a nation that is efficiently mitigating all hazards .

conversely , one could argue that isolating mitigation capabilities in a separate mission may lead those capabilities to being ignored or overlooked by the stakeholders of the other mission areas , even though they are capabilities that should be employed in all phases of the preparedness cycle .

to understand the conceptual importance of this shift , it may be useful to think of the process of building a house .

the objective statement of the national preparedness goal represents the architect's drawing of the house .

at this stage , the drawing is scant in detail , but it illustrates the architect's general vision for how the house will look when completed .

with the inclusion of mitigation as an element of the national preparedness goal , ppd - 8 has added something akin to a new floor in the architectural drawing .

it is hard to assess the value of adding this floor to the design at this point in time , but it is worth noting as a distinct evolution from hspd - 8 .

in addition to defining the end - state objective , the national preparedness goal also identifies the set of core capabilities needed to reach the end - state objective in each of the mission areas of prevention , protection , mitigation , response , and recovery .

the goal also identifies preliminary target levels for these capabilities .

through a capability - based planning process , 32 different core capabilities were identified across the five mission areas of the national preparedness goal .

three core capabilities were identified as being required in all mission areas .

the core capabilities are listed in table 2 of the national preparedness goal ( also provided in table 2 of this report ) .

by comparison , the hspd - 8 target capability list had five common capabilities and 29 capabilities across four mission areas .

the national preparedness goal suggests that fema will provide a "cross - walk" of the two lists on its website , but one has yet to be provided .

one example of a ppd - 8 core capability is "access control and identity verification" in the protection mission area .

in order to protect the nation against all hazards , the nation must be able to "apply a broad range of physical , technological , and cyber measures to control admittance to critical locations and systems , limiting access to authorized individuals to carry out legitimate activities. .

ppd - 8 also evolved from hspd - 8 by altering the process used to identify the set of national capabilities .

both hspd - 8 and ppd - 8 used a capability - based planning approach , but hspd - 8 relied more heavily on a set of national scenarios to derive the capabilities necessary for national preparedness during the planning process .

pkemra states that the president "may" include national planning scenarios in development of preparedness policy , but does not explicitly require their usage .

under hspd - 8 , 15 different national planning scenarios were developed that helped identify the capabilities needed for national preparedness .

in contrast , ppd - 8 policy does not appear to use planning scenarios extensively to help identify capabilities for the goal , nor is there mention that scenarios will be used in the future .

in the draft of the ppd - 8 national preparedness goal , there was mention of a "meta - scenario" that was used to define the capabilities needed for response and recovery .

this meta - scenario was not mentioned specifically in the final version of the goal , and appears to have been simplified in text to a "no - notice , cascading incident" .

however , the meta - scenario may still have been used as a template for administration officials to develop the capability list .

in addition to the possible use of the meta - scenario , a "strategic national risk assessment" was completed to help identify capabilities .

in ppd - 8 , the president mandated that the secretary of homeland security will conduct a strategic , national - level risk assessment to identify the relevant risk factors that guide where core capabilities are needed and develop a list of the capabilities and associated performance objectives for all hazards that will measure progress toward their achievement .

the national risk assessment should build on and integrate current models and best practices to enable the national assessment to be applied regionally and on a local level , as appropriate and practicable .

the director of national intelligence and attorney general will provide relevant and appropriate terrorism - related intelligence information to the secretary of homeland security for the development of the risk assessment .

an extensive description of the risk methodology used in this assessment is not publically available .

also , the complete results of the assessment are classified .

however , the goal mentions several broad key findings , such as that "cyber attacks can have their own catastrophic consequences and can also initiate other hazards , such as power grid failures or financial system failures , which magnify the potential impact of cyber incidents. .

it is difficult to assess the value of these findings in identifying necessary capabilities without access to the classified version of the assessment .

however , on the surface , these findings appear to be too broad for them to be substantially helpful in identifying capabilities needed in any of the mission areas .

returning to the metaphor of the house , the process used by national preparedness goal to identify capabilities is like the development of a engineering blue print from the architect's drawing of that house .

the engineering blue print adds considerable detail to the plan by identifying the core features of the house , such as the plumbing , the electrical wiring , and the masonry walls .

therefore , in assessing the blueprint , the construction foreman knows that in order to build the house , he will need the capability to install plumbing , construct masonry structures , or safely install electrical wiring .

the provided example capability , "access control and identity verification," is like the capability to install plumbing — it is a necessary set of activities that the nation needs to be able to perform successfully in order to reach the end - state objective of a secure and resilient nation .

at this point in the process , the goal has identified what type of house the administration would like to build , its key features , and the needed capabilities to construct the house .

it has yet to identify who , how , and with what tools and resources , these capabilities will be accomplished .

that part of the policy is developed in the national preparedness system , namely through the national planning frameworks and companion interagency operational plans .

the national preparedness system has numerous elements , but a series of five national planning frameworks will arguably be most significant for overall preparedness policy .

the frameworks , one for each mission area of national preparedness , are to assign key roles and responsibilities to federal agencies and help determine how limited resources and authorities are applied to develop national preparedness .

hspd - 8 only specifically called for one document , the national response plan , which is the predecessor to the national response framework .

ppd - 8 states: "the frameworks shall be built upon scalable , flexible , and adaptable coordinating structures to align key roles and responsibilities to deliver the necessary capabilities .

the frameworks shall be coordinated under a unified system with a common terminology and approach , built around basic plans that support the all - hazards approach to preparedness and functional or incident annexes to describe any unique requirements for particular threats or scenarios , as needed .

each framework shall describe how actions taken in the framework are coordinated with relevant actions described in the other frameworks across the preparedness spectrum. .

unlike hspd - 8 , the key terms prevention , protection , mitigation , response , and recovery have been defined in ppd - 8 .

in the implementation plan , each framework has also been assigned to an interagency policy committee ( ipc ) of the national security council ( nsc ) .

the assigned ipc is to oversee the policy coordination of the frameworks , and provide a forum for resolving policy disputes that may arise in their development .

the lead federal government officials have also been designated for each framework in the implementation plan .

the national preparedness goal lists the capabilities of each framework mission area , and elaborates further on the definitions of the mission area .

this information is summarized in table 2 of the report .

there are other components of the national preparedness system that are mentioned in the strategic guidance of ppd - 8 , the implementation plan , and the national preparedness goal .

currently , there is little information available on the additional elements , preventing detailed analysis .

these elements will likely be described further in a forthcoming description of the national preparedness system , due on november 24 , 2011 .

table 3 summarizes what is known about these elements and how they are possibly related pkemra requirements .

one of the major issues congress may wish to consider is the conformity of ppd - 8 and component policies with the full intention of pkemra .

congress may decide that some the requirements of pkemra have not been fulfilled or that certain requirements are no longer relevant .

since the ppd - 8 implementation process is in its early phases , it may be premature to assess comprehensive compliance with the statute .

however , dhs is to submit a national preparedness report , due by march 30 , 2012 , intended to fulfill the reporting requirements in pkemra , notably 6 u.s.c .

§752 .

the report may be a valuable tool for congress to assess the progress of the executive branch in fulfilling the requirements of pkemra .

additionally , congress may wish to examine individual national planning frameworks , including the conformity of the national disaster recovery framework to the pkemra mandate in 6 u.s.c .

§771 .

if , as predicted , a support function model is adopted by all of the national planning frameworks , congress may wish to evaluate the assignment of coordination and primary agency roles to federal departments and agencies .

these roles typically carry a varied amount of additional responsibility for each department assigned with a new role .

further , the frameworks may attempt to coordinate and de - conflict the authorities and resources through this support function model , and may potentially do so in a manner that is disagreeable to congress .

congress may also wish to review the leadership responsibilities dictated under ppd - 8 policies .

the president has directed the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , through the assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism , to lead the development of the national preparedness goal and system .

hspd - 8 also directed the creation of the goal and system by the secretary of dhs .

this delegation of leadership is an important distinction as it diverges from the language of pkemra that directed the president to develop the goal and system by acting through the administrator of fema .

congress may wish to review the impact of this decision on the mission of fema and dhs and potential fulfillment of pkemra .

additionally , ppd - 8 assigned leadership roles for the development and overall coordination of each national planning framework ( see table 2 ) .

ppd - 8 policies are not , in principle , intended to place undue financial burden on state and local governments , the public and non - profit sector , and private citizens .

congress may want to evaluate ppd - 8 guidance for its effect on these other government entities , especially for its compliance with the unfunded mandate reform act of 1995 ( p.l .

104-4 ) .

further , congress may wish to assess the effectiveness of the preparedness policies within their own districts and jurisdictions , and assess the overall preparedness level of their communities for the unique set of threats faced by each district .

the capabilities identified in the national preparedness goal can serve as a guide for the types of tasks each state and local government will be expected to be able to accomplish , with the assistance of other stakeholders , in each mission area of prevention , protection , mitigation , response and recovery .

in paul davis's definition of capability - based planning , he specifically noted that planning "is to be done not with the largesse of a blank - check policy ( preparing for anything that might conceivably arise ) , but rather while working within an economic framework. .

the national preparedness goal recognizes the need to use an economic framework in planning , as it notes: the results of these efforts and the specific deliverables called for in ppd - 8 will inform current and future budget year planning and decisions .

we will analyze current performance against our intended capabilities , the defined targets , and associated performance measures .

this analysis will enable us to individually and collectively determine necessary resource levels , inform resource allocation plans , and guide federal preparedness assistance .

budget implications across the preparedness enterprise cannot be assessed without this detailed and specific information .

this approach will allow for annual adjustments based on updated priorities and our resource posture .

given current fiscal constraints , congress may wish to assess , along with the administration , the total budgetary implications of the "preparedness enterprise" developed by pdd - 8 .

these implications may be specifically referenced in the president's future budget request for fy2012 .

for example , the establishment of multiple new national planning frameworks may bestow additional , and currently unfunded , responsibilities on federal agencies to prepare for and coordinate capabilities in the different mission areas .

more holistically , if the standard for preparedness is based in part on the meta - scenario described in the draft national preparedness goal , congress may wish to evaluate whether existing appropriated resources are sufficient to meet the challenge of the consequences described in the catastrophic scenario .

finally , it is important to note that it may be difficult to assess the overall policy impact of ppd - 8 in the near future .

because most of the evolution from hspd - 8 to ppd - 8 is conceptual and strategic , the effect of ppd - 8 policies on the preparedness of the nation for a disaster will take time to fully develop as concepts are operationalized .

further , some elements of ppd - 8 policy may not be finalized until at least the end of september 2012 .

though future exercises and trainings may provide an opportunity to evaluate some ppd - 8 policies , a full analysis may not be possible until the nation either averts or is struck by a major disaster .

this does not diminish the importance of ppd - 8 policies , but may make it challenging for congress to evaluate the relative worth of ppd - 8 as a whole , and even more challenging to evaluate individual components of the policy .

