the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) was founded in 1989 for the purpose of promoting trade and investment liberalization in the asia - pacific as a means of fostering sustainable economic growth and prosperity in the region .

apec currently has 21 members: australia , brunei , canada , chile , china , hong kong ( officially hong kong , china ) , indonesia , japan , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , papua new guinea , peru , the philippines , russia , singapore , south korea , taiwan ( officially , chinese taipei ) , thailand , the united states , and vietnam .

apec is one of a few international organizations in which both china and taiwan are members .

during the 1994 economic leaders' meeting in bogor , indonesia , apec members agreed to the bogor goals of "free and open trade and investment in the asia - pacific by 2010 for developed economies and 2020 for developing economies. .

apec has also made trade facilitation — changes in governmental procedures and controls to increase the ease and efficiency of trade — a major priority .

apec has three distinct features among multilateral trade organizations .

first , all the liberalization measures taken by its members are voluntary .

members announce their liberalization measures via "individual action plans. .

second , these liberalization measures are generally extended to all economies — not just apec members — under the concept of "open regionalism. .

third , decisions are made by consensus rather than through a process of formal negotiations .

every year , a different apec member organizes and hosts a series of meetings held throughout the year , including the annual economic leaders' meeting , which is traditionally held in october or november .

the united states is the host in 2011 ; russia will be the host in 2012 .

the host member usually picks a theme for the year .

the united states has chosen as the theme for 2011 , "creating a seamless economy in the asia - pacific region by strengthening regional integration and expanding trade , promoting a green economy and better coordinating trade regulations. .

between november 8 and 13 , 2011 , the united states will host several senior - level apec meetings in honolulu , hi .

the meetings begin with the fifth and final senior officials meeting ( som ) of the year , to be held on november 8 and 9 .

the previous soms — held in washington , dc ; san francisco , ca ; and big sky , mt — focused on such topics as energy , transportation , and the role of women in the economy .

the 5 th som will be followed by a finance ministers' meeting on november 10 , to be hosted by secretary of the treasury timothy geithner .

on november 11 , secretary of state hillary clinton and u.s. trade representative ron kirk will co - host the apec ministerial meeting .

the agendas for these meetings have not been disclosed .

the apec gathering in honolulu is scheduled to conclude with the two - day economic leaders' meeting , to be hosted by president obama .

he will be joined by the leaders of the other 20 apec members , or their chosen representatives .

at past meetings , the u.s. president held one or more separate bilateral meetings with other leaders , usually including a meeting with the leader of the host member .

it is unknown if president obama will hold similar meetings this year .

the agenda of the economic leaders' meeting usually is based on the host's theme for the year , implying this year's meeting will center on regional economic integration , sustainable development , and regulatory convergence .

as host , president obama is likely to push for progress on the formation of a free trade area of the asia - pacific ( ftaap ) , a contentious concept on apec's agenda since 2005 .

while the united states seems to envision an ftaap as a larger , binding , and comprehensive free trade agreement among all apec members , other apec members see the ftaap either as the culmination of apec's "open regionalism" model or a free trade agreement centered in asia .

in addition , the united states may use the event to inform the apec members about the status of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations and possibly publicly announce a significant landmark in the tpp talks .

the economic leaders' meeting typically ends with the release of a joint leaders declaration which summarizes the current status of apec and sets priorities for the organization's future .

since the beginning , the obama administration has signaled that the asia - pacific region is a foreign policy priority .

secretary hillary clinton's first international trip after taking office was to asia , with visits to china , indonesia , japan , and south korea .

prior to her trip , secretary clinton stated that u.s. relations throughout asia are "indispensable to our [u.s.] security and prosperity. .

in november 2009 , president obama travelled to asia , with visits to china , japan , singapore , and south korea .

during the trip , president obama attended the 2009 apec leaders' meeting and the first u.s. - asean leaders' meeting , which were held in singapore .

president obama hosted the second u.s. - asean leaders' meeting in september 2010 in new york city and attended his second apec economic leaders' meeting in november 2010 in yokohama , japan .

besides high - level trips to asia , the obama administration has sought to strengthen u.s. ties to the region .

during a january 2010 trip to asia , secretary clinton announced that the united states would formally request membership in the east asia summit ( eas ) .

she then attended the eas meeting in hanoi in october 2010 , at which it was disclosed that the united states — along with russia — would become a full member in 2011 .

in addition , the obama administration has actively pursued progress in the ongoing tpp negotiations , promoting the potential trade agreement as a possible model free trade agreement for the 21 st century .

the heightened u.s. engagement in the asia - pacific region has raised questions about apec's continued role and relevance in u.s. foreign policy , particularly given the growing number of alternative regional events or organizations at which the united states can present its views .

the obama administration has frequently portrayed apec as the premier economic and trade organization in the asia - pacific region , and similarly views the eas as the main geopolitical association in the region .

this view is shared by all of the other members of these two associations .

the obama administration has also repeatedly presented the tpp as a building stone for creating the ftaap envisioned by apec .

not all of apec's members agree with this representation of the tpp and some do not share the u.s. conceptualization of a future ftaap .

some chinese scholars and officials have expressed considerable concern about u.s motivations behind fostering a comprehensive free trade agreement in the asia - pacific region .

some observers challenge the consistency of a negotiated , binding , and discriminatory tpp with apec's bogor goals and its consensus - based , voluntary , "open regionalism" approach to trade and investment liberalization .

in addition , along with reemphasizing the importance of apec to the region , the obama administration has spoken extensively about the "central role" of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) in asia - pacific relations .

while 7 of the 10 asean members are also apec members , there remains some tension between the supposed importance of apec as the primary path for regional economic integration and the u.s. view of asean as the pivotal player in regional relations .

the obama administration has indicated that it wishes to prioritize three issues during the apec meetings in november .

first , the meetings will explore ways to strengthen regional economic integration and expanding trade by developing practical approaches to "next - generation" trade and investment issues .

among the top "next generation" issues identified by the united states are establishing trade policies governing the promotion of innovation ; encouraging the participation of small and medium - sized enterprises in international trade ; and making supply chains more friendly to international trade .

second , the leaders and ministers will discuss the promotion of sustainable economic growth and creating jobs in "green industries. .

third , the meetings' participants will focus on regulatory cooperation and convergence to help facilitate trade in the region .

beyond these three topics , the obama administration is eager to explore ways to make apec a more effective and productive means of promoting trade and investment liberalization and facilitation .

critics of apec have portrayed the annual economic leaders' meeting as a "talk shop" that fails to produce significant results .

supporters point to the general decline in tariff and non - tariff barriers among apec members since the bogor goals were announced , and its considerable success in trade facilitation measures .

in part , apec's poor image among some observers may be due to its voluntary , consensus - based approach , which rarely results in newsworthy events , such as the signing of binding trade agreements .

congressional interest in apec has generally focused on three issues — implications for u.s. trade policy in general , potential effects on relations with china , and budgetary matters .

apec's original vision of a voluntary "open regionalism" approach to trade and investment liberalization has proven difficult to implement in the traditional structure of u.s. trade policy .

on occasion , the trade liberalization measures proposed to apec by the united states in its individual action plan ( iap ) have required changes in u.s. trade laws , such as the lowering of tariff rates .

one such issue is currently before congress .

the united states agreed in 2007 to join apec's business travel card ( abtc ) program , which allows business travelers pre - cleared , facilitated short - term entry to participating member economies .

valid for three years , the card permits multiple entries into participating apec member territories and eliminates the need to obtain visas or entry permits .

h.r .

2042 would partially fulfill the u.s. commitment to join the abtc program by requiring the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , to establish a program to issue apec business travel cards and integrate it with existing registered traveler programs , such as global entry , nexus , and sentri .

on october 25 , 2011 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

2042 by a voice vote .

the bill has been sent to the senate for consideration .

over the last few years , apec has emerged as an issue in u.s. relations with china .

while some u.s. observers are apprehensive about china's growing assertiveness in asia and its active program to negotiate free trade agreements in the region , some chinese officials and scholars view the u.s. effort to use apec to promote an ftaap and negotiate a tpp without china's participation as part of a greater u.s. strategy of containment of china .

finally , as an apec member , the united states must contribute to the annual budget of apec to maintain the apec secretariat in singapore and finance various apec activities and programs .

in previous fiscal years , the level of direct u.s. financial support for apec was $901,000 per year .

congress appropriated additional funds in fiscal years 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 to finance preparations and programs related to hosting apec in 2011 .

