the ucp and cocoms are covered under title 10 - armed forces ; subtitle a - general military law ; part i – organization and general military powers ; chapter 6 – combatant commands .

as it relates to the ucp , section 161 , inter alia , stipulates: unified cocoms are established by the president , through the secretary of defense ( secdef ) , with the advice and assistance of the cjcs .

the cjcs shall periodically review ( at least every two years ) missions , responsibilities ( including geographic boundaries ) , and force structure of each combatant command .

based on this review , the cjcs will recommend to the president , through the secdef , changes to missions , responsibilities , and force structure deemed necessary .

the president , except in times of hostilities or imminent danger , will notify congress not less than 60 days after establishing a new combatant command or significantly revising the missions , responsibilities , or force structure of an existing combatant command .

also under section 161 , the cjcs is required to consider during each periodic ucp review: whether there was an adequate distribution of responsibilities among the regional unified combatant commands ; whether fewer or differently configured commands would permit the united states to better execute war fighting plans ; whether any assets or activities were redundant ; whether war fighting requirements were adequate to justify current commands ; whether exclusion of certain nations from the areas of responsibility presented difficulties with respect to national security objectives in those areas ; and whether the boundary between the u.s. central and european commands could create command conflicts in the context of a major regional conflict in the middle east .

generally , the ucp update cycle runs from 12 to 18 months .

the current ucp process consists of five iterative phases described below: 1 .

guidance: dod ucp planners review four central documents: the national security strategy of the united states of america ; the national defense strategy of the united states of america ; the national military strategy of the united states of america ; and the current ucp .

ucp participants also receive command guidance in various forms and in varying degrees , and are apprised of the strategic context under which the ucp will be evaluated .

during the final part of this phase , stakeholders ( combatant commanders , service chiefs , and the joint staff ) identify issues they believe need to be addressed during the ucp update cycle .

2 .

slate: during this phase , issues are slated for discussion .

at the beginning of the phase an action officer planning conference is held to discuss ucp issues .

after the conference , stakeholders submit issue development papers ( idps ) to the joint staff where they are posted online on a secure operating system ( siprnet ) where stakeholders can view and comment on them .

after a period of time , these idps and associated comments are sent to the deputy director for strategy and policy and the director j - 5 for validation .

those idps that make it through the validation process are then "slated" and placed online so stakeholders can develop positions for the next phase of the ucp process .

3 .

assessment: this phase begins with a planner's assessment conference where courses of action ( coa ) are developed for each validated idp .

these coa provide decision makers with a range of choices to address the idps .

once the coa are agreed at the conference , they are again posted online for review and comment .

after a period of time , the coa are finalized and "closed out. .

4 .

adjudication: the adjudication phase is a four part process whereby the issues and coa are sent to various levels of the joint staff for approval .

the first level is the deputy director for strategy and policy and after review and approval , a draft ucp is published .

next comes the director j - 5 and another revised draft ucp is published .

this draft ucp is then taken to a service chiefs' "tank" meeting and after that meeting , another ucp draft is prepared .

finally a joint chiefs of staff tank meeting is held and a final draft ucp is prepared , posted on the siprnet , and is then ready for final review .

5. review: during this phase the ucp is reviewed and revised for the final time .

the first review is held at the "four - star level" including service chiefs , combatant commanders , and other 4-star level general officers and dod civilians .

next , the secdef reviews the draft ucp and suggests changes .

the next step is the national security council ( nsc ) review where the ucp is commented on by other u.s. government agencies .

finally , after incorporating the views of the nsc principals , the ucp is taken to the president for approval and final publication .

there are other executive branch agencies ( state department , department of justice , department of homeland security , and the central intelligence agency , to name a few ) that are collectively referred to as the interagency and have a vested interest in the ucp because some of its associated military tasks intersect with the responsibilities of these agencies .

while none of these agencies are formally part of the ucp development process , they do have access to it by means of agency liaison officers stationed at the cocoms and on the joint staff .

these liaison officers have visibility of the idp and coa process as well as access to draft ucps and are able to report their observations and concerns to their principals ( i.e. , secretary of state , attorney general , etc. ) .

the nsc also receives periodic updates on ucp development or revisions during the ucp cycle .

the principals may then choose to address their ucp concerns with senior dod leadership .

during the nsc ucp review , other agencies can publicly voice concerns with the ucp but , unless an agency has not been actively following the ucp development , there should be no "surprises" when the ucp is reviewed by the nsc .

congress currently has no statutory role in the ucp development , revision , or review process other than those stipulated in title 10 , chapter 6 , sections 161 and 166 .

congress does , however , make its concerns known during hearings , private conversations between members and staff and dod leadership , and through lending support to ucp - related issues through legislation or by resolution .

for example , prior to the 2007 decision to stand up africom , a number of members called for the creation of a separate geographic combatant command for africa .

congress also periodically includes provisions in annual national defense authorization acts calling for dod studies and reports on certain aspects of cocom structure and operations .

these requirements , in addition to providing information to congress , also serve the purpose of identifying areas of congressional concern which can influence dod cocom - related resourcing and policy decisions .

the 2011 ucp is a classified document .

on april 8 , 2011 , dod released the 2011 ucp and the unclassified highlights were included in the following news release: dod releases unified command plan 2011 the department of defense released today the updated unified command plan ( ucp ) , a key strategic document that establishes the missions , responsibilities , and geographic areas of responsibility for commanders of combatant commands .

unified command plan 2011 , signed by the president on april 6 , assigns several new missions to the combatant commanders .

every two years , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff is required to review the missions , responsibilities , and geographical boundaries of each combatant command and recommend to the president , through the secretary of defense , any changes that may be necessary .

as in past years , the 2011 review process included the combatant commanders , service chiefs and dod leadership .

significant changes made by ucp 2011 include - shifting areas of responsibilities boundaries in the arctic region to leverage long - standing relationships and improve unity of effort .

as a result of this realignment , responsibility for the arctic region is now shared between useucom and usnorthcom rather than useucom , usnorthcom and uspacom as directed in previous ucps .

 - giving usnorthcom responsibility to advocate for arctic capabilities .

 - codifying the president's approval to disestablish u.s. joint forces command .

 - expanding u.s. strategic command's responsibility for combating weapons of mass destruction and developing global missile defense concept of operations .

 - giving u.s. transportation command responsibility for synchronizing planning of global distribution operations .

ucp 2011 continues to support u.s. defense security commitments around the world while improving military responsiveness to emerging crises .

a map with the ucp cocom areas of responsibility is included in the appendix .

the non - statutory origins of cocoms are rooted in the u.s. experience in world war ii .

prior to world war ii , the services operated independently and , despite lessons learned from world war i suggesting the army and navy needed to better communicate and plan , no real concerted effort was made to coordinate the armed forces , largely attributed to "bureaucratic distrust and service rivalry. .

during this period , marine corps fears the army would lobby to eliminate the marines on the grounds they were a "redundant service" as well as army efforts to maintain control over the country's air arm typified the climate among the services that made any meaningful reform virtually impossible .

world war ii presented unique challenges not faced during the 18-month u.s. involvement in the first world war .

while world war i was fought in a variety of theaters , such as europe , africa , the mediterranean , and the middle east , u.s. involvement was primarily limited to europe and was predominately land - centric .

in terms of strategic planning and command relationships , the united states played a supporting role .

the united states' experience in world war ii bore little resemblance to that of the great war .

the european and pacific theaters of the second world war varied significantly , with the european theater being a land - centric conflict supported by naval operations whereas the pacific theater was naval - centric and supported by marine and army ground forces .

both theaters also featured extensive supporting air force operations , including long - range strategic bombing campaigns unprecedented in both size and scope .

in terms of relationships with allies , the united states assumed the leadership role in both the pacific and european theaters — largely due to its unmatched military and industrial resources — despite insistence that the u.s. was "co - equal partners" with great britain , france , and russia .

unlike 1918 , after the japanese surrender in 1945 , u.s. political and military leaders did not advocate a post war policy of isolationism , because of fears of a communist russia and , to a lesser extent , china .

u.s. global military presence was viewed as a guarantee against unfettered communist expansion , and this presence necessitated an effective , geographically focused , long - term , joint command arrangement .

as previously noted , cocoms are governed by the provisions contained in sections 161 through 168 of title x , armed forces , u.s. code .

these sections address the following provisions ; section 161: the establishment of cocoms ; section 162: chain of command and assignment of forces for cocoms ; section 163: role of the cjcs ; section 164: assignment and powers and duties of commanders of cocoms ; section 165: administration and support of cocoms ; section 166: cocom budget proposals ; section 166a: funding cocoms through the cjcs ; section 166b: funding for combating terrorism readiness initiatives ; section 167: unified cocoms for special operations forces ; section 167a: unified cocoms for joint warfighting experimentation: acquisition authority ; and section 168: military - to - military and comparable activities .

on an annual basis , cocoms request operations and maintenance ( o&m ) funding .

funding for forces assigned to cocoms are funded by the respective services and funding for operations are funded separately , such as operations in afghanistan and counterterror operations that have primarily been funded through the overseas contingency operations ( oco ) account .

table 1 provides o&m funding figures for the cocoms from fy2011 to fy2013 .

it should be noted that some amounts include operational and oco costs ( see corresponding notes ) .

congress is presented with a wide range of national security policy issues that are impacted by the provisions of the ucp as well as the cocom construct .

as the u.s. arguably moves to a post - iraq / afghanistan era where global military operations against terrorists could be the new "steady state," it might prove prudent to re - examine the ucp and cocoms .

the administration's decision to shift u.s. national strategic emphasis to the asia - pacific region and middle east also presents considerations for congress .

as new threats such as cyber attacks and tcos take center stage and new international actors such as china and india emerge while established actors such as russia and iran transition to different types of security challenges , such a re - examination could serve to increase the efficacy of u.s. national security policy .

the administration's decision to shift strategic focus to the asia - pacific while maintaining an active role in the middle east raises a number of issues for possible congressional consideration .

potential issues include the following: in terms of the ucp , will a new ucp need to be issued in the near future to codify this change in strategic emphasis ? .

will new title 10 authorities be required to facilitate this shift ? .

does headquarters , uspacom require additional staff and resources to implement the administration's new strategy ? .

is uspacom's command infrastructure adequately geographically positioned to take on this new strategic challenge ? .

compared to uscentcom and usafricom , the uspacom region can be viewed as somewhat peaceful .

in this regard , is focusing on the asia - pacific region the best course of action when there are , at present , a number of volatile conflicts and potential civil wars in the middle east and africa ? .

what are the impacts to the other cocom's as a result of the asia - pacific shift ? .

what resources will they lose due to this shift and how do respective combatant commanders plan to compensate for a possible loss of resources ? .

are there ucp - directed missions and responsibilities that cocom commander will no longer be able to accomplish as a result of shifting resources to the asia - pacific region ? .

what has been the response of our allies and potential adversaries as a result of the announced strategic shift ? .

in the fall 2010 edition of the interagency journal , former u.s .

ambassador edward marks noted the geographic commands have essentially two tasks: war planning and fighting , and military engagement programs .

both tasks remain , and will always remain , fundamental responsibilities of the department of defense and the military services .

however while the war planning and fighting responsibility obviously remains uniquely a duty of the department of defense and the military services , the engagement programs no longer can be handled as a discrete military activity .

in today's world , military engagement programs with other countries can only be seen as part of the overall engagement activity of the u. s. government .

the so - called "nexus" of security challenges — terrorism , narcotics , smuggling , international criminal networks , etc. — can no longer be managed as single agency programs but must be integrated into "whole of government" programs .

the concept of a "whole of government approach to national security" has taken on renewed emphasis since september 11 , 2001 .

past and current senior military leadership have repeatedly called for greater participation in national security matters from other u.s. government agencies , even going so far as to publically advocate for greater funding levels for the state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) so they can play a greater role in military operations .

in the current strategic environment , cocoms are being faced with security challenges that fall outside the traditional military realm .

one such challenge , transnational criminal organizations or tcos , is a stated concern of combatant commanders both in a domestic and international context .

in this regard , if tcos are expected to become a central security issue for cocoms and the president and dod include tco - related responsibilities in the ucp , enhanced interagency involvement in the ucp process from the justice department , other u.s. law enforcement entities and others could prove to be beneficial .

it can be argued while greater resources for other u.s. government agencies are important , of equal importance is participation in the ucp process .

it has been noted that military engagement programs are at the forefront of geographical cocom's responsibilities and as hostilities in iraq and afghanistan diminish over time , and the u.s. defense budget decreases , military engagement could become the primary focus of all geographical cocoms .

under the current ucp development process , the u.s. interagency has a degree of visibility but participation is limited .

while interagency participation in developing regional war plans might not be appropriate , a greater role in planning for military engagement activities might not only enhance these programs but might also identify areas of redundancy with other u.s. government regional engagement programs .

this enhanced role could include more interagency representatives in the early stages of the ucp review and development process and increasing military presence in key interagency positions , particularly directorates that are responsible for strategic planning and resourcing .

while the interagency might welcome the opportunity to play a greater role , dod might be less than enthusiastic with including a greater role for other u.s. government agencies in what it likely considers fundamental strategic military planning .

in this regard , congress might consider an in depth examination of the ucp development process .

this examination could focus on the current level of interagency participation and identifying areas in the process where greater interagency involvement could be beneficial .

in september 2000 , washington post reporter dana priest published a series of articles whose central premise was combatant commanders wielded an inordinate amount of political influence within the countries in their areas of responsibility and "had evolved into the modern - day equivalent of the roman empire's proconsuls — well - funded , semi - autonomous , unconventional centers of u.s. foreign policy. .

some national security experts consider this series as the catalyst of the continuing debate as to whether or not cocoms have assumed too much influence overseas , thereby diminishing the roles other u.s. government entities play in foreign and national security policy .

despite the post - september 11 , 2011 , ascendancy of the interagency in foreign policy and national security matters , the debate over the cocom's role continues .

in 2007 , testimony from mark malan from refugees international before the senate subcommittee on african affairs of the foreign relations committee he noted in some parts of the world , like iraq and afghanistan , the face of u.s. foreign policy is clearly a military one .

in africa , the dod appears to be putting a civilian mask on the face of a combatant command , with its marketing pitch for usafricom .

this disingenuous strategy is not working .

the veneer of the mask is simply too thin , and attempts to patch the holes that have emerged — by telling us "what africom is not about" and re - emphasizing a humanitarian and developmental role for the u.s. military in africa — simply make the face of u.s. foreign policy much shadier .

the notion of a benign u.s. combatant command is an enigma to those who clearly understand ( and accept ) the need for the u.s. to secure access to africa's natural resources , especially oil ; and to establish bases from which to destroy networks linked to al - qaeda .

when the u.s. promotes a combatant military command in terms of development and humanitarianism , africans will inevitably suspect that the true story is being kept from them .

the assertion that cocoms have usurped other u.s. government entities in the foreign policy arena may deserve greater examination .

geographic combatant commanders generally agree their role is more political than military .

a former useucom and supreme allied commander , europe ( saceur ) estimated he spent about 70% of his time on political - military issues , despite having ongoing combat operations in the balkans .

uscentcom commanders have reportedly spent a significant amount of time meeting with the senior iraqi and afghan political leadership over the past 10 years discussing issues of building and maintaining armed forces , civil - military relations , and other national security matters .

while these discussions might not conform to what have been traditionally considered war fighting - related topics , the complexities of u.s. involvement in these two countries suggests combatant commanders have been required to play a more pronounced political role .

some u.s. government officials suggest the combatant commander / state department relationship , as it currently exists , has proven beneficial .

a former under secretary of state for political affairs noted he was a huge fan of the [regional commanders] .

i was the ambassador to turkey ; in eucom , when the deputy [commander , the commander] , and i were on the same page — there was nothing we couldn't achieve .

in 6 years in turkey as [deputy chief of mission] and ambassador , there was never a single conflict .

now , i'm dealing with colombia ; i've made five of my six visits with southcom's commander .

we do everything together .

yes , someone could goof .

but the system works wonderfully — the [regional commanders] are some of the finest america has to offer .

when the [commander] and ambassador are on the same page , it's a very powerful combination .

i'm a complete believer .

congress has examined aspects of this cocom - state department relationship in terms of the broader topic of civil - military relations as well as how it pertains to usafricom and its role in u.s. foreign policy .

in a broader context congress might wish to consider the role geographic cocoms play in u.s. foreign policy abroad .

this consideration could take into account more than just the state department , but also other u.s. government agencies that play a foreign policy role .

while presence and access to resources have been cited as positive attributes for cocom involvement overseas , it is possible a reallocation of resources might put a more "civilian" face on u.s. engagement and development efforts , possibly resulting in greater acceptance and efficacy in regions that are sensitive to u.s. military presence .

in examining the respective roles of cocoms , the state department , and others , it might be possible to identify both areas of redundancy as well as areas requiring greater emphasis , thereby enhancing overall u.s. effectiveness in political - military relations with nations in respective regions .

with many experts predicting shrinking or flat u.s. military and state department budgets over the next few years , such an examination might lead to a more cost effective approach to u.s. foreign policy .

while geographic cocoms suggest their regional perspective is their primary virtue , others argue the "strict geographic regionalism" the cocoms were aligned under is no longer how the world is organized .

these critics contend globalization at one end and localism ( tribalism ) at the other end has made the geographic cocom construct less than ideal .

given this view , some suggest there are opportunities to address this disparity .

the subcontinent or indian ocean or western asia has been cited as one aor that could merit a separate command .

with long - term strategic emphasis on countering violent extremism in afghanistan and pakistan , it might be in the nation's best interest to establish a separate command rather than continuing to include them in uscentcom where the command's planners and decision makers must also focus on issues such as iran's pursuit of nuclear weapons and regional influence , the israel - palestine impasse , and the fate of syria and egypt .

india might also figure into this strategic recalculation , as its relationships with pakistan and china have a significant political - military impact in the region .

some believe india — currently the responsibility of uspacom — might be a better fit under a separate subcontinent cocom .

another area where a new cocom could be warranted is central asia .

such a new command could include turkmenistan , kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and uzbekistan — all presently under uscentcom — and could be a natural complement to a subcontinent cocom as many of the region's issues are more "localized" as tribes in the region tend not to conform to established political borders .

these cross - border tribal and ethnic issues are viewed by many as key contributors to regional instability .

while the establishment of new cocoms might have an academic appeal , critics note such a course of action might not be fiscally sustainable .

establishment of new cocoms is viewed as being a resource - intensive undertaking — even if resources are taken from existing cocoms .

new cocoms would require additional joint - qualified senior and mid - level officers as well as supporting military , civilian , and possibly contractor staff .

new cocoms would also likely require additional physical infrastructure and if there is an intent to headquarter these new cocoms in their aors , there might also be political and diplomatic issues to consider .

in a fiscally constrained environment , these considerations might outweigh any operational benefits that might be derived from the establishment of new cocoms .

aside from geographic cocoms , there might also be cause to re - examine functional cocoms .

one area for possible examination is if u.s. cyber command — currently a subunified command under usstratcom — should be elevated to a full - fledged combatant command .

proponents cite the following five benefits of this course of action: unity of command / effort: the current dod approach to cyberwarfare is scattered across the services and defense agencies .

the services , the defense information systems agency ( disa ) , the national security agency ( nsa ) , the intelligence community , and the other cocoms have unsynchronized cyberspace warfighting capabilities .

a separate and distinct uscybercom would have greater authority , responsibility , legitimacy , and visibility than the current arrangement .

synchronization: under the current command arrangement , uscybercom might not have sufficient authority to fully synchronize cyber operations across the services and cocoms .

this could lead to a situation in which a cocom decides to conduct cyber operations within its aor and , because there are no physical boundaries in cyber space , these actions could have an adverse impact on the other cocoms .

mass: a central cocom with exclusive authority could mass the cyber activities of the other cocoms , services , and dod agencies into a coordinated effort to achieve mass effects on their intended target .

offensive operations: one perceived benefit of elevating uscybercom to full combatant command status is it would enable the u.s. government to place greater emphasis on offensive cyber operations as opposed to the current disparate emphasis on defensive cyber operations which are viewed by some as less effective than offensive operations .

diverse mission focus: supporters argue the current command arrangement results in a lack of direction and discipline amongst dod and government entities that makes oversight and , ultimately , funding more difficult .

an elevated uscybercom could serve to provide a single mission focus for the u.s. military .

while proponents suggest , in the long run , a separate uscybercom would be cost efficient , such an undertaking in a fiscally constrained environment could prove to be a difficult undertaking .

there might also be resistance from the other cocoms to ceding their cyber - related responsibilities to an elevated uscybercom , arguing that they better understand the cyber threats in their specific regions than would a single entity responsible for a wider range of cyber threats .

because it might be difficult to identify , recruit , and retain cyber - qualified personnel that would likely be needed for a separate uscybercom , cyber professionals from the cocoms might be sought after to staff a new uscybercom which could cause resentment from the cocoms .

some experts believe the cocom construct is a relic of the cold war where the central mission of the u.s. military was to prepare for and conduct combat operations in specific geographical regions against conventional armed forces .

these experts suggest a more radical approach to the issue of cocoms is required so they remain relevant in a post - september 11 , 2001 , world .

two possible alternatives to the current cocom construct are usually discussed .

this proposal advocates retaining the cocom headquarters and substituting a number of jtfs for the service - centric subcomponent commands .

this approach could streamline and reduce infrastructure and simplify command channels .

these jtfs could be designed on a regional , functional basis , for specific operational tasks and would be more flexible and reduce response time to crises in the region .

larger cocom aors might also benefit from several jtfs that could provide focused planning and operational execution in smaller , more manageable portions of their aors .

another perceived benefit of this construct is if a specific condition within a cocom's aor is resolved , the jtf established to address the issue could be rapidly disestablished , thereby reducing personnel , infrastructure , and operations and maintenance ( o&m ) costs .

this proposal advocates replacing cocoms with permanent standing , civilian - led interagency organizations that would have regional responsibility for all aspects of u.s. foreign policy .

these organizations would be led by highly credentialed civilians , potentially with a four - star military deputy and would report directly to the president through the national security council ( nsc ) .

these organizations would include representatives from all major u.s. government agencies , including dod .

this construct would change only the authority to integrate all elements of u.s. national power and dod would continue to exercise its title 10 authority by means of jiatfs .

a perceived benefit of this approach is it could result in a significant increase in unity of effort across all the instruments of u.s. national power through all phases of an operation to include pre and post - conflict .

another benefit is such an organization might better facilitate both coalition and alliance - based operations from a political standpoint as it may be more palatable for some nations to work with a civilian - led organization rather than a military - centric one .

this new construct might also have benefits for both regional engagement and developmental efforts thereby reducing the military "face" of these operations , particularly in regions that are sensitive to u.s. military presence .

these are but two possible alternatives to the current cocom construct .

while congress might not choose to directly address cocom reform ( particularly if there is a general belief the current cocom construct meets current and future security needs ) it is possible that , as congress , the administration , and dod continue to pursue government - wide efficiencies aimed at reducing federal spending , these and other alternatives might inform the debate .

