this report discusses the u.s. wind turbine manufacturing industry , its supply chain , employment and international trade trends , major federal policy efforts aimed at supporting the industry , and issues affecting its future .

the wind industry's national trade group , the american wind energy association ( awea ) , reported an estimated 30,000 americans were employed directly and indirectly in wind turbine manufacturing in 2011 , compared to 2,500 in 2004 .

another 45,000 u.s. workers reportedly were employed in other parts of the wind industry in 2011 , including construction and services .

wind turbine equipment and component manufacturing jobs range in pay from about $30,000 to around $90,000 , according to the bureau of labor statistics .

following an unprecedented period of growth in the u.s. wind power market between 2005 and 2009 , about half as many new wind turbines were installed in 2011 ( some 3,500 ) as in 2009 .

aside from ge energy and clipper windpower , most of the manufacturers that sell , assemble , or manufacture turbines and wind - related components in the u.s. market are headquartered outside the united states .

vestas , gamesa , and siemens are among the european manufacturers that have responded to government regulations that mandate the use of renewables , including wind power .

other firms manufacturing wind turbines for the u.s. wind market include japanese and indian companies such as mitsubishi and suzlon .

manufacturers from south korea and china are also expanding production capacity and entering the u.s. market .

federal interest in the u.s. wind turbine manufacturing industry is based on ( 1 ) increasing the role of clean energy technology in energy production ; ( 2 ) encouraging advanced manufacturing and the creation of skilled manufacturing jobs ; and ( 3 ) enhancing the diversity of u.s. energy sources .

wind energy , like many energy technologies , benefits from government incentives .

without them , it does not appear likely that there would be a u.s. wind turbine industry .

to a large extent , the federal government sets the framework and influences the pace of domestic wind power development .

one of the main federal policy tools to encourage wind generation is a tax credit , known as the production tax credit ( ptc ) , which is slated to expire at the end of 2013 .

other policy drivers include state renewable portfolio standards , which have been adopted by more than half the states to mandate production of electricity from "clean" sources .

no nationwide renewable electricity standard currently exists , but the obama administration and some members of congress have endorsed the concept .

these policies do not directly address manufacturing , but greater wind power adoption supports the development of a u.s. wind energy manufacturing base .

in addition , the federal government and some state governments have maintained programs that provide financial incentives for manufacturing of wind power equipment .

many international wind turbine manufacturers and component suppliers have opened manufacturing facilities in the united states since 2005 .

in 2011 , there were more than 470 u.s. - based wind turbine manufacturing facilities — a 10-fold increase in five years — ranging from wind turbine assembly plants to factories producing various wind - related components including large bearings , castings , electrical wiring , fasteners , hydraulics , and power electronics .

only a small number of these factories are dedicated exclusively to building turbine parts ( blades , towers , and nacelles ) ; the others manufacture components for various industrial uses , including wind - specific products .

given the interest in wind power around the world , manufacturers with u.s. production facilities may be able to increase exports of advanced wind - energy components .

around $250 million in fully assembled wind turbines were exported from the united states in 2011 .

the industry's future in the absence of government support , however , is open to question .

while the cost of electricity from land - based wind turbines is less than the cost of power from other alternative sources , such as concentrated solar plants and geothermal installations , it is still , in general , somewhat higher than the cost of power from new gas - fired generators .

this means that without government support , electricity suppliers' demand for wind turbines would be relatively limited .

it is possible that , if existing policy tools are allowed to expire , wind industry manufacturing will face a difficult future .

on the other hand , it is imaginable that technological improvements in wind generation and higher costs for construction of fossil - fuel power plants could at some point make wind cost - competitive with coal and gas as a source of electricity , creating a brighter outlook for wind turbine manufacturing .

wind turbine manufacturing is at the core of the multifaceted wind power industry .

because of the use of castings , forgings , and machining , turbine manufacturing is a significant contributor to u.s. heavy manufacturing .

by the end of 2011 , more than 38,000 wind turbines were installed in the united states .

procurement of wind turbines accounts for an estimated 60% to 70% of overall expenses for wind energy developers .

the market potential of offshore wind power is not covered in this report .

no offshore projects have been installed in the united states to date , and the industry faces difficulties with permitting , financing , and infrastructure availability .

so far , cape wind , off the coast of nantucket in massachusetts , is the only project that has a commercial wind energy development lease with the u.s. government .

awea reports that at the end of 2011 , there were 15 different proposed offshore wind projects in the united states , and a proposed offshore transmission line .

to help spur offshore wind development , in december 2012 , the department of energy ( doe ) awarded $28 billion in grants to seven offshore wind projects in six states , with the aim of three to begin commercial operations by 2017 .

also , this report does not cover small wind turbine manufacturing , which awea defines as turbines with rated capacities of 100 kilowatts ( kw ) or less .

this segment of the wind turbine market appears to be growing .

according to the world wind energy association , worldwide more than 330 manufacturers offer small wind turbines .

awea's most recent data indicate that 95 manufacturers of small wind turbines were based in the united states in 2009 .

worldwide the wind power industry is driven by various types of government support , which range from tax credits to incentive policies like feed - in tariffs .

these incentives have been much larger in several foreign countries than in the united states , which has helped to spur the manufacturing of wind turbines in europe and asia .

more recently , however , many countries — especially in europe — have begun to reduce subsidies for renewables , including wind .

in europe , feed - in tariffs are among the policy tools that have been used to promote wind power , and have been credited by industry advocates like the european wind energy association with driving renewable energy growth , particularly in denmark , spain , and germany .

however , faced with a difficult fiscal and economic situation , some european countries have reduced their wind power feed - in tariffs and are taking a more critical look at their renewable energy policies .

for instance , in 2010 , spain announced it would reduce its wind subsidies by 35% from january 1 , 2011 , to january 1 , 2013 .

some of the leading global wind turbine manufacturers , including vestas and gamesa , have downsized their operations to remain competitive , while others may place even more emphasis on exporting .

china's renewable energy law , which took effect in 2006 , is one measure that has driven growth in the domestic market .

china introduced a feed - in tariff for wind power generation in 2009 .

the chinese government also implemented various policies to encourage the development of local manufacturing and technology development .

in the united states , various federal policies also have been instrumental in the development of a domestically based wind power sector , including the production tax credit ( ptc ) / investment tax credit ( itc ) , which will expire at the end of 2013 ; an advanced energy manufacturing tax credit ( mtc ) , which reached its funding cap in 2010 ( no additional funds were allocated to continue with the mtc ) ; the section 1603 treasury cash grant program , which required that wind projects begin construction by december 31 , 2011 , and be placed in service by december 31 , 2012 ; and the section 1705 loan guarantee program for commercial projects , which includes manufacturing facilities that employ "new or significantly improved" technologies .

the wind industry asserts that a national renewable electricity standard is needed to create long - term stability and to attract investment in new turbine production facilities .

table 5 provides an overview of selected federal programs affecting the u.s. wind power industry .

the expansion of the u.s. wind power manufacturing base will depend , at least in part , on government policy decisions .

the production costs of u.s. plants that make turbine components appear to be competitive with those in other countries , and the difficulty and expense of transporting very bulky products over long distances serves as an obstacle to import competition .

nonetheless , there are several obstacles that may impede the expansion of wind energy manufacturing in the united states .

one is the history of policy - induced boom - and - bust cycles in wind energy investment , which may lead wind turbine manufacturers and component suppliers to conclude that future u.s. demand for their products is too uncertain .

another significant challenge affecting the sector's future is the availability of adequate transmission for power generated by wind farms .

most wind farms are located at a distance from the urban areas where most electricity is consumed , and a shortage of transmission capacity could hamper wind farm creation or expansion .

congress may wish to evaluate the seriousness of transmission issues in the context of other federal efforts to support wind generation .

the structure of the wind manufacturing industry is also likely to undergo significant change .

as is typical in budding industries , a large number of companies now compete in wind manufacturing .

mergers and failures are likely to lead to consolidation as the sector matures .

as this report describes , competition in the wind turbine sector from new asian entrants will likely become more significant in future years , but it is still unclear whether many of these companies have the technological abilities and financial resources to become significant players in the u.s. market .

appendix a .

global wind turbine manufacturers appendix b .

selected examples of u.s. wind turbine production facilities appendix c. 48c manufacturing tax credi .

