financial stress encountered by dairy farmers in recent years has led congress and the industry to reconsider how to deal with volatile farm milk prices and the financial prospects for dairy farmers .

in the 112 th congress , several members have introduced legislation for alternatives to current federal programs , which expire in 2012 .

alternative policies could either be incorporated into the next omnibus farm bill , enacted separately before current program expiration through the regular order of business , or incorporated into the work of the joint select committee on deficit reduction .

this report provides a brief overview of federal dairy policy and reviews legislation that has been introduced in the 112 th congress to support dairy farmers .

current dairy policy has evolved over the last 75 years to support dairy farmers and stabilize markets .

this section briefly describes the five main components of current dairy policy shown in figure 1 .

the federal cost of dairy programs depends on market conditions , with costs ranging from zero in fy2008 , when farm milk prices were high , to $1 billion in fy2009 , when prices fell sharply .

following sharply lower farm milk prices and continuing movements toward high feed costs in 2009 , the dairy industry and some members of congress have been developing and offering legislation designed to better support dairy farmers and improve dairy pricing under marketing orders .

this section briefly reviews dairy farm support bills introduced to date in the 112 th congress ( see figure 4 and table 1 ) .

several bills would eliminate elements of current dairy programs and replace them with programs that supporters say would better protect producers in market downturns .

as a separate part of dairy policy reform , many are interested in creating a more dynamic and transparent pricing system under marketing orders to improve price discovery and reduce volatility .

proposed dairy legislation has the potential to eliminate some dairy programs and modify others , or replace them altogether with a new approach to dairy farm support .

many in the industry , including both producers and processors , have concluded that at least some change is needed in the federal marketing order system , although the degree of desired change varies substantially .

the industry is not unified on the general approach to dairy farm price and income support .

cost considerations and familiarity with existing programs or comfort level with new ones are likely factors in how dairy policy is developed in the 112 th congress .

