appropriations for intelligence activities represent a significant part of both the federal and defense budget at a time of growing fiscal austerity .

in the past , spending levels for intelligence activities were shrouded in secrecy .

today , overall totals of intelligence spending are made public , but the process for appropriating funds for intelligence activities remains complicated and not well understood .

steady , yearly increases in intelligence funding in the past decade helped create an intelligence apparatus that , many experts agree , has been effective at accomplishing its ultimate goal of preventing another terrorist attack on the scale of 9 / 11 .

but in the new era of fiscal limits , intelligence officials and members of congress are addressing ways to reduce intelligence spending while ensuring continued effectiveness against al - qaeda and while adapting to new priorities other than counterterrorism .

director of national intelligence ( dni ) james r. clapper jr. recently stated that sequestration would require a 7% cut , or roughly $4 billion , to the national intelligence program ( nip ) budget and warned of reduced global coverage and decreased human and technical intelligence collection .

mr. clapper also warned of repercussions similar to those that occurred in the 1990s when , in concert with a one - third decrease in active duty military personnel , the intelligence community saw a 23% cut in its budget , resulting in what he characterized as a "damaging downward spiral. .

the washington post on august 29 , 2013 , published details about the administration's fy2013 nip budget request , based on a document provided by former nsa contractor edward snowden .

because the document leaked to the news media is classified , crs is unable to provide a discussion of the specific detail of that budget submission .

nonetheless , the disclosure may drive further public debate about the size of the intelligence budget and about the effectiveness of intelligence spending .

this report discusses the historic trend in intelligence spending , as well as broader issues concerning the intelligence budgeting process , and may help members of congress contextualize information concerning the fy2013 budget .

total intelligence spending can be understood as the combination of ( 1 ) the nip , which covers the programs , projects , and activities of the intelligence community oriented towards the strategic needs of decision makers , and ( 2 ) the military intelligence program ( mip ) , which funds defense intelligence activity intended to support tactical military operations and priorities .

later sections of this report describe these programs in more detail .

it is important to recognize that public comments about intelligence spending do not always distinguish between the nip , the mip , and the total of the two , complicating discussions on a subject about which there are already few details .

the 9 / 11 commission recommended that the amount of money spent on national intelligence be released to the public .

in accordance with the implementing the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act , the director of national intelligence ( dni ) in 2007 began to announce each year the amount of money appropriated for the nip .

the intelligence authorization act of 2010 also required the president to publicly disclose the amount requested for the nip in his budget .

the secretary of defense began to release annual mip appropriations figures in 2010 and specified those figures back to 2007 .

these actions have provided public access to previously classified budget numbers for national and military intelligence efforts .

table 1 provides these recently released figures in both nominal and constant 2014 dollars .

unless otherwise noted , values in this report are in constant dollars .

intelligence appropriations are inherently complicated because of the nature of both the intelligence community and the budgeting and execution processes that have developed over time .

funds for the large national - level intelligence agencies — cia , the national security agency ( nsa ) , national reconnaissance office ( nro ) , national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) , and defense intelligence agency ( dia ) — are included in the nip and are generally believed to consume a large portion of annual intelligence funding .

the nip also includes funding for the state department's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) and intelligence efforts in other civilian agencies , including the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and the departments of justice , commerce , and the treasury .

funds for the intelligence components of the military departments are included in the mip .

in addition , the mip includes some funds for the tactical intelligence activities of the nsa , nro , nga , and dia .

the dni develops and determines the nip budget and presents it to the president for his approval "together with any comments from the heads of departments containing agencies or organizations. .

the president's annual budget is then submitted to congress , normally in early february of each year .

congress reviews the president's budgets and appropriates funds for intelligence mostly in defense appropriations legislation , which has always included the vast bulk of intelligence spending — probably well over 90% of the nip .

appropriations for the cia are included in defense appropriations acts , but are transferred directly to the director of the cia , and the defense department has no role in the apportionment or allocation of cia funds .

funding for intelligence activities of some departments , namely state , justice , homeland security , energy , and the treasury , is provided in other appropriations measures .

once appropriations legislation ( or a continuing resolution ) is enacted prior to the beginning of the new fiscal year , the office of management and budget ( omb ) apportions funds to the various agencies with national intelligence programs based on the administration request and congressional adjustments .

the complexities of the intelligence appropriations process have led to a number of proposals for different approaches that seek in various ways to disentangle national intelligence funding from the defense budget .

although the dni has a statutory responsibility to manage nip funds , the office of the secretary of defense also has a major role in budget execution , to some extent sharing responsibility with the dni .

the intelligence reform act provides that the dni "shall be responsible for managing appropriations for the national intelligence program by directing the allotment or allocation of such appropriations," but also provides that this be done in a manner "that respects and does not abrogate the statutory responsibilities" of heads of departments .

a key issue here is the potential for competing goals and different priorities that may derive from the respective roles of the dni and the secretary of defense in preparing the annual budgets for intelligence agencies and for allocating appropriated funds for intelligence activities within national - level dod agencies .

the "does not abrogate" language creates a level of ambiguity regarding the respective budgetary authorities of the dni and secretary of defense .

while the dni effectively has authority over the nip today , in the event of major changes to the budgets of the dod component of the intelligence community , this ambiguity in the statute could result in challenges to the dni's stewardship of the intelligence community .

even absent such changes , the fact that much of the nip is buried within the defense budget might complicate budget formulation and execution .

some observers have suggested that intelligence appropriations should be separated from defense appropriations and that congress should consider a separate appropriations act ( or a separate title in a larger appropriations act ) for intelligence .

others have suggested establishing separate intelligence appropriations subcommittees .

such approaches , proponents maintain , would provide a better opportunity for congress to consider the national intelligence effort as a collective whole and give the dni a greater role in ensuring that government - wide requirements are not sacrificed to meet the immediate needs of dod programs .

on the other hand , skeptics argue that these changes would provide the dni no new insights that he cannot currently obtain , and that they would complicate ties between intelligence programs and closely related non - intelligence dod programs such as satellite launch programs .

sections below discuss these proposals in more detail .

specific proposals to change the intelligence appropriations process have been controversial .

there is strong resistance to separate intelligence appropriations bills , and little attention has as yet been given to a separate title for the nip within defense appropriations legislation .

dni clapper has apparently dropped plans to separate the nip from dod's budget .

moreover , the intelligence oversight structure , which the 9 / 11 commission characterized as "dysfunctional," has remained largely unchanged .

efforts to establish new congressional committees with both authorization and appropriations responsibilities appear to have generated little interest .

a separate appropriations subcommittee for intelligence was approved by the senate but never established , nor has the house created an entirely separate subcommittee .

thus , for the moment , members of congress have to work with existing intelligence appropriations and oversight mechanisms to help shepherd the intelligence community into a new fiscal era .

these issues also raise broader questions about the extent and sufficiency of dni authorities , a topic of much debate in the years immediately following intelligence reform , especially as it related to the personnel and funding of the department of defense elements of the intelligence community .

regarding the proposal to move the intelligence community out of dod's budget , dni clapper stated that it would give "odni a lot more authority and insight and transparency over [the nip]," suggesting he currently lacks sufficient authority and insight .

there currently appears to be little appetite for a debate about an expansion of dni authorities , probably in part because of unanswered questions about the current remit and effectiveness of the office of the dni .

nonetheless , dni authorities may be more critical now , when declining budgets force choices between different intelligence platforms and agencies , as opposed to when the dni faced the relatively easy process of managing a decade of budgetary growth .

the 9 / 11 commission recommendations included a variety of changes intended to strengthen congressional oversight of intelligence and streamline the intelligence budgeting process .

responding to those recommendations about intelligence appropriations , congress undertook a number of initiatives , but some measures have not been implemented and others have been reversed .

none appears to have fundamentally altered the process .

house initiatives both the house and senate responded to the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations to set up separate appropriations subcommittees for intelligence .

h.res .

35 of the 110 th congress established a select intelligence oversight panel within the house appropriations committee .

the panel was to consist of not more than 13 members of whom no more than 8 came from the same political party , including the chairman and ranking member of the appropriations committee , the chairman and ranking members of the defense appropriations subcommittee , six additional members of the appropriations committee , and three members of the intelligence committee .

the select panel was established to: review and study on a continuing basis budget requests for and execution of intelligence activities ; make recommendations to relevant subcommittees of the committee on appropriations ; and , on an annual basis , prepare a report to the defense subcommittee of the committee on appropriations containing budgetary and oversight observations and recommendation for use by such subcommittee in preparation of the classified annex to the bill making appropriations for the department of defense .

proponents of h.res .

35 indicated their determination to support the intent of the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission and pointed to three principal concerns: the first was that the intelligence authorizing committee was routinely ignored by the administration and the intelligence community because they didn't provide the money .

in this town , people follow the money .

secondly , the appropriations committee , frankly , was negligent in its responsibilities for oversight... .

the third problem that we faced is that there was grossly insufficient staff on the part of the appropriations committee to have decent congressional oversight.. .

 .

the other problem was that there was not sufficient emphasis on intelligence matters by the defense appropriations subcommittee because they had a lot of other things to do .

opponents argued that the proposal did not significantly change the previously existing structure: "rather than consolidating oversight authority into a single committee that has both authorizing and appropriating authority , it just creates a new committee that has neither , doesn't have either of those powers. .

in july 2008 , the chairman of the panel , representative rush holt , described the panel's recommendations to the defense appropriations subcommittee , claiming that "in the course of a year and [a] half since the creation of this panel we have directly influenced the intelligence fund for five bills .

three of these bills were supplemental appropriations and this is the second annual appropriations bill that we have acted upon. .

he indicated that the panel forwarded recommendations higher than the previous year's levels but lower than the administration's request .

the panel's recommendations sought , he maintained , to require the odni to better manage the budget and enhance the role of congress in reviewing the budget request and overseeing the dni's performance .

rush argued: "one of the problems of past congressional oversight has been that the intelligence community was forced to cut or add programs based on the changing whims of congress .

the creation of this panel and stronger budgetary oversight over intelligence programs will hopefully provide stability for our nation's intelligence professionals. .

representative holt also noted that the panel recommended changes to space programs and encouraged a robust investment in foreign language training .

in january 2011 , the 112 th congress eliminated the select intelligence oversight panel in h.res .

5 .

in march 2011 , the chairman of the house permanent select committee on intelligence , representative mike rogers , announced a plan to permit three members of the appropriations committee to participate in house permanent select committee on intelligence hearings and briefings .

the goal of the initiative , according to representative rogers , was to "knit together the intelligence committee with the appropriators and ... allow key appropriators important insights into the intelligence committee which they fund. .

the proposal did not , however , change the responsibilities of the two committees .

senate initiatives the senate also recognized the need to respond to the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations .

in january 2004 , the senate adopted s.res .

445 to improve the effectiveness of the senate select committee on intelligence and for other purposes .

section 402 of the resolution , which passed by a vote of 79-6-15 , established a subcommittee on intelligence within the senate appropriations committee "as soon as possible after the convening of the 109 th congress. .

s.res .

445 did not , however , actually constitute a change to the senate rules , and the 109 th congress reshuffled appropriations subcommittees and jurisdictions without creating a subcommittee on intelligence .

in considering intelligence authorization in 2009 , however , the senate returned to the issue .

the intelligence committee reported its version of fy2010 authorization legislation , s. 1494 , which included a provision ( section 341 ) to express the sense of the senate that a subcommittee on intelligence should be established within the committee on appropriations with the responsibility for approving an annual appropriations bill for the national intelligence program that would be considered by the full appropriations committee "without intervening review by any other subcommittee. .

the intelligence subcommittee would , however , automatically include the chairman and ranking member of the subcommittee on defense .

this provision was the subject of conversations between the chair of the intelligence committee and the ranking member of the appropriations committee , and section 341 was dropped from the bill before it passed the senate by unanimous consent on september 16 , 2009 .

 ( the provision was not included in the final version of the fy2010 intelligence authorization act , p.l .

111-259 , that was eventually enacted in october 2010. ) .

during consideration of s.res .

445 and on other occasions , it was argued that it would be difficult to create a subcommittee with a classified budget .

the actions taken by the senate reflect the fact that classification has always been a key consideration in the congressional approach to intelligence appropriations .

there has been little public discussion of the extent to which other factors relating to subcommittees' jurisdiction may have been important .

