an adequate physician supply is important for the effective and efficient delivery of health care services and , therefore , for population health and the cost and quality of health care .

assessments of the adequacy of physician supply often focus on three dimensions of the physician population: its size ; its composition ( eg , the distribution of primary care and specialty physicians ) ; and its geographic distribution .

policies that aim to alter physician supply generally focus on both current and future supply along these three dimensions because physician training is a lengthy process ; therefore , changes implemented to alter supply do not have immediate effects .

each of the three dimensions of physician supply is important for health care spending because physician clinical decisions affect approximately 90% of each health care dollar spent .

the size of the physician population partially determines the volume of health services provided and therefore costs , as physicians provide health care services that generally cannot be provided by non - physicians .

the composition may affect spending because , as some researchers have found , areas with more specialists have higher health care spending .

similarly , the geographic distribution of the physician population can affect spending since in areas with too few physicians , there may be higher utilization of potentially costly emergency room services because more appropriate physician services are unavailable .

in contrast , in areas with more physicians , individuals may receive unnecessary services , which can increase health care spending .

the three dimensions of physician supply are also important for population health .

too few physicians — overall or in specific geographic areas — may result in delayed or foregone care that can worsen health conditions or lead to premature death because adequate and timely services were not obtained .

too many physicians can mean that additional health services are provided , which may increase the risk of adverse events or medical errors .

the composition of the physician population also affects population health .

a number of studies have found that areas with more primary care physicians have better health outcomes , including , for example , all - cause mortality , life expectancy , and self - rated health .

the federal government supports physician services and training , which may make the adequacy of the current and future physician supply of interest to congress .

specifically , the federal government pays for physician services , primarily through the medicare and medicaid programs .

the federal government also supports physician training through a number of programs in various departments and agencies .

on march 23 , 2010 , president obama signed the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , which may affect the demand for physician services ; therefore , the new law may increase congressional interest in physician supply .

the aca may expand the demand for physician services by expanding insurance coverage to those previously uninsured and by expanding medicaid eligibility to individuals who were previously ineligible .

the aca may specifically increase the demand for primary care physicians through increased coverage of preventive services by medicare , medicaid , and private insurance .

the aca also ( 1 ) authorizes increased funding or program changes for a number of programs that support physician training , ( 2 ) includes provisions to increase support for primary care , ; and ( 3 ) appropriates funds to expand programs that encourage physicians to practice in certain geographic areas .

this report examines each dimension of physician supply , separately discussing current ( and , where appropriate , future ) concerns and changes included in the aca that may affect each dimension .

the report then discusses workforce planning activities included in the aca that may affect all of these dimensions of supply .

the appendix presents relevant aca provisions , summarizes them , and indicates which of the dimensions of physician supply each may affect .

an appropriately sized physician population is necessary for an effective and efficient health care system .

as noted above , too few physicians may mean delayed care , which can worsen health conditions and increase costs through greater hospital and emergency department use .

too many physicians can mean that individuals receive unnecessary health services , which may increase the risk of adverse events and increase costs .

this section provides an overview of how the physician population is measured , considerations in determining its appropriate size , and debate around the appropriateness of its current and future size .

it concludes with a discussion of the aca's potential effect on the size of the physician population , including a discussion of provisions in the law that aim to increase the number of physicians or to improve physician productivity .

the composition of the physician population is an important determinant of access to care and health care costs .

there are two main concerns about the composition of the physician population: ( 1 ) that the distribution of primary care and specialty physicians has resulted in primary care shortages and an oversupply of specialty physicians , and ( 2 ) that , despite excess specialists overall , there are shortages in certain specialties .

in 2010 , the physician population consisted of more than two - thirds specialists and less than one - third primary care physicians .

some experts suggest this composition is not optimal , a suggestion that is generally consistent with research that examines the effects of the composition of the physician population on health .

research suggests that primary care is correlated with improved health outcomes and decreased costs .

for example , researchers have found that each additional primary care physician lowers the risk of death and that patients who have a regular primary care physician have lower overall health care costs .

similarly , in more targeted studies of the medicare population , the supply of primary care physicians was found to correlate with reduced mortality ( although associations with other health outcomes were weaker ) .

internationally , those countries with more primary care physicians have better overall population health as measured by indicators such as infant mortality , child health , and all - cause mortality .

in contrast , research on the effects of more specialists on health outcomes is less clear .

for example , a meta - analysis comparing specialty to primary care found that while some studies concluded that specialists provide better care for certain diseases , others found no differences or better outcomes from primary care physicians .

other studies have found that specialty supply has little effect on infant mortality or on all - cause mortality .

researchers have suggested that the current distribution of specialists and primary care physicians may be linked with a number of adverse health outcomes , including higher mortality rates in areas with more specialists .

with respect to shortages in certain specialties , several have been documented ( eg , in cardiology , dermatology , emergency medicine , and neurology ) , often by studies conducted by specialty professional associations .

these associations may have an interest in publicizing shortages and minimizing oversupply ; therefore , determining which specialties are in shortage based only on these studies may be challenging .

however , some specialties , such as general surgery , geriatrics , the pediatric subspecialties , and psychiatry , have more widely acknowledged shortages and have targeted federal programs to address these shortages .

this section discusses primary care supply , as well as factors deterring entry into primary care practice .

it then summarizes aca provisions that aim to address these factors through a number of mechanisms .

it concludes with an overview of aca provisions targeting shortages in specialty areas .

the geographic distribution of physicians is an important determinant of health care access , quality , and cost .

physicians are distributed differently across the united states ; specifically , researchers have found large regional variations in physician supply , with some areas having a 50% surplus of physicians and others having a 10% deficit .

experts suggest that both over - and undersupply may be problematic .

in high - supply areas , the population may receive unnecessary and excess care , whereas in low - supply areas , the population may receive little or no care because of long wait times or long travel distance to providers .

rural areas , in particular , experience physician shortages ; however , some urban areas , specifically areas with economically disadvantaged populations , may have shortages as well .

this section discusses physician shortages in specific geographic areas .

it begins with a discussion of health professional shortages areas ( hpsas ) and medically underserved populations / areas ( mua / ps ) .

the federal government uses these designations to determine areas and populations that have heath professional shortages ( including physician shortages ) .

designated areas are eligible for a number of programs — some of which were amended or created by the aca — that aim to increase the number of health professionals in a specific geographic area .

given the use of hpsa and mua / ps for guiding federal policies that seek to lessen geographic shortages of health professionals , it is necessary to understand this designation when discussing the geographic distribution of the physician population .

the section also discusses some reasons why geographic areas may have physician shortages , and the aca provisions that may affect the geographic distribution of the physician population .

although areas with an excess of physicians are of concern , federal policies tend to focus on increasing access in shortage areas , and in rural areas in particular .

some experts have argued that lack of workforce planning has contributed to current physician supply concerns and that federal programs supporting the physician workforce are not coordinated .

gao has also noted that lack of data hamper efforts to evaluate programs funded under phsa title vii .

such data may be necessary for comprehensive workforce planning .

concerns about lack of planning and coordination and lack of data to evaluate programs existed prior to the aca , but the aca may exacerbate these concerns because it expands federal support for the health care workforce .

the aca includes provisions to increase workforce planning and collect data needed to support these efforts .

the aca includes provisions that may increase workforce planning at the federal and state levels .

section 5101 establishes the national health workforce commission to evaluate and make recommendations about the health care workforce ( including physicians ) .

the commission was appointed by gao in september of 2010 and is required to review health care workforce supply and demand and make recommendations on national priorities and policies .

commission members are required to make reports to congress and to review reports from the state workforce development planning grants and from the national center for health workforce analysis ( see below ) .

section 5102 authorizes grants for states to undertake health care workforce development .

the aca also requires additional data collection on health workforce programs and establishes a federal center to undertake health workforce analysis to support the new commission .

section 5103 requires hhs to establish a national center for health care workforce analysis and to establish state and regional centers for health workforce analysis .

section 5103 also requires longitudinal evaluations of individuals who have received support ( education , training , or financial assistance ) from grants awarded under phsa title vii .

the section authorizes increased grant amounts for this purpose and requires phsa title vii advisory groups to develop performance measures and guidelines for longitudinal evaluations for the programs they advise .

the current and future physician supply may be inadequate .

some experts suggest that there are too few physicians overall , too few primary care physicians specifically , and that physicians are inadequately distributed throughout the united states .

the aca may intensify some of these concerns ; specifically , although the aca includes a number of provisions that aim to alter physician supply , it is not yet known whether and how these provisions will affect physician supply .

many of the programs established by the aca have not yet been implemented , and others may not have immediate effects .

in addition , some the aca programs are temporary , and many rely on discretionary funding .

