murder , committed under any of more than 50 jurisdictional circumstances , is a federal capital offense .

so are treason , espionage , and certain drug kingpin offenses .

the federal death penalty act and related provisions establish the procedure that must be followed before a defendant convicted of a federal capital offense may be executed .

the federal death penalty act reflects the constitutional boundaries identified in furman and subsequent related supreme court decisions .

the opinion for the court in furman v. georgia runs less than a page .

it simply states the following: "the court holds that the imposition and carrying out of the death penalty in these cases constitute cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the eighth and fourteenth amendments. .

furman drew two responses .

some states sought to remedy arbitrary imposition of the death penalty by making capital punishment mandatory .

some states and congress narrowed the category of cases in which the death penalty might be a sentencing option and crafted procedures designed to guide jury discretion in capital cases in order to equitably reduce the risk of random imposition .

the court in woodson rejected the first approach , and in gregg endorsed the second .

the court has subsequently noted that furman and gregg "establish that a ... capital sentencing system must: ( 1 ) rationally narrow the class of death - eligible defendants ; and ( 2 ) permit a jury to render a reasoned , individualized sentencing determination based on a death - eligible defendant's record , personal characteristics , and the circumstances of his crime. .

with respect to eligibility for the death penalty , the court declared "that capital punishment must 'be limited to those offenders who commit a narrow category of the most serious crimes and whose extreme culpability makes them the most deserving of execution.' .

"applying this principle , [the court] held in roper and atkins that the execution of juveniles and mentally retarded persons are punishments violative of the eighth amendment because the offender had a diminished personal responsibility for the crime. .

moreover , the eighth amendment cannot accept imposition of the death penalty where it is disproportionate to the crime itself as , at least in some instances , "where the crime did not result , or was not intended to result , in death of the victim .

in coker , for instance , the court held it would be unconstitutional to execute an offender who had raped an adult woman.... and in enmund , the court overturned the capital sentence of a defendant who aided and abetted a robbery during which a murder was committed but did not himself kill , attempt to kill , or intend that a killing would take place .

on the other hand , in tison , the court allowed the defendants' death sentences to stand where they did not themselves kill the victims but their involvement in the events leading up to the murders was active , recklessly indifferent , and substantial. .

imposition of the death penalty as punishment for a particular crime will be considered cruel and unusual when it is contrary to the "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of maturing society. .

those standards find expression in legislative enactments , prosecution practices , jury performance , and execution records , viewed in light of "the court's own understanding and interpretation of the eighth amendment's text , history , meaning , and purpose. .

once a defendant has been found to be a member of a capital punishment eligible class , the question becomes whether he is among that limited number within that class for whom the death penalty is an appropriate punishment .

the court , after gregg , found acceptable sentencing schemes that reserved capital punishment for those cases in which the jury's consideration involved one or more aggravating factors and any mitigating factors .

if an aggravating factor is not already required for eligibility , one must be found in the course of the individualized selection assessment .

aggravating factors must satisfy three requirements .

"first the circumstance may not apply to every defendant convicted of the murder ; it must apply only to a subclass of defendants convicted of murder .

second , the aggravating circumstance may not be constitutionally vague. .

third , the aggravating circumstance may not be statutorily or constitutionally impermissible or irrelevant .

as for mitigating evidence , evidence must be received and considered "if the sentencer could reasonably find that it warrants a sentence less than death. .

the constitution insists "that the jury be able to consider and give effect to a capital defendant's relevant mitigating evidence.... [v]irtually no limits are placed on the relevant mitigating evidence a capital defendant may introduce concerning his own circumstances. .

the eighth amendment also condemns execution in a cruel and unusual manner .

it proscribes any method of execution which presents an "objectively intolerable risk" that the method is "sure or very likely to cause serious illness and needless suffering. .

the federal and state capital punishment statutes all require , or at least permit , execution by lethal injunction .

in baze , the court rejected an eighth amendment challenge which failed to show that the lethal injunction procedure at issue was sure or very likely to cause needless suffering .

existing federal law affords capital cases special treatment .

there is no statute of limitations for capital offenses , but there is a preference for the trial of capital cases in the county in which they occur .

the attorney general must ultimately approve the decision to seek the death penalty in any given case .

defendants in capital cases are entitled to two attorneys , one of whom "shall be learned in the law applicable to capital cases. .

defendants are entitled to notice when the prosecution intends to seek the death penalty , and at least three days before the trial , to a copy of the indictment as well as a list of the government's witnesses and names in the jury pool .

defendants have twice as many peremptory jury challenges in capital cases as in other felony cases and prosecutors more than three times as many .

should the defendant be found guilty of a capital offense , the furman / gregg - inspired sentencing procedures set forth in the federal death penalty act come into play .

the death penalty may be imposed under its provisions only after ( 1 ) the defendant is convicted of a capital offense ; ( 2 ) in the case of murder , the defendant has been found to have acted with one of the required levels of intent ; ( 3 ) the prosecution proves the existence of one or more of the statutory aggravating factors ; and ( 4 ) the imbalance between the established aggravating factors and any mitigating factors justifies imposition of the death penalty .

statute of limitations and related matters : "an indictment for any offense punishable by death may be found at any time without limitation. .

this provision applies when the offense is statutorily punishable by death , even if the prosecution elects not to seek the death penalty or the jury fails to recommend it .

prosecutorial options are somewhat more limited than this statement might imply .

in rare cases , due process may preclude a stale prosecution even in the absence of a statute of limitations .

the due process delay proscription only applies where the delay is the product of prosecutorial bad faith prejudicial to the defendant: "[a]pplicable statutes of limitations protect against the prosecution's bringing stale criminal charges against any defendant , and , beyond that protection , the fifth amendment requires the dismissal of an indictment , even if it is brought within the statute of limitations , if the defendant can prove that the government's delay in bringing the indictment was a deliberate device to gain an advantage over him and that it caused him actual prejudice in presenting his defense. .

moreover , the statute of limitations only marks time from the commission of the crime to accusation , in the form of either arrest or indictment .

deadlines between accusation and trial are the province of the constitutional and statutory speedy trial provisions .

here too , the limits are not particularly confining in most instances .

"the sixth amendment .. .

speedy trial clause is written with such breadth that , taken literally , it would forbid the government to delay the trial of an 'accused' for any reason at all .

[the] cases , however , have qualified the literal sweep of the provision by specifically recognizing the relevance of four separate enquiries: whether delay before trial was uncommonly long , whether the government or the criminal defendant is more to blame for that delay , whether , in due course , the defendant asserted his right to a speedy trial , and whether he suffered prejudice as the delay's result. .

the speedy trial act provides a more detailed time table , but one that comes with a number of extensions and exclusions .

all in all , time before trial is rarely a matter of the essence in a capital case .

justice department review : the decision to seek or not to seek the death penalty is ultimately that of the attorney general .

under the procedure established in the united states attorneys manual , the united states attorney where the trial is to occur files a recommendation with the justice department , ordinarily after conferring with the victim's family and in the case of a recommendation to seek the death penalty with defense counsel .

the recommendation is referred to the capital review committee .

the committee's task is to ensure that the decision to seek the death penalty reflects fairness , national consistency , statutory compliance , and law enforcement objectives .

it makes its recommendation to the attorney general through the deputy attorney general .

appointment of counsel : capital defendants are entitled upon request to the assignment of two attorneys for their defense .

there is some uncertainty over whether they are to be appointed immediately following indictment for a capital offense or whether they need only be appointed "promptly" sometime prior to trial ; and whether the right expires with the decision of the government not to seek the death penalty .

the federal appellate courts are divided over whether a lower court's erroneous refusal to appoint a second attorney in a capital case is presumptively prejudicial or if the defendant must still show that the error was prejudicial .

the trial court may authorize the payment of attorneys , investigators , experts , and other professional services reasonably necessary for the defense of indigent defendants charged with a capital offense .

this does not entitle the accused to the attorney or expert of his choice or to a jury - selection expert .

moreover , removal of the defendant's attorney in a compensation dispute is not appealable until after the trial .

pre - trial notice of intent to seek the d eath penalty : section 3593 obligates the prosecutor to advise the defendant and the court , "a reasonable time before trial" or before the acceptance of a plea , of the government's intention to seek the death penalty .

capital juries : the sixth amendment affords the accused the right to trial before an impartial jury .

the federal death penalty act affords the defendant convicted of a capital offense the right to a jury for sentencing purposes .

the accused may waive his right to a jury trial , either by pleading guilty or by agreeing to a trial by the court without a jury .

a convicted defendant may also waive his right to a jury during the capital sentencing phase .

the prosecution , on the other hand , enjoys comparable prerogatives .

it may insist upon a jury if there is to be a trial .

it must also agree if the capital sentencing hearing is to be held before the court without a jury .

moreover , it too is entitled to an impartial jury .

thus , the sixth amendment permits the exclusion of those potential jurors who assert that they will not vote to impose the death penalty under any circumstances .

in most felony cases , the accused may peremptorily reject up to 10 potential jurors without regard to cause , and the prosecution may peremptorily reject up to 6 .

in a capital case , each side has 20 peremptory challenges .

in the case of multiple defendants , the court may , but need not , allow the defendants additional challenges and may require they agree upon their challenges .

death - ineligible offen d ers : whether by statute , by constitutional command , or both , some offenders may not be exposed to a federal trial in which the prosecution seeks the death penalty for a federal capital offense ; some may not be executed .

a woman may not be executed while she is pregnant .

neither may a person who is mentally retarded be executed nor a person who lacks the mental capacity to understand that he is being executed and why .

the federal death penalty act may not be employed to charge a juvenile for a capital offense committed when the accused was under 18 years of age .

an accused who is incompetent to stand trial may not be tried for a capital offense or any other crime .

death - eligible offenses : federal law permits imposition of the death penalty only where the defendant has been convicted of a death - eligible crime , where the aggravating and mitigating factors present in a particular case justify imposition of the penalty , and in a murder case where the defendant has been found to have the requisite intent for imposition of capital punishment .

federal law divides death - eligible offenses into three categories .

the one group consists of homicide offenses , another of espionage and treason , and a third of drug offenses that do not involve a killing .

capital homicide offenses : murder is a capital offense under more than 50 federal statutes .

some outlaw murder as such under various jurisdictional circumstances .

most , however , make some other offense , such as carjacking , a capital offense , if death results from its commission .

a defendant convicted of a capital offense may be executed , however , only if it is shown beyond doubt at a subsequent sentencing hearing that one of the statutory aggravating circumstances exists , and that he either ( a ) killed the victim intentionally ; ( b ) intentionally inflicted serious injuries that resulted in the victim's death ; ( c ) intentionally participated in an act , aware that it would expose a victim to life - threatening force , and the victim died as a consequence ; or ( d ) intentionally engaged in an act of violence with reckless disregard of its life - threatening nature and the victim died as a consequence .

the court will sometimes permit a separate preliminary jury proceeding to determine the existence of the requisite intent .

some courts have upheld the submission of all four mental states to the jury .

even in the presence of the necessary intent and at least one of the statutory aggravating factors , a defendant may only be sentenced to death , if the jury unanimously concludes that on balancing the aggravating and mitigating factors imposition of the death penalty is justified .

subsection 3592 ( c ) of the federal death penalty act lists 16 statutory aggravating factors: " ( 1 ) death during commission of another crime .

 ( 2 ) previous conviction of violent felony involving firearm .

 ( 3 ) previous conviction of offense for which a sentence of death or life imprisonment was authorized .

 ( 4 ) previous conviction of other serious offenses .

 ( 5 ) grave risk of death to additional persons .

 ( 6 ) heinous , cruel , or depraved manner of committing offense .

 ( 7 ) procurement of offense by payment .

 ( 8 ) pecuniary gain .

 ( 9 ) substantial planning and premeditation .

 ( 10 ) prior conviction for two felony drug offenses .

 ( 11 ) vulnerability of victim .

 ( 12 ) conviction for serious federal drug offenses .

 ( 13 ) continuing criminal enterprise involving drug sales to minors .

 ( 14 ) high public officials .

 ( 15 ) prior conviction of sexual assault or child molestation .

 ( 16 ) multiple killings or attempted killings. .

the jury may also consider any non - statutory aggravating factors which it finds beyond a reasonable doubt to exist .

the constitution and the federal death penalty act favor the introduction of mitigating evidence during the capital sentencing proceeding .

the supreme court declared some time ago that "the eighth amendment ... require[s] that the sentencer ... not be precluded from considering , as a mitigating factor , any aspect of a defendant's character or record and any of the circumstances of the offense that the defendant proffers as a basis for a sentence less than death. .

the federal death penalty act directs the finder of fact to consider any mitigating factor and permits the defendant to present any information relevant to a mitigating factor .

this gives the defendant considerable latitude .

yet his options are not boundless .

the evidence he offers must be relevant and not invite confusion or unfair prejudice .

moreover , the prosecutor may question the weight that a mitigating factor warrants .

subsection 3592 ( b ) of the federal death penalty act describes seven statutory mitigating factors and adds a catch - all that encompasses "other factors in the defendant's background , record , or character or any other circumstance of the offense that mitigate against imposition of the death sentence. .

the other seven cover the following: " ( 1 ) impaired capacity .

 ( 2 ) duress .

 ( 3 ) minor participation .

 ( 4 ) equally culpable , disparate punished defendants .

 ( 5 ) no prior criminal record .

 ( 6 ) disturbance .

 ( 7 ) victim's consent. .

treason : treason is punishable by death or imprisonment for not less than five years and a fine of not less than $10,000 .

the death penalty for treason may only be imposed upon conviction , a finding of one or more of the statutory aggravating factors , and a determination that the aggravating factors outweigh any mitigating factors .

the mitigating factors in a treason case are the same as those in a murder case , seven statutory factors and one catch - all: impaired capacity ; duress ; minor participation ; equally culpable but less severely punished defendants ; absence of prior criminal record ; mental disturbance ; victim consent ; and any other mitigating factor relating to the offender or the offense .

different aggravating factors , however , apply in treason and espionage cases .

the aggravating factors are four: prior treason or espionage conviction ; grave risk to national security ; grave risk of death ; and "any other aggravating factor. .

commentators have questioned whether the constitution allows imposition of the death penalty in cases involving treason , espionage , or murder - less drug offenses , since in such cases the statute on its face authorizes the death penalty without requiring the death of a victim .

the court in kennedy specifically distinguished this class of crimes from those involving violence against individuals .

each of the crimes presents considerations of its own and might under some circumstances survive scrutiny even under the individual violence standards .

nevertheless , it seems likely that any court confronting the issue would at a minimum consider the kennedy standards ( indicia of "the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society" read in conjunction with the court's precedents ) .

under the federal death penalty act , the death penalty does not follow inevitably from a treason conviction .

capital punishment is confined to those cases marked by one of the three aggravating factors and by the absence of countervailing mitigating factors .

the national security factor might be considered a bit too open ended , but that defect , if it is one , might be cured by jury instruction or appellate construction .

of the three — treason , espionage , and murder - less drug kingpin offenses — commentators seem to consider treason the most likely to survive constitutional scrutiny .

espionag e: espionage is a death - eligible offense under any of three conditions .

first , it is a capital offense to disclose national defense information with the intent to injure the united states or aid a foreign government , if the disclosure results in the death of an american agent .

second , it is a capital offense to disclose information relating to major weapons systems or elements of u.s. defense strategy with the intent to injure the united states or aid a foreign government .

third , it is a capital offense to communicate national defense information to the enemy in time of war .

the statutory aggravating and mitigating factors are the same as those used in treason cases .

drug kingpin ( continuing criminal enterprises ) : murder committed in furtherance of a drug kingpin ( continuing criminal enterprise ) offense is a capital crime .

it is one of the many federal homicide offenses discussed earlier .

certain drug kingpin offenses , however , are capital offenses even though they do not involve a murder .

a continuing criminal enterprise is one in which five or more individuals generate substantial income from drug trafficking .

the leader of such an enterprise is subject to a mandatory term of life imprisonment , if the enterprise either realizes more than $10 million in gross receipts a year or traffics in more than 300 times of the quantity of controlled substances necessary to trigger the penalties for trafficking in heroin , methamphetamines , or other similarly categorized controlled substances under 21 u.s.c .

841 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) .

a drug kingpin violation is a capital offense , if it involves twice the gross receipts or twice the controlled substances distributed necessary to trigger the life sentence , or if it involves the use of attempted murder to obstruct an investigation or prosecution of the offense .

presenting and weighing the factors : the federal death penalty act establishes the same capital sentencing hearing procedures for all capital offenses — murder , treason , espionage , or murder - less drug kingpin offenses .

the hearing is conducted only after the defendant has been found guilty of a death - eligible offense .

it is held before a jury , unless the parties agree otherwise .

the prosecution and the defense are entitled to offer and rebut relevant evidence in aggravation and mitigation without regard to the normal rules of evidence in criminal proceedings .

as noted earlier , there is some question whether the prosecutors' arguments or rebuttal concerning the defendant's lack of remorse constitute a violation of the defendant's right not to testify .

some also question whether prosecutors are free to argue that the death penalty is made more appropriate by a defendant's insistence of his right to a trial .

the prosecution bears the burden of establishing the existence of aggravating factors and the defendant of establishing mitigating factors .

the burdens , however , are not even .

the prosecution must show proof beyond a reasonable doubt ; the defendant a less demanding proof by a preponderance of the evidence .

the finding on aggravating circumstances must be unanimous ; the finding on mitigating circumstances need only be espoused by a single juror .

capital punishment may only be recommended and imposed , if the jurors all agree that the aggravating factors sufficiently outweigh the mitigating factors to an extent that justifies imposition of the death penalty .

if they find the death penalty justified , they must recommend it .

if they recommend the death penalty , the court must impose it .

if they cannot agree , the defendant must be sentenced to a term of imprisonment , most often to life imprisonment .

appellate review : a defendant sentenced to death is entitled to review by the court of appeals .

the defendant is entitled to relief if the court determines that ( 1 ) the sentence was the product of passion , prejudice , or other arbitrary factor ; ( 2 ) the finding of at least one statutory aggravating factor cannot be supported by the record ; or ( 3 ) there exists some other legal error that requires the sentence to be overturned .

convictions and sentences imposed in a capital case are subject to normal appellate and collateral review as well .

execution of sentence : once all opportunities for appeal and collateral review have been exhausted , a defendant sentenced to death is executed pursuant to the laws of the state where the sentence was imposed , or if necessary , pursuant to the laws of a state designated by the court .

the united states marshal has the authority to use state or local facilities and personnel to carry out the execution .

the regulations permit six defense witnesses and 18 public witnesses to attend the execution .

video and audio recording are forbidden .

