in the information age , data of varying types have become increasingly valuable .

data can be used particularly to better target advertising and other forms of marketing to specific individuals .

the preferences of individuals can be aggregated and analyzed in such a way as to better predict future habits .

this general process is used across a wide array of industries , and it raises a number of first amendment and privacy questions .

for example , courts have struggled with fundamental questions , such as whether the sale and aggregation of data is speech at all , and , as discussed in the cases below , what standard of scrutiny to apply to restrictions on trade in data if it is speech .

these questions are particularly salient in the market for health related data .

health related data can be very valuable to researchers , scientists , and other academics .

it can be just as valuable to participants in the market for the provision of health care .

for example , pharmaceutical manufacturers use a process known as detailing to market prescription drugs .

detailing involves sending representatives of the pharmaceutical manufacturers to individual doctors' offices with information about prescription drugs and their various uses .

detailing is very expensive ; as a result , pharmaceutical manufacturers only engage in detailing for more expensive ( i.e. , brand - name ) prescription drugs .

the more information a detailer has about the doctor ( or medication prescriber ) that he or she is planning to market to , the better targeted , and more effective , the detailing becomes .

consequently , information about the past prescribing practices of doctors can be valuable to detailers in designing their marketing strategies .

an industry has developed to collect , aggregate , and analyze these prescriber data .

data gatherers collect information ( by purchasing it ) from pharmacies and other entities that have vast troves of prescriber history data .

they then aggregate and analyze the data .

the information they collect from pharmacies and hospitals about prescriber practices is then sold to pharmaceutical manufacturers for use in marketing .

they also sell the data to researchers and others that might use the data for purposes unrelated to marketing , but this market is far smaller than the market consisting of pharmaceutical marketers .

some doctors find better - targeted detailing to be useful .

other doctors find the sharing of their prescriber history without their consent , and its subsequent use as a marketing tool , to be an invasion of privacy .

three states — maine , new hampshire , and vermont — enacted statutes to restrict the sale and use of prescriber history data for the purposes of marketing ( though not for any other purpose ) without the consent of the doctor .

as discussed below , the states claimed to be protecting the privacy interest of the doctors .

also , the states were interested in lowering the costs of health care .

because detailing effectively encourages the prescription of more expensive , brand - name drugs , data suggest that health care costs are measurably increased by detailing .

the states reasoned that if detailing were less effective , then doctors might be more likely to prescribe generic drugs , which are cheaper than brand - name drugs , and health care costs overall would go down .

the companies that collect , analyze , and sell these data challenged the laws , claiming that they were an unconstitutional restriction of their free speech rights under the first amendment , as incorporated against the states by the fourteenth amendment .

the first and second circuit courts of appeals reached opposite conclusions regarding the constitutionality of the state laws that restricted the sale and use of prescriber data .

the first circuit , in two separate cases , found the laws to be constitutional , because they did not restrict "speech. .

the second circuit not only found a similar vermont law to be a restriction of speech , but also found the law to be unconstitutional under the commercial speech standard of scrutiny , a standard considered to be less rigorous than the constitutional standard applied to fully protected speech .

the supreme court affirmed the decision of the second circuit , but did so using what appeared to be a different standard of review that the court called "heightened judicial scrutiny. .

as noted above , the vermont law in question operated to restrict the sharing and use of prescriber - identifiable information in three ways .

first , it prohibited pharmacies , health insurers , and others in possession of or gathering prescriber - identifiable information from selling that information without the consent of the prescriber .

at the second circuit level , it was assumed that only sales for marketing purposes were restricted without consent , but at the supreme court level vermont argued that all sales were prohibited without consent .

second , pharmacies , health insurers , and similar entities were prohibited from allowing prescriber - identifiable information to be used for marketing purposes without prescriber consent .

lastly , marketers and pharmaceutical manufacturers were barred from using prescriber - identifiable information in their marketing , without the prescriber's consent .

the court began its analysis of the law by addressing vermont's arguably new interpretation of the statute .

below it had been argued that the ban on the sale of prescriber - identifiable information was only a ban on the sale for marketing purposes .

vermont argued to the court that the statute banned all sales of such information that occurred without consent .

the court noted that it might be too late in the game for vermont to change its interpretation of the law , but , ultimately , the shift in interpretation would not matter analytically .

the court found that the provision was unsustainable even under vermont's new interpretation , because the sale of the information was prohibited without prescriber consent , except in certain enumerated circumstances .

these exceptions , in the court's estimation , were very broad .

for example , under the exemption the prescriber - identifiable information could be given away or sold to academic researchers without consent , but not to pharmaceutical marketers .

the rest of the statute prohibited the use and disclosure of the prescriber - identifiable information only for marketing .

the court held that the vermont statute should be subject to "heightened judicial scrutiny," because it placed both content - and speaker - based restrictions on speech .

the statute was a content - based restriction on speech because it placed burdens on speech with a particular content ( i.e. , pharmaceutical marketing ) .

however , it placed no burdens on speech for an academic purpose , or other routine sharing of the information outside marketing purposes .

the statute was found to make speaker - based distinctions , because it burdened particular speakers — pharmaceutical marketers — while allowing other speakers an informational and communicational advantage .

vermont was free , for example , to provide academic researchers with prescriber - identifiable information in order for the researchers to craft a message that would counter the message of pharmaceutical manufacturers and promote generic alternatives .

the court seemed to take issue with the intentional handicapping of the speech of pharmaceutical marketers .

the court referenced vermont's stated desire to "level the playing field" and the legislative finding that pharmaceutical marketers often communicate messages that "are in conflict with the goals of the state. .

the court found that the vermont law seemed to be designed to make the message of pharmaceutical marketers less effective in an effort to bring down the costs of prescription drugs , and thereby advantage the communication of state - supported content .

the court seemed particularly concerned with vermont's attempt to favor its own message by disadvantaging the speech of a particular group .

the "first amendment requires heightened scrutiny whenever the government creates 'a regulation of speech because of disagreement with the message it conveys.' .

burdens on commercial speech are not excepted from this rule , according to the court .

often citizens may have more of an interest in hearing truthful commercial speech than even highly valued political dialogue .

"that reality has great relevance in the fields of medicine and public health , where information can save lives. .

the court also disagreed with vermont's argument that the statute was merely a regulation of commerce .

as before the second circuit , vermont again argued that precedent in united reporting , which upheld a regulation of access to information held by the government , applied in this case , because the vermont statute also regulated access to information .

the supreme court agreed with the second circuit .

access to information held by the government is distinguishable from regulations on the exchange of information between private parties .

"this court has held that the creation and dissemination of information are speech within the meaning of the first amendment.... facts , after all are the beginning point for much of the speech that is most essential to advance human knowledge and conduct human affairs. .

as a result , the court found that the vermont statute implicated the first amendment and should be subject to heightened scrutiny , despite the state's objections .

under usual circumstances , it would be enough to say that the law discriminated based upon content on its face , and viewpoint in practice , but because this law arguably burdened only commercial speech , the court acknowledged that a different standard might apply .

nonetheless , the court found that "the outcome is the same whether a special commercial inquiry or a stricter form of judicial scrutiny is applied. .

in order to survive constitutional review under the commercial speech standard , vermont was required to at least show that the statute directly advanced the interests it sought to protect , and that there was a reasonable fit between the means chosen and the ends sought to be achieved .

similar to the reasoning of the second circuit , the supreme court found that the statute did not advance the interest of protecting physician privacy .

the prescriber - identifiable information could be distributed widely , so long as it was not being distributed for a marketing purpose .

it could also be used for myriad purposes without permission .

the court found that "vermont has given its doctors a contrived choice: either consent , which will allow your prescriber - identifying information to be disseminated and used without constraint ; or , withhold consent , which will allow your information to be used by those speakers whose message the state supports. .

while the law did offer physicians limited privacy from the use and disclosure of their information , it only did so by requiring that physicians also support the state's interests .

vermont also argued that detailing undermines the doctor - patient relationship , because it interferes with doctors' treatment decisions , and burdens on detailers' speech work to protect the doctor - patient relationship .

the court dispensed with this argument by noting that "[if] pharmaceutical marketing affects treatment decisions , it does so because doctors find it persuasive .

absent circumstances far from those presented here , the fear that speech might persuade provides no lawful basis for quieting it. .

as to vermont's interest in lowering the cost of health care , the court , like the second circuit , was not persuaded that restricting the use of prescriber - identifiable information directly advanced the state's interest in lowering healthcare costs .

the court was also cautious of a regulation that sought to keep truthful information from people .

"the first amendment directs us to be especially skeptical of regulations that seek to keep people in the dark for what the government perceives to be their own good. .

fearing that expression is too effective is not a permissible reason to restrict it or burden it , even if it somehow may lower healthcare costs .

the state is , of course , free to attempt to argue its own point of view .

for example , the state might also launch a campaign to educate doctors about generic alternatives to brand - name drugs , and it may use prescriber - identifiable information in order to better target its messaging .

"however , the state cannot engage in content - based discrimination to advance its own side of a debate. .

fundamentally , the court seemed to be particularly concerned that the government , in this case , had burdened a message simply because the government did not approve of the message , and found it to be too effective .

the government also left unburdened the speech of speakers with whom the government agreed or whose message the government supported .

"this the state cannot do. .

as a result the court affirmed the decision of the second circuit striking down the law .

three justices dissented .

those justices would have applied central hudson's intermediate commercial speech standard , and would have found that vermont's law withstood scrutiny under that standard .

