from the 19 th century to the passage of the indian child welfare act ( icwa ) in 1978 , the federal government , states , and private agencies sought to separate indian children from their tribes and families in order to "civilize" the children or provide them with better lives .

congress undertook to reverse this practice when it passed the icwa in response to the high rate at which states were separating indian children from their parents , families , and tribes through involuntary removal of indian children from indian homes and involuntary termination of parental rights .

one survey reported that "approximately 25 – 35 percent of all indian children are separated from their families and placed in foster homes , adoptive homes , or institutions. .

the house committee on interior and insular affairs — the predecessor of the present - day house committee on natural resources — termed the disparity between placement rates for indians and non - indians "shocking. .

the committee expressed concern about the welfare of indian children who are traumatized by removal from their families and then "adjusting to a social and cultural environment much different from their own. .

the committee concluded , "[i]n judging the fitness of a particular family , many social workers , ignorant of indian cultural values and social norms , make decisions that are wholly inappropriate in the context of indian family life and so they frequently discover neglect or abandonment where none exists. .

the committee noted also that "[t]he decision to take indian children from their natural homes is , in most cases , carried out without due process of law" and that most cases did not go through adjudication because parents voluntarily waived their parental rights in the face of coercion from the state .

congress declared two policy aims of the icwa: ( 1 ) "to protect the best interests of indian children," and ( 2 ) "to promote the stability and security of indian tribes and families. .

the icwa is premised on the belief that "protection of the child's relationship with the tribe is in the child's best interest. .

it identifies indian children as a "resource" that is "vital to the continued existence and integrity of indian tribes. .

thus , the icwa recognizes that indian tribes have a unique interest in their minor members or potential members .

the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) described the icwa's policy as follows: "congress through the [icwa] has expressed its clear preference for keeping indian children with their families , deferring to tribal judgment on matters concerning the custody of tribal children , and placing indian children who must be removed from their homes within their own families or indian tribes. .

to achieve these policy aims , the icwa establishes "minimum federal standards for the removal of indian children from their families and the placement of such children in foster or adoptive homes which will reflect the unique values of indian culture , and by providing for assistance to indian tribes in the operation of child and family services programs. .

in addition , the icwa provides procedural protections for parents and tribes in state court proceedings .

the icwa applies to child custody proceedings involving indian children .

"child custody proceedings" include "foster care placement," "termination of parental rights," "preadoptive placement," and "adoptive placement. .

it does not apply to placements resulting from juvenile proceedings concerning an act which if committed by an adult would be a crime , or custody determinations made in conjunction with divorce proceedings .

although the icwa is associated primarily with involuntary child custody proceedings , it applies to voluntary proceedings as well .

the icwa defines "indian child" as "any unmarried person who is under age eighteen and is either ( a ) a member of an indian tribe or ( b ) is eligible for membership in an indian tribe and is the biological child of a member of an indian tribe. .

the bia guidelines provide "[w]hen a state court has reason to believe a child involved in a custody proceeding is an indian , the state court shall seek verification of the child's status from either the [bia] or the child's tribe. .

under the bia guidelines , the tribe's determination of the child's or parent's status as a member or the child's status as eligible for membership is conclusive .

in the absence of a tribal determination , the bia's determination is conclusive .

to counter the high rate at which states were removing indian children from their families and indian communities , the icwa provides uniform and heightened standards for involuntarily terminating parental rights , preferences for placing indian children in indian adoptive homes , and procedural protections for parents and indian tribes in state court proceedings .

foster care is the term applied to the temporary placement of a child with a licensed caregiver when a child is removed , voluntarily or involuntarily , from his or her home and made a ward of the state or tribe .

the foster care giver has day - to - day responsibility for the child and the state or tribe makes the legal decisions for the child .

section 1912 ( e ) establishes the standard of proof , the type of evidence , and the substantive standard that state courts must apply in removing an indian child from his or her home and placing the child in foster care .

section 1912 ( e ) provides that for involuntary proceedings , state courts must find , based on "clear and convincing evidence," including the testimony of qualified expert witnesses , that "continued custody of the child by the parent or indian custodian is likely to result in serious emotional or physical damage to the child" before placing the child in foster care .

the "clear and convincing evidence" standard is higher than the "preponderance of the evidence" standard necessary for due process and employed by most states in foster care placement proceeding for non - indian children .

the bia guidelines provide that "[e]vidence that only shows the existence of community or family poverty , crowded or inadequate housing , alcohol abuse , or non - conforming social behavior does not constitute clear and convincing evidence that continued custody is likely to result in serious emotional or physical harm to the child. .

rather , in order to meet the standard , "the evidence must show the existence of particular conditions in the home that are likely to result in serious emotional or physical damage to the particular child. .

section 1915 ( b ) provides that for foster care or preadoptive placement , a state court must place the child "in reasonable proximity to his or her home," "in the least restrictive setting which most closely approximates a family , and in which his special needs , if any , may be met. .

these standards are similar to the standards applied under state law for foster placement of non - indian children .

the icwa , however , provides a hierarchy of preferences .

placement should be: with a member of the child's extended family ; a foster home licensed , approved , or specified by the child's tribe ; an indian foster home licensed or approved by an authorized non - indian licensing authority ; or , an institution for children approved by an indian tribe or operated by an indian organization which has a program suitable to meet the child's needs .

like the preferences for adoption , these preferences make it more likely that indian children will not be removed from an indian environment .

parents and tribes enjoy the same procedural rights in foster care placement proceedings as they have in parental rights termination proceedings .

by recognizing both exclusive and concurrent tribal court jurisdiction over custody proceedings involving indian children , the icwa provides an important mechanism by which tribes may participate in the placement of indian children .

the icwa recognizes that tribal courts have exclusive jurisdiction over child custody proceedings involving indian children who are residing on the reservation or who are wards of the tribal court , regardless of residency .

it recognizes that tribal courts have concurrent jurisdiction over child custody proceedings involving children who reside off the reservation .

to ensure that other jurisdictions respect tribal court orders , the icwa provides that "[t]he united states , every state , every territory or possession of the united states , and every indian tribe shall give full faith and credit to the public acts , records and judicial proceedings of any indian tribe applicable to indian child custody proceedings to the same extent that such entities give full faith and credit to the public acts , records and judicial proceedings of any other entity. .

over the years , there have been many bills introduced in congress to amend the icwa .

in general , the amendments have been aimed at ensuring tribal notice and the opportunity for limited tribal intervention in voluntary adoptions , restricting the time in which parents may revoke their consent to voluntary termination of their rights , and providing criminal penalties for misrepresentation regarding an indian child .

in addition , many of the proposed amendments have clarified when tribal courts have exclusive jurisdiction ; extended exclusive jurisdiction to tribes with reservations located in p.l .

280 states and to tribes without reservations , including tribes in oklahoma ; and , made clear that tribes in alaska have jurisdiction concurrent with state courts .

only one bill has been introduced to limit the applicability of the icwa .

there were no bills introduced in the 112 th congress to amend the icwa , and no bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress thus far .

the icwa has achieved success in reducing the rate at which indian children are removed from their homes and the rate at which indian children are placed in non - indian homes .

nonetheless , indian children are still removed from their homes and placed in foster care at a rate higher than that for non - indian children .

in 2008 , congress passed the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act , which made tribes eligible for direct funding for foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act , the act under which states receive federal funding for foster placement and adoption assistance .

it is too early to know the results of this access to increased funding , but it may improve the tribes' ability to protect their children in a way that also protects the tribes .

