trade adjustment assistance for workers ( taa ) provides federally - funded benefits to dislocated workers who are adversely affected by foreign trade .

benefits under taa include training subsidies and income support for workers who have exhausted their unemployment insurance ( ui ) .

taa - eligible workers who are age 50 and over and obtain reemployment at a lower wage may be eligible for a wage insurance program .

to be eligible for taa benefits , separated workers must petition the department of labor ( dol ) to establish that foreign trade contributed importantly to their job loss .

taa benefits are funded through federal appropriations and administered through state workforce systems and state unemployment insurance agencies .

taa for workers is authorized under title ii of the trade act of 1974 , as amended .

it was last reauthorized by the trade adjustment assistance extension act of 2011 ( taaea ; title ii of p.l .

112-40 ) .

taaea specified that taa would operate under one set of eligibility and benefit provisions through december 31 , 2013 , and then revert to more restrictive eligibility and benefit provisions beginning january 1 , 2014 .

this report will refer to the expired expanded provisions as "the 2011 provisions" and the current reduced provisions as " the 2014 provisions. .

changes in taa eligibility and benefits are not retroactive .

for example , workers who are covered under a petition filed under the 2011 provisions may continue to receive benefits under those provisions , even after the provisions have changed for new beneficiaries .

this means that state grantee agencies operate multiple versions of the taa program simultaneously , providing benefits based on the timing of the petition under which each participant is covered .

under taaea , the taa for workers program was set to be phased out after december 31 , 2014 .

however , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) appropriated funds for the program with the intent of continuing full operation of the taa for workers program through fy2015 , including the certification of new workers .

in fy2015 , the program will continue to operate under the 2014 provisions .

obtaining taa benefits is a two - stage process .

first , a group of workers must petition dol to establish that foreign trade "contributed importantly" to their job losses and become taa certified .

once a group has been certified , individual workers covered by the group's petition apply for state - administered benefits at local american job centers ( also known as one - stop career centers ) .

taa is available to workers in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

this section describes taa eligibility criteria under the current law 2014 provisions .

table 1 compares the current 2014 provisions to the now - expired 2011 provisions .

taa benefits include training subsidies and income support for workers who have exhausted their ui benefits and are enrolled in training .

workers age 50 and over may participate in a wage insurance program .

as noted previously , changes in taa provisions are not typically retroactive .

therefore , workers are entitled to a set of benefits and services based on the effective provisions under which the petition that covers them was certified .

for example , a worker who is covered by a petition that was certified under the 2011 provisions would still be able to receive the benefits specified in the 2011 provisions even if the worker did not receive benefits until after the 2014 provisions had taken effect .

table 2 at the end of this section compares benefits and services available to workers who are covered by petitions certified under the 2011 and 2014 provisions .

due to the two - year period that a certification remains active and the length of the time that a worker may receive taa benefits and services , workers certified under pre - 2011 provisions may currently be eligible for other sets of benefits authorized by previous taa provisions .

taa for workers is funded by the federal government and administered jointly by the federal government and cooperating state agencies .

group eligibility is determined by dol and individual benefits are administered by cooperating state agencies .

funds for training and other reemployment services are allotted to the states by formula .

the allotment formula considers the weighted average of certified workers in the state during the past four quarters , with the greatest weight on the most recent quarter ; the weighted average of workers participating in training during the previous four quarters , with the greatest weight on the most recent quarter ; the number of workers estimated to be participating in training during the forthcoming fiscal year as determined by the previous factor and dol estimates ; and the amount of funding estimated to be necessary to provide approved training as determined by per - trainee expenditures in the past four quarters .

at the beginning of the fiscal year , 65% of the year's reemployment service funds are distributed to the states using the formula .

the remaining 35% is held in a reserve fund .

states with emergencies or unforeseen training burdens may apply for these reserve funds .

any reserve funds that are not allocated through the emergency funding process are allocated to the states using the original formula throughout the fiscal year .

regulations specify that no state's initial allocation may be less than 25% of its allocation in the preceding fiscal year .

the tra income support and ataa wage insurance program are uncapped entitlements that are funded by the federal government and administered by state unemployment agencies .

annual congressional appropriations for these programs typically reflect the request in the president's budget .

any funds from these allocations that are unobligated at the end of the fiscal year expire and are returned to the treasury .

this section presents certification and participation data for taa through fy2013 .

when interpreting these data , it is important to note that the eligibility and benefit provisions of taa varied throughout the period listed .

since data only go through fy2013 , they do not include any workers who were certified under the 2014 provisions of the program .

eligibility requirements and benefit levels are determined by the taa provisions in effect on the date on which the petition that covers the individual was filed .

a summary of dates and corresponding provisions that determine benefits is in table 3 .

since a worker's benefits are determined by the provisions that were in place when the petition covering the worker was filed and not when the worker actually receives the benefits , workers participating in taa at the same time may be covered by different provisions .

for example , in its fy2013 annual report , dol noted that program participants in that year included individuals covered under the taaea as well as individuals covered under prior versions of taa that had been enacted in 2009 and 2002 .

as such , while variations in policy should be considered when interpreting the data , it is not possible to easily identify which program provisions align with program data from recent years .

 table 4 presents data on taa petitions and certifications from fy2003 to fy2013 .

in some cases , a petition may be filed in one year and be determined in the subsequent year .

for example , the large increase in petitions filed in fy2009 created a backlog and many of the petitions were not determined until fy2010 .

the reduction of the backlog in fy2010 explains why the number of petitions certified in fy2010 exceeds the number of petitions filed .

the filing and determination of petitions in different years also means that it is not possible to calculate the certification rate in a fiscal year by dividing the number of certified petitions by the number of filed petitions .

petitions certified in fy2013 ( the most recent year for which data are available ) covered approximately 104,000 workers .

this represented an increase above the number of workers certified in fy2012 , but was still below the approximately 287,000 workers who were certified in fy2010 .

in fy2013 , the taa program was operating under the 2011 provisions , which meant that both production and services workers were eligible to be certified for benefits .

among the 1,025 certified petitions , approximately 58% were on behalf of production workers .

the remaining 42% of certified petitions were from service workers .

not all workers who are covered by a certified taa petition choose to pursue benefits under the program .

certified workers may seek reemployment without assistance from the program , retire , or simply not pursue benefits .

table 5 presents data on the number of workers who enrolled in training or received an initial tra payment by fiscal year .

since workers can be enrolled in training and receive tra for more than one year , the number of workers receiving benefits in a year may be greater than the number of new participants listed in the table .

benefit usage in a particular fiscal year can be influenced by a number of factors .

taa policy varied throughout the period covered in table 5 .

varied eligibility and benefit provisions likely impacted certifications and subsequent benefit usage .

for example , the year with the highest number of new training participants is fy2009 , which coincides with the expanded eligibility and benefits under the 2009 provisions of taa .

non - taa policy provisions may influence the use of taa benefits .

for example , during the fy2009-fy2012 period , congress had enacted unemployment insurance extensions .

since tra benefits are offset by ui , demand for tra was reduced during this period .

economic conditions may affect certified workers' decisions to pursue training and other benefits .

for example , during a period of low unemployment , a worker covered by a certified taa petition may forego training benefits and pursue immediate reemployment .

table 5 does not provide data on the number of taa - certified workers who received non - training employment services such as case management and career counseling .

under the 2009 and 2011 provisions , these services were an entitlement for certified workers and funding for these services was included in states' allotments for reemployment services .

under the 2002 and 2014 provisions , states must make every reasonable effort to provide these services , but did not receive dedicated funding to provide them .

 table 6 presents data on post - taa outcomes for program exiters using dol's common measures , a metric that dol uses across its workforce programs .

in the table , entered employment rate ( eer ) refers to the percentage of workers who were employed in the quarter after program exit .

the employment retention rate ( err ) is the share of these employed workers who were also employed in the second and third quarters after exit .

average earnings ( ae ) are recorded in the second and third quarters after exit among workers who were employed in the first quarter after exit .

eer data are for all exiting workers .

taa classifies a program participant as an exiter once 90 days have passed since the worker received services or case management .

dol does not disaggregate its outcome data by which provisions of taa an exiter received benefits under .

as such , it is not possible to compare the employment outcomes of beneficiaries under different provisions ( eg , 2002 provisions vs. 2011 provisions ) .

when interpreting outcome data , it may be useful to consider the broader labor market .

for example , the increase in eer between fy2010 and fy2012 may have been influenced by broader labor market trends ( eg , reduction in employment rate ) as well as factors related to the taa program and program participants .

while outcome data can offer some insights on participants' post - participation activities , such data offer a limited perspective on the impact of taa benefits and services .

for example , while the data in the previous section shows that 71% of program exiters in fy2013 met the "entered employment" criteria , we do not know how many of the same workers would have entered employment if taa were not available and the workers either ( 1 ) simply sought reemployment with no government intervention or ( 2 ) utilized other employment and training programs that are available to all unemployed workers .

as such , it is not possible to use outcome data to easily estimate the impact of or value added by taa participation .

to estimate the impact of taa , dol commissioned a series of studies to estimate the short and medium - term impact of the taa for workers program .

these studies were released throughout 2012 and considered a cohort of taa - eligible workers who were laid off between november 1 , 2005 , and october 31 , 2006 .

since taa is an entitlement program for certified workers , the studies were not able to use a random assignment methodology in which some taa - eligible workers received services while others did not .

instead , the studies compared taa participants to a comparison group of ui claimants with similar observable characteristics such as age , race , education , employment history , and prior earnings .

the study compared the employment status and earnings of taa participants and the comparison group for 16 quarters ( 48 months ) after initial job loss .

it found that early in the reference period , taa participants were more likely to participate in training , less likely to be employed , and had lower earnings than the comparison group .

this is an expected finding since taa generally emphasizes training over immediate reemployment .

in the 16 th quarter , the study found that taa participants' employment rate and earnings were both statistically significantly lower than the constructed comparison group .

the study offered a number of caveats with regard to these findings and their generalizability .

among these were that a four - year follow up period may be insufficient to fully evaluate the returns to taa - funded training and that , while the study compared taa participants to ui claimants with similar observable characteristics , it is possible that there were unobservable differences between the groups that influenced employment and earnings outcomes .

the analysis also noted that , due to the timing of the study , many taa participants who participated in training returned to the labor market during an economic recession , whereas many members of the comparison group ( which spent less time in training ) returned to the labor market before the recession .

when considering the generalizability of the study , it is also worthwhile to note that the populations considered in the studies were eligible under and received benefits according to the 2002 provisions of taa .

these provisions , while similar to current law , were decidedly different from the eligibility and benefit provisions that were in place under 2009 and 2011 versions of the program .

taa was formally established by the trade expansion act of 1962 ( p.l .

87-794 ) but was little used until the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) expanded benefits and eligibility .

except for a lapse between december 1985 and march 1986 , a variety of legislative vehicles kept taa authorized through the end of fy2001 .

authorization then lapsed for 11 months , but the program remained funded through appropriations .

the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) reauthorized taa , expanded benefits , and established a wage insurance program for older workers .

authorization expired on december 31 , 2007 , but the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) funded taa for fy2008 .

the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) funded taa through march 6 , 2009 , and specified that the programs would continue through that date .

the trade and globalization adjustment assistance act of 2009 ( tgaaa ) , part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , was signed on february 17 , 2009 .

tgaaa reauthorized taa and temporarily expanded both eligibility and benefit levels .

authorization for the tgaaa changes was set to expire on december 31 , 2010 , but the omnibus trade act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-344 ) extended them through february 12 , 2011 .

after that date , taa reverted back to the pre - expansion provisions that were in place prior to tgaaa and defined by the trade act of 2002 .

2011 reauthorization taa operated under the pre - expansion provisions until october 21 , 2011 , when the trade adjustment assistance extension act of 2011 ( taaea ; title ii of p.l .

112-40 ) was signed into law .

taaea reauthorized taa through december 31 , 2014 , and expanded eligibility and benefits to near - tgaaa levels through december 31 , 2013 .

the law was retroactive and groups who were denied certification under the prior provisions were automatically reconsidered under the provisions enacted by taaea .

groups who were certified under the prior provisions were eligible to reapply under the new expanded benefit provisions .

the expanded provisions of the taaea expired after december 31 , 2013 , and eligibility criteria and benefit levels largely reverted to the levels set by the trade act of 2002 .

these provisions were set to remain in place for one year until the program was scheduled to begin to be phased out after december 31 , 2014 .

however , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) appropriated funds for the program for fy2015 with the intent of continuing full operation of the taa for workers program through fy2015 .

