the lord's resistance army ( lra ) is a small yet vicious armed group that originated in northern uganda in 1987 .

founded and led by joseph kony , the lra currently operates in the remote border areas between the central african republic ( car ) , democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , south sudan , and sudan .

the lra's actions — which include massacres , abductions ( notoriously of children ) , sexual assault , and looting — have caused humanitarian suffering and instability .

the group is active in a region marked by other complex security and humanitarian challenges , and the conflict has eluded a negotiated or military solution .

the ugandan military has prevented the lra from operating within uganda since roughly 2005 , and lra's numbers have greatly declined from thousands of fighters in the late 1990s and early 2000s to a reported 150-200 "core combatants. .

still , according to the nongovernmental lra crisis tracker , the lra has killed over 2,900 civilians and abducted more than 6,000 since december 2008 , when an attempted peace process with the group broke down ( see " background on the lra " below ) .

in may 2010 , congress enacted the lord's resistance army disarmament and northern uganda recovery act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-172 ) , which states that it is u.s. policy "to work with regional governments toward a comprehensive and lasting resolution to the conflict," and authorizes and calls for a range of u.s. humanitarian , security , and development responses .

the act followed more than a decade of congressional activity related to the lra , and it passed with 201 house cosponsors and 64 senate cosponsors .

the administration's approach to the lra , submitted to congress in november 2010 as required under p.l .

111-172 , is organized around four broad objectives that closely respond to provisions of the legislation ( see " u.s. policy " ) .

more broadly , the administration has expressed a commitment to preventing and responding to "mass atrocities," including in its 2010 national security strategy and a presidential study directive ( psd - 10 ) issued in august 2011 .

administration officials have cited u.s. support for efforts to counter the lra as an example of their commitment to atrocity prevention .

in october 2011 , the obama administration announced the deployment of about 100 u.s. military personnel to act as advisors in support of ugandan - led military efforts to capture or kill senior lra leaders .

the united states has provided significant logistical support for uganda's counter - lra operations beyond its borders since late 2008 .

members of congress have expressed support for the u.s. advisor deployment in statements and legislation , though some initially stated concerns about its duration , cost , unintended consequences , and the precedent that it might set .

while p.l .

111-172 did not specifically authorize u.s. troop deployments , it directed u.s. policy to provide "political , economic , military , and intelligence support for viable multilateral efforts ... to apprehend or remove joseph kony and his top commanders from the battlefield," and the administration has portrayed the counter - lra deployment as consistent with congressional intent .

campaigns by u.s. - based advocacy groups have contributed to u.s. policymakers' interest in , and u.s. public awareness of , the lra issue .

in addition to the united states , other international actors have devoted resources to responding to the lra , including african governments ; united nations ( u.n. ) agencies , political missions , and peacekeeping operations ; the african union ( au ) ; and the european union ( eu ) .

in 2012 , the au launched a regional task force ( au - rtf ) against the lra , which is led by uganda and has subsumed previous ugandan , south sudanese , and drc operations .

however , the au - rtf has not reached its authorized troop strength of 5,000 .

although the ugandan military ( ugandan people's defense force or updf ) is regarded as the most effective of the african forces involved , some observers have questioned its capacity and commitment to complete the mission .

more broadly , the governments of lra - affected countries each face other , arguably more vital , priorities with regard to their domestic security and to each other .

notably , internal security and humanitarian crises have burgeoned in south sudan and the central african republic since 2013 .

the lra's strength has significantly decreased since the u.s. advisors first deployed , and several senior lra figures have been captured or killed by ugandan troops in u.s. - supported operations .

u.s. funding has also assisted with "early - warning" mechanisms in affected communities , the disarmament and reintegration of ex - lra combatants , and other activities designed to improve civilian protection and lessen the group's strength .

despite these successes , kony apparently remains at large , and the lra "has demonstrated a remarkable ability to survive. .

according to u.s. director of national intelligence james clapper , who testified to congress in 2014 that regional operations had the lra "on the run and in survival mode," "joseph kony is often on the move and has long been able to elude capture .

getting a 'fix' on his location will remain difficult in this very remote part of the world. .

in early 2015 , clapper testified that the lra continued to "display great agility" and that "even in its weakened state , probably has the ability to regenerate if counter - lra operations are reduced. .

it is difficult to assess whether the current approach of seeking to remove the remaining top commanders through military operations , in combination with efforts to lure lra rank - and - file fighters into deserting , can fully eradicate the group .

analysts who follow the activities of the lra agree that it is a vicious , brutal group that has caused great human suffering and instability .

where some disagree is over the extent to which the lra poses a threat to core u.s. interests , if at all , and over the appropriate level and tactics of the u.s. response to the group .

these questions are particularly pertinent in the context of the deployment of u.s. military personnel and assets .

key questions include what is , or should be , the relative priority of counter - lra activities compared to other humanitarian , national security , and budgetary goals ? .

what is the impetus for u.s. action , when compared to other foreign policy concerns ? .

what is the appropriate level of funding for lra - related activities , both military and nonmilitary ? .

what are the benchmarks for success and / or withdrawal of u.s. forces ? .

how are regional actors and local communities likely to react to an eventual withdrawal ? .

if uganda , the key military actor in counter - lra efforts , were to withdraw before the key objectives of the administration's strategy are achieved , how would that affect the u.s. response to the lra ? .

what more , if anything , should be done to advance civilian protection , support the reintegration of ex - lra combatants , address humanitarian needs , and achieve other goals laid out in p.l .

111-172 ? .

to what extent , with u.s. support , are regional militaries willing and able to defeat the lra ? .

what is the likely impact of a "decapitation" approach on the lra's activities and the humanitarian situation in affected areas ? .

what are the potential unintended consequences , if any , of u.s. support to the ugandan or south sudanese forces participating in counter - lra operations , in terms of regional relations and u.s. diplomatic influence ? .

lra members reportedly travel in small , highly mobile bands , which include abductees forced to act as porters , scouts , sex slaves , and junior fighters .

while senior command positions appear to remain in the hands of ugandan nationals , the group's lower ranks presumably include individuals from countries more recently affected by the lra .

the level of command and control linking lra leaders to each other and to their fighters is uncertain .

the lra's capacity appears to have diminished as ugandan , congolese , and south sudanese troops , supported by the united states , have pursued operations against lra cells , and as mid - and senior - ranking group figures have deserted or been captured or killed .

civilian killings by the group have decreased markedly in recent years , from 1,200 in 2009 to fewer than 20 in 2014 .

the number of people displaced as a direct result of lra attacks , or out of fear of coming under attack by the lra , has also reportedly declined .

as of mid - 2015 , almost 200,000 people were estimated to be internally displaced or living as refugees in car , drc , and south sudan due to the lra , compared to over 326,000 reportedly displaced as of december 2013 .

recent ugandan military estimates put the lra's strength at about 200-300 fighters , down from a peak of over 2,000 in the late 1990s and early 2000s .

advocates of a continuing u.s. role in efforts to counter the lra nevertheless warn that the group continues to pose a threat and could rebound , reporting that attacks and abductions attributed to the group increased in 2014 , a trend that has continued into 2015 , reversing a decline in 2011-2013 .

the most recent report of the u.n. secretary - general on the situation in central africa raises concern with the reported movement of "the bulk of the lra" into drc , where a majority of reported lra attacks occurred in 2015 , according to lra crisis tracker .

most of those incidents , primarily looting and / or abductions , took place in and around garamba national park , on the border with south sudan .

the remote , densely forested park , roughly the size of delaware , had been a refuge for kony and his fighters from 2006 through 2008 , until they were scattered by a ugandan - led regional offensive .

the park's elephant population has increasingly been targeted by poachers , reportedly including lra fighters — park rangers report that more than 170 elephants , more than 10% of the park's population , have been killed since the beginning of 2014 .

lra crisis tracker analysts have warned that the lra is likely exploiting instability in car to resupply its forces through looting and trafficking in illegal ivory , gold , and diamonds .

u.s. - supported ugandan operations in car ceased for several months in 2013 following the overthrow of the car government by a rebel movement , due to political and security challenges .

although ugandan operations subsequently recommenced , reports suggest that the lra is operating to the north and west of previous areas of activity in car .

these areas may be beyond the reach of ugandan troops , who are based in the far southeast of the country .

in 2013 , independent analysts reported that the lra had established a safe - haven in kafia kingi , a disputed area on the border between sudan and south sudan .

these analysts posited that the sudanese government and / or military elements were purposefully allowing the lra to operate in the area , noting a history of prior sudanese government support to the lra ( see "sudan and the lra" textbox , below ) .

in 2013 , ugandan troops serving in the au - rtf reportedly entered kafia kingi and destroyed the lra's bases there .

however , in may 2014 , the u.n. secretary - general reported to the u.n. security council that "credible sources suggest that lra leader joseph kony and senior lra commanders have recently returned to seek safe haven in sudanese - controlled areas" of kafia kingi , despite sudanese government denials .

according to recent media and nongovernmental reports , the lra is using kafia kingi as a transit point for ivory poached from drc and smuggled through eastern car for trafficking onward to asia .

in 2015 , a state department official stated in a national geographic interview , "it's not a secret to anyone that kony's in sudan .

it's his sanctuary. .

at the invitation of the sudanese government , the au special envoy for lra issues led a delegation to khartoum in september 2015 to discuss the kafia kingi allegations .

they have agreed to send a joint fact finding mission to the area .

international humanitarian assistance to lra - affected areas increased significantly between 2009 and 2013 .

however , according to the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( unocha ) , despite donor efforts , "only a few humanitarian agencies and nongovernmental organizations [are] able to provide assistance in remote areas where no state institutions are present. .

insecurity in car and south sudan appears to have further reduced access since 2013 , while nongovernmental organizations have begun to "phase out" from some lra - affected areas of drc as the number of displaced persons continues to decrease .

the lra emerged in northern uganda in 1987 , the year after yoweri museveni , a rebel leader from southern uganda , seized power , ending nearly a decade of rule by leaders from the north .

joseph kony , then in his 20s , initially laid claim to the legacy of alice lakwena , an ethnic acholi spiritual leader from northern uganda .

lakwena was a key figure among northern rebel factions seeking to overthrow the museveni government , but her holy spirit movement ( hsm ) was defeated by the ugandan military in 1987 .

kony , reportedly a relative of lakwena's , then founded the lra .

the group , primarily composed of ethnic acholis , targeted civilians in acholi areas of uganda and sought support and protection from the government of sudan .

in the late 1980s , the museveni government recruited acholis into government - backed civilian defense forces , which led the lra to escalate its attacks against acholi civilians and contributed to deep distrust between the government and northern communities .

some analysts contend that president museveni initially had little interest in defeating the lra , either because his government and the updf were able to exploit the conflict for political and economic gain , or because the conflict was perceived as a way to further marginalize acholis , who had dominated the ugandan armed forces prior to museveni .

ultimately , the ugandan military succeeded in pushing the lra out of the country in 2005-2006 .

lra leaders then moved elsewhere in the region , notably to drc and then to car .

the lra's current area of activity is vast and characterized by an extremely minimal government influence and a limited international humanitarian presence .

the lra has periodically laid out vague political demands , and in some ways its emergence and nearly 20-year sustainment in northern uganda can be understood as a product of long - standing northern grievances against perceived southern political domination and economic neglect .

the lra has also fed off of proxy struggles between sudan and uganda .

yet the group does not have a clear political or economic agenda , and its operations appear to be motivated by little more than the infliction of violence and the protection of senior leaders .

the lra at one time had a civilian wing , which called itself the lord's resistance movement and framed its demands as ethno - regional socioeconomic and political grievances , but its influence and ability to make commitments on kony's behalf appeared limited .

the lra has a cult - like dimension: kony claims to receive commands from traditional spirits , and has also at times cloaked his rhetoric in christian and messianic terms .

lra commanders are infamous for mutilating and brutally killing their victims , and they rely on the mass abduction of children , who are often brutalized and forced to commit atrocities , to replenish their ranks .

the united states has supported efforts to counter the effects of the lra for more than a decade .

when the lra was in uganda , the united states provided humanitarian assistance along with aid in support of the social and economic recovery of the north .

the united states has significantly increased its engagement since 2008 , after the juba peace talks broke down and the lra became mobile throughout a wider swath of central africa .

u.s. involvement in counter - lra efforts is largely premised on the group's infliction of widespread human suffering .

it is also tied to an expanding security partnership with uganda .

in addition to its counter - lra operations , uganda is the leading troop contributor to the u.s. - supported au stabilization operation in somalia ( amisom ) , which is linked to u.s. counterterrorism objectives .

the u.s. relationship with uganda has been strained by the ugandan government's repression of its gay and lesbian community , which the administration has condemned , but security cooperation has continued .

the administration's strategy to support the disarmament of the lord's resistance army , submitted to congress in 2010 as required in p.l .

111-172 , lays out four "strategic objectives": 1. the increased protection of civilians from lra attacks ; 2. the apprehension or "removal" of kony and other senior lra commanders ; 3. the promotion of defections from the lra and the disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration of remaining lra combatants ; and 4. the provision of humanitarian relief to lra - affected communities .

the multi - year strategy emphasizes that the united states will "work with national governments and regional organizations" to accomplish these goals .

at the same time , it acknowledges that governments in the region have competing priorities and that "the capabilities of national , regional , and multinational forces to provide protection against the lra are limited. .

the agencies involved in implementation , which is coordinated by the national security council , include the state department , the defense department , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , with support from the intelligence community .

as part of its multi - faceted approach , the administration has pressed regional governments , other donors , and multilateral entities such as u.n. missions and the au to prioritize lra - related efforts and to develop plans to coordinate such efforts .

for example , the administration has used the u.s. voice and vote in the u.n. security council to support u.n. peacekeeping operations in drc , south sudan , and car — which help to coordinate counter - lra activities — as well as the u.n .

regional office for central africa , a u.n. political mission whose mandate includes the lra .

in addition , u.s. diplomacy has sought to mediate and de - escalate disputes between host countries and the ugandan military over the duration and purpose of updf deployments .

the following sections describe key components of the u.s. response to the lra .

congress has played a key role in u.s. policy toward the lra .

following the enactment of p.l .

111-172 , congress has appropriated funding and created new authorities for the executive branch to carry out components of the u.s. response .

selected enacted legislation is described below .

consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 , december 23 , 2011 ) .

funds appropriated for the department of state and foreign assistance "should be made available for programs and activities affected by the lord's resistance army. .

the conference report accompanying the act stated that , "up to $10,000,000 be made available for peace and security in the affected region to address these issues , including programs to improve physical access , telecommunications infrastructure and early - warning mechanisms and to support the disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration of former lra combatants , especially child soldiers. .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( p.l .

112-81 , december 31 , 2011 ) .

authorized the secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , to provide "not more than" $35 million for each of fiscal years 2012 and 2013 in "logistic support , supplies , and services for foreign forces participating in operations to mitigate and eliminate the threat posed by the lord's resistance army. .

department of state rewards program update and technical corrections act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-283 , january 15 , 2013 ) .

amended the state department basic authorities act of 1956 to authorize , among other things , the issuance of monetary rewards for information leading to the arrest or conviction in any country , or the transfer to or conviction by an international criminal tribunal , of any foreign national accused of war crimes , crimes against humanity , or genocide .

provided that "nothing in this act or the amendments made by this act shall be construed as authorizing the use of activity precluded under the american servicemembers' protection act of 2002" ( p.l .

107-206 , title ii ) , which prohibits material assistance to the icc , among other provisions .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 , january 2 , 2013 ) .

expressed the sense of congress that the u.s. operation to support african counter - lra efforts "should continue as appropriate to achieve the goals of the operation" and that the secretary of defense "should provide intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance assets" in support of the u.s. operation .

provided "an additional $50 million to enhance the intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) support to africom's ooc [operation observant compass]. .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 ( p.l .

113-66 , december 26 , 2013 ) .

authorizes the secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , to provide up to $50 million year fiscal year , through fy2017 , in "logistic support , supplies , and services , and intelligence support , to foreign forces participating in operations to mitigate and eliminate the threat posed by the lord's resistance army. .

prohibits utilizing over $37.5 million in fy2014 until the secretary of defense provides a report on operation observant compass describing its "specific goals," "the precise metrics used to measure progress," and "the actions that will be taken to transition the campaign if it is determined that it is no longer necessary for the united states to support the mission of the campaign. .

consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 , january 17 , 2014 ) .

funds appropriated for foreign assistance "shall be made available for programs and activities in areas affected by the lord's resistance army ... including to improve physical access , telecommunications infrastructure , and early - warning mechanisms and to support the disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration of former lra combatants , especially child soldiers. .

provided budget authority for $10 million in economic support fund ( esf ) for counter - lra programs .

required the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of defense and the usaid administrator , to submit a report on progress toward implementing the administration's counter - lra strategy and the objectives included in p.l .

111-172 , including assistance provided for such purposes .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l .

113-291 , january 3 , 2014 ) .

expresses that the u.s. advise and assist operation in support of regional counter - lra operations "has made significant progress in achieving its objectives" and that "the department of defense should continue its support of operation observant compass , particularly through the provision of key enablers , such as mobility assets and targeted intelligence collection and analytical support , to enable regional partners to effectively conduct operations against joseph kony and the lord's resistance army," also requires that operation observant compass be "integrated into a comprehensive strategy to support the security and stability in the region. .

consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 , december 16 , 2014 ) .

funds appropriated for foreign assistance "shall be made available for programs and activities in areas affected by the lord's resistance army ... including to improve physical access , telecommunications infrastructure , and early - warning mechanisms and to support the disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration of former lra combatants , especially child soldiers. .

directs the secretary of state to continue the reporting requirement included in the joint explanatory statement of p.l .

113-76 during fy2015 .

pending resolutions include s.res .

237 and h.res .

394 , "condemning joseph kony and the lord's resistance army for continuing to perpetrate crimes against humanity , war crimes , and mass atrocities," and broadly supporting counter - lra efforts by the african union as well as central african governments and regional organizations .

additionally , there are several pending legislative provisions that address the future of the department of defense support for the counter - lra mission .

these provisions are described below .

h.rept .

114-102 accompanying h.r .

1735 ( fy2016 national defense authorization act ) .

expresses concern that the secretary of defense has not provided details on its plan to transition or terminate the counter - lra mission should joseph kony be removed from the battlefield or when the authority expires in september 2017 .

directs the secretary of defense to brief the house committee on armed services on the post - lra transition or termination plan by september 30 , 2015 .

s.rept .

114-49 accompanying s. 1376 ( fy2016 national defense authorization act ) .

notes the progress of the au - rtf in combatting the lra and encourages the department of defense to continue to provide logistic support , supplies , and services , as well as intelligence support , to foreign forces participating in counter - lra efforts .

s.rept .

114-63 accompanying s. 1558 ( fy2016 department of defense appropriations bill ) .

provides that "the department of defense shall continue its support of operation observant compass to enable regional partners to continue to conduct operations against joseph kony and the lord's resistance army. .

h.r .

2685 ( fy2016 department of defense appropriations act ) .

provides that , of funding provided under "operation and maintenance , defense - wide ... up to $30,000,000 shall be for operation observant compass. .

s. 1725 ( fy2016 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act ) .

provides budget authority for $10 million in economic support fund ( esf ) for counter - lra programs "including to improve physical access , telecommunications infrastructure , and early - warning mechanisms and to support the disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration of former lra combatants , especially child soldiers. .

the deployment of u.s. military personnel in support of regional counter - lra efforts may raise questions related to whether , and in what form , explicit legal authorization is required ( see "war powers" text - box , above ) .

additional issues of potential interest are outlined below .

as the lra's capacity has weakened amid u.s. military deployments to the region , some anti - lra advocates have begun to call for a shift in u.s. focus toward preparing for a post - lra environment .

this might include reallocating resources from military operations and life - saving humanitarian relief toward recovery and development efforts .

in may 2015 , the u.n. secretary - general suggested to the security council that the "lack of funding for protection , reintegration , and development programs in lra - affected areas remains a serious challenge," noting that several projects in the area had recently closed .

given the areas where the lra currently operates , any u.s. development assistance could face challenges related to the difficulty of overseeing implementation in remote areas — including in countries , like car , where diplomatic access to areas outside of bangui is limited — and competing priorities for global aid resources .

some advocates have expressed concern that if / when the military objectives of the strategy have been met , international support for programs in this remote region may fade .

in addition to overarching questions identified at the outset of this report , additional questions for u.s. policy include the following: what is the ultimate end - game of u.s. - supported regional military efforts ? .

what possible scenarios need to be considered ? .

what safeguards are in place to ensure that u.s. support for counter - lra operations does not contribute to human rights abuses by partner forces ? .

are additional safeguards needed ? .

what more can be done to encourage african states to fulfill their troop commitments to the au regional task force and improve regional cooperation ? .

what are the practical and operational challenges associated with the area of operations for u.s. military advisors , and are u.s. policies and precautions sufficient to address them ? .

to what extent are intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) needs being met ? .

conversely , do military deployments and isr allocations for counter - lra efforts draw assets away from other u.s. missions and priorities ? .

if regional operations are successful , what is the appropriate level of funding , if any , for any future humanitarian , recovery , and development assistance ? .

do p.l .

111-172 and the lra strategy provide a possible model for responding to other groups responsible for mass atrocities ? .

