the largest sources of federal funding for elementary and secondary education are the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , and the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ; p.l .

108-446 ) .

in fy2014 , the esea provided approximately $23.0 billion in funding for education , representing roughly 61.8% of all federal elementary and secondary education funding administered by the department of education .

title i of the esea is the largest esea program , providing support for the education of disadvantaged students .

over the past two decades , the esea has become increasingly focused on promoting educational standards and accountability to help ensure that students in schools receiving title i funds are consistently held to state developed educational standards , and that these same standards are applied to all groups of students .

the esea contains high stakes accountability provisions featuring varied consequences for schools in which a sufficient percentage of students or subgroups of students fail to make academic progress in relation to the standards .

in fy2014 , the idea provided approximately $12.5 billion in funding for the education of students with disabilities , representing roughly 34% of all federal elementary and secondary education funding administered by the department of education .

the idea focuses on ensuring that all elementary and secondary students with disabilities receive a free appropriate public education ( fape ) .

part b of the idea is the largest program , providing special education and related services to students with disabilities from preschool through high school and ensuring that these students receive an individualized education that is tailored to their needs .

idea has accountability provisions that are largely focused on ensuring that states comply with various provisions of the law .

the idea accountability system also requires states to report on various performance indicators that pertain to the academic progress of students with disabilities , but , unlike the esea , uniform levels of achievement are not expected .

approximately 6 million students with disabilities receive special education under part b of the idea .

while nearly all students with disabilities between the ages of 6 and 21 years old are educated to some extent in the general education classroom ( 95% ) , 65% of all students with disabilities in this age range spend over 80% of their time in the general education classroom .

since many students with disabilities participate in the general education classroom , they often have the same educational experiences as their non - disabled peers .

for example , they are taught to the same academic content standards , in the same classrooms , and by the same teachers .

they often take the same annual assessments in reading and mathematics .

the educational experiences that students with disabilities share with their non - disabled peers are typically guided by policies set forth in the esea .

students with disabilities also have educational experiences that are unique to them and are not shared by their non - disabled peers .

for example , they are provided individualized education programs ( ieps ) that outline the provision of special education and related services .

they are taught by special education teachers and related service providers , such as speech pathologists , audiologists , occupational therapists , and others .

sometimes , students with disabilities take alternate assessments in reading and mathematics instead of the general state assessment .

the individualized educational experiences of students with disabilities are typically guided by policies set forth in the idea .

both the esea and the idea affect the education of students with disabilities and aim to improve educational outcomes for these students .

while the goals of the two laws may be similar , the esea and the idea support students with disabilities differently .

in particular , some tension exists with regard to expectations for student learning .

under esea , the emphasis is placed on holding all students and all subgroups of students ( i.e. , "students with disabilities" ) to the same academic standards , closing gaps between subgroups of students , and expecting 100% proficiency on assessments of reading and mathematics .

under idea , the emphasis is placed on assessing individual students , establishing individualized learning goals , and monitoring progress toward meeting these goals .

when the underlying concepts or legislative language of the esea and idea are not clearly aligned , it can be difficult for educators to plan and execute an appropriate education for students with disabilities .

one example of possible misalignment concerns what to teach students with disabilities .

under esea , general education teachers are expected to teach to grade - level standards to students with disabilities .

under idea , special education teachers are expected to teach to individualized goals developed for each student with a disability .

the individualized goals developed under the idea may not be aligned with the grade - level standards under esea .

another example of potential misalignment concerns high school graduation rates .

while both esea and idea require states to report graduation rates for students with disabilities , idea allows for a longer period of time to complete high school graduation requirements than is generally allowed under the "four - year" graduation rate reported under the esea .

the purpose of this report is to highlight issues of alignment and possible misalignment between the two laws , to describe how statutory and regulatory language has sought to clarify these issues , and to draw attention to issues that congress may want to clarify .

for the purpose of this report , alignment refers to the extent to which the esea and idea have similar conceptual aims and compatible statutory or regulatory language .

misalignment refers to the extent to which esea and idea have conflicting conceptual aims , conflicting statutory or regulatory language , or introduce specific issues that present difficulties in implementing provisions of both laws simultaneously .

where possible misalignment exists , this report explores the potential consequences of dual implementation of the requirements of the esea and the idea .

while this report provides some relevant background information on the esea and the idea , it does not serve as a comprehensive resource on the basic provisions of these laws .

background information on the esea and the idea is available in other reports .

in addition , some of the provisions of the esea have been modified for states that have had their applications for the esea flexibility package issued by the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) approved .

in september 2011 , the secretary announced that states may request flexibility on various esea academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) in exchange for meeting four principles established by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law .

as of march 5 , 2014 , ed had approved esea flexibility package applications for 42 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

similar flexibility was also provided to a group of leas in california .

if congress continues to work on esea reauthorization during the 113 th congress , it is possible that provisions included in any final bill may be similar to or override the waivers and principles established by the administration .

the remainder of this report focuses primarily on the statutory and regulatory provisions of the esea and how they align with the statutory and regulatory provisions of the idea .

it does not focus comprehensively on changes due to the issuance of the esea flexibility package , but does highlight some issues that may arise due to its issuance .

this report is organized around four broad education policy issues that are relevant to both the esea and idea: standards , assessments , accountability , and teachers .

the first three education policy issues are interrelated and comprise the esea accountability system .

that is , states set academic standards for students , assessments measure whether students are achieving these standards , and the assessment scores inform the esea accountability system to determine whether certain goals are being met .

the fourth policy issue , teachers , is not directly related to the overall accountability system , but it has important implications for the education of students with disabilities .

in particular , the "highly qualified" teacher requirements of the two laws are examined to explore whether the requirements further the goal of meeting the needs of students with disabilities .

in addition , this section examines the increasing emphasis on teacher effectiveness and how this may affect students with disabilities .

for each policy issue , background information on the relevant statutory and regulatory language of esea and idea is provided .

then , there is a discussion of alignment , possible areas of misalignment , and specific issues that congress may want to clarify during the reauthorization debate of the esea .

appendix a presents a glossary of selected acronyms used in this report .

standards are a set of expectations of certain skills and knowledge for students at a particular grade level or developmental level .

recent federal policies have supported standards - based education in an effort to promote equity in academic expectations for all students .

in elementary and secondary education , "standards" typically refer to grade - level academic content and achievement standards that are required by the esea .

state academic content and achievement standards are intended to ensure that all students , including students with disabilities , have access to and make progress in the general education curriculum .

in addition to the state academic content and achievement standards , students with disabilities are taught the individualized skills and goals outlined by their iep as required by the idea .

in a broad sense , iep goals can be viewed as a set of individualized "standards" for a student with a disability .

the following section provides background information on the relevant statutory and regulatory language that describes the academic content and achievement standards in the esea and iep goals in the idea .

this discussion is followed by an analysis of how the two sets of standards are used to guide instruction for students with disabilities and a discussion of alignment options that congress may consider .

educational assessment is a complex endeavor that involves gathering and analyzing data to support decision - making about students and the evaluation of academic programs and policies .

in recent years , federal education legislation has placed an increased emphasis on assessment in elementary and secondary schools .

the esea and idea both have assessment requirements that affect students with disabilities .

under the esea , students with disabilities are required to participate in state assessments used within the federal accountability system .

the idea also requires students with disabilities to participate in state assessments used for federal accountability .

under the idea , however , students with disabilities also take assessments for a variety of other purposes , such as determining the type and severity of their disabilities and monitoring their progress toward achieving iep goals .

the following section provides background information on the relevant statutory and regulatory language that describes student assessment in the esea and idea .

this discussion is followed by an analysis of how the purpose of assessment differs between the esea and idea , an examination of the alignment between the two laws , and a discussion of alignment options that congress may consider .

over the last two decades , federal education policy has been moving toward a focus on student achievement as a means of measuring accountability for schools , leas , and states .

the increased focus on student achievement and other educational indicators is evident in both the esea and idea .

both laws measure student achievement and other educational indicators and use these data within a state accountability system .

during the latest reauthorizations of the esea and the idea , statutory provisions were added that increased the emphasis on student outcomes and accountability .

the esea accountability system was designed to assess whether schools and leas are making ayp with respect to reading and mathematics achievement , achievement on another academic indicator , and student participation in assessments .

the idea "monitoring and enforcement" system was designed to assess whether states are meeting a series of academic and compliance indicators to determine whether the law is being implemented as intended .

for the purpose of this report , the idea "monitoring and enforcement" system is referred to as an "accountability" system .

it is important to note that the federal government enforces accountability requirements at different levels in the esea and the idea .

under the esea , the federal government monitors the progress of states , leas , and schools .

consequences of not meeting accountability requirements are targeted at the lea and school level .

under the idea , the federal government directly monitors the progress of states only .

states , however , are required by the idea to monitor their own leas using the same system that the federal government uses to monitor the states .

under the idea accountability system , consequences of not meeting accountability requirements are targeted at the state level ; however , states are required by the idea to implement the same consequences at the lea level .

idea does not require states or leas to implement consequences at the school level .

the following section provides background information on the relevant statutory and regulatory language that describes accountability systems in the esea and idea .

this discussion is followed by an analysis of how the accountability systems differ , an examination of the alignment between the two laws , and a discussion of alignment options that congress may consider .

a major focus of both the esea and the idea is to improve academic outcomes for all students , including students with disabilities .

it is widely recognized that improving academic outcomes for all students is dependent on the quality of instruction they receive from teachers .

as discussed earlier , approximately 60% of students with disabilities spend at least 80% of their instructional time in the general education classroom .

because they receive instruction inside and outside the general education classroom , students with disabilities are taught by both general education teachers and special education teachers .

the quality of both general education teachers and special education teachers may influence the achievement of students with disabilities .

furthermore , collaborative efforts between general education teachers and special education teachers may contribute to the achievement of students with disabilities .

the following section provides background information on the relevant statutory and regulatory language that describes teacher requirements in the esea and idea .

this discussion is followed by an examination of the alignment between the esea and idea and a discussion of alignment options that congress may consider .

the esea includes a definition of "highly qualified" teacher as the term relates to teachers of elementary and secondary education .

in general , the esea requires that teachers of core academic subjects: ( 1 ) must have full state certification , ( 2 ) must not have had any certification waived on an emergency , temporary , or provisional basis , and ( 3 ) must have at least a baccalaureate degree .

in addition , the definition has various requirements related to demonstrating subject matter expertise depending on the teacher's level of experience ( i.e. , new versus experienced ) and the grade level taught by the teacher ( i.e. , elementary , middle , or secondary ) .

with respect to new teachers , a new elementary school teacher must demonstrate subject knowledge and teaching skills in reading , writing , mathematics , and other areas of the basic elementary school curriculum by passing a state test .

a new middle or secondary school teacher must demonstrate a high level of competency in each of the academic subjects taught in one of the following ways: ( 1 ) passing a state academic subject test , or ( 2 ) completing an academic major , graduate degree , or coursework equivalent to an undergraduate academic major , or advanced certification credentialing in each of the academic subjects taught .

experienced elementary , middle , or secondary school teachers may meet either the definition of "highly qualified" for new teachers or demonstrate competency in all subjects taught using a "high objective uniform state standard of evaluation" ( housse ) .

the idea also includes a definition of "highly qualified" teacher as the term relates to special education teachers of elementary and secondary education .

under idea , for any special education teacher , the term "highly qualified" has the meaning given to the term in the esea with several exceptions .

first , the idea definition of "highly qualified" applies to all special education teachers regardless of whether they teach core academic subjects .

all special education teachers ( 1 ) must have full state certification , ( 2 ) must not have had any certification waived on an emergency , temporary , or provisional basis , and ( 3 ) must have at least a baccalaureate degree .

second , the idea definition broadens the "highly qualified" requirements with respect to two groups of special education teachers: ( 1 ) teachers who teach only core academic subjects exclusively to students with the most significant cognitive disabilities and ( 2 ) teachers who teach more than one core academic subject exclusively to students with disabilities .

teachers who teach core academic subjects exclusively to students with the most significant cognitive disabilities , whether new or not new to the profession , have several options for meeting the "highly qualified" definition: ( 1 ) teachers may meet the "highly qualified" definition of the esea for any elementary , middle , or secondary teacher ; ( 2 ) elementary teachers may meet the requirements by demonstrating competence on housse ; and ( 3 ) middle and secondary school teachers may meet the requirements by demonstrating "subject matter knowledge appropriate to the level of instruction being provided , as determined by the state , needed to effectively teach to those standards" ( i.e. , alternate achievement standards ) .

teachers who teach more than one core academic subject exclusively to students with disabilities also have several options for meeting the "highly qualified" definition: ( 1 ) teachers may meet the esea requirements for each core subject taught ; ( 2 ) experienced special education teachers may meet the requirements based on the esea housse option , which may include a single evaluation covering multiple subjects ; and ( 3 ) new special education teachers who are already "highly qualified" in mathematics , language arts , or science have two years from the date of employment to meet the "highly qualified" definition with respect to the other core subjects taught .

table 4 provides a comparison of select statutory and regulatory provisions of the esea and idea discussed above .

the esea provides the definition of "highly qualified" teacher for elementary and secondary school teachers .

the idea definition of "highly qualified" teacher broadens requirements for special education teachers .

the legislative language in the esea and the idea are aligned conceptually , and the idea definition references the esea definition .

furthermore , the idea states that a teacher who is deemed "highly qualified" under idea shall be considered "highly qualified" for the purposes of the esea .

one potential area of misalignment related to the "highly qualified" teacher definitions concerns the implementation of the requirements at the school level .

esea outlines the requirements for general education teachers and idea outlines the requirements for special education teachers , which sets up two "tracks" to become "highly qualified. .

the existence of two tracks seems to imply that students without disabilities are taught by general education teachers and students with disabilities are taught by special education teachers .

in reality , general education teachers and special education teachers share the responsibility for educating most students with disabilities .

as previously discussed , almost 60% of students with disabilities spend at least 80% of their time in the general education classroom .

many students with disabilities , therefore , spend the majority of their time taught by a general education teacher .

even if a general education teacher is "highly qualified" based on the esea requirements , the teacher may not have any preparation or training in special education .

there is no federal requirement for general education teachers to have specialized preparation or training in special education .

the likelihood that a general education teacher has received such preparation or training depends on certification requirements in the state .

according to data from the national association of state directors of teacher education and certification ( nasdtec ) , in order for a general education teacher to become certified , 28 states require coursework in special education , 11 states do not require coursework in special education , and 12 states did not report this information .

in the 28 states that require coursework in special education , information on the amount and type of coursework is not readily available .

a second potential area of misalignment in teacher policy more broadly concerns the current shift toward "teacher effectiveness. .

during the implementation of the "highly qualified" teacher definition , this requirement came to be seen as setting minimum qualifications for entry into the profession and was criticized by some for establishing standards so low that nearly every teacher met the requirement .

meanwhile , policymakers have grown increasingly interested in the output of teachers' work ; that is , their performance in the classroom and the effectiveness of their instruction .

a number of federal , state , and local programs have been implemented in an effort to improve teacher performance through alternative compensation systems .

one federal effort to promote teacher evaluation systems based on teacher effectiveness is the race to the top ( rttt ) grant program .

a significant feature of teacher evaluation systems that measure the output of teachers' work is the concept of "teacher effectiveness. .

under the rttt program , the measurement of teacher effectiveness was required to be based , in part , on student achievement on state assessments .

a more recent effort to promote teacher evaluation systems based on teacher effectiveness was included in the esea flexibility package .

in order to receive the waivers offered through the esea flexibility package , states and leas had to commit to develop , adopt , pilot , and implement teacher and principal evaluation and support systems that 1. will be used for continual improvement of instruction ; 2. meaningfully differentiate performance using at least three performance levels ; 3. use multiple valid measures in determining performance levels , including data on student growth , and other measures of professional practice ; 4. evaluate teachers and principals on a regular basis ; 5. provide clear , timely , and useful feedback , including feedback that guides professional development ; and 6. will be used to inform personnel decisions .

one concern with the potential policy shift toward teacher evaluation systems based on teacher effectiveness is that it is unclear how special education teachers would be included in these systems .

teacher evaluation systems based on teacher effectiveness must be able to link student achievement data to the teacher who is responsible for instruction .

students with disabilities are educated in multiple settings by multiple teachers .

as such , general education teachers and special education teachers share the responsibility of educating students with disabilities .

it is unclear whether the general education teacher or the special education teacher would ultimately be held accountable for the student's achievement .

it is possible that both general and special education teachers could be held accountable for the student's achievement , but the logistics of "splitting" responsibility for student achievement may complicate teacher evaluation systems .

there also may be some complicating factors in terms of measurement .

that is , students with disabilities participate in a variety of state assessments ( i.e. , general state assessments and alternate assessments ) , and it is unclear whether all types of assessment are appropriate to use in a teacher evaluation system that is based , in part , on student achievement on state assessments .

as congress considers the esea provisions regarding teacher preparation , recruitment , and evaluations , it may also consider how these provisions are aligned with idea: highly qualified teachers providing instruction to students with disabilities .

several education disability advocacy groups that have promoted maintaining the "highly qualified" teacher definition have called for the reauthorization of the esea to include more specific requirements for general educators who teach students with disabilities .

specifically , the learning disabilities association of america ( lda ) recommends that "highly qualified" general education teachers should be prepared to deliver scientific , research - based instruction for students with disabilities and be able to modify the curriculum , as necessary .

the national association of state directors of special education ( nasdse ) recommends that language be added to the esea that requires teachers to "have knowledge and proficiency to work with all types of diverse students , including students with disabilities , in order to be highly qualified. .

because many students with disabilities spend the majority of their time in the regular education classroom , the ability of a regular education teacher to address the needs of students with disabilities may directly impact the learning of students with disabilities and their performance on state assessments .

under the current esea accountability system , the quality of instruction provided to students with disabilities by general education teachers , therefore , likely contributes to a school's , lea's , or state's ability to meet ayp targets for students with disabilities .

collaboration between general and special education teachers .

because many students with disabilities spend the majority of their time in a general education classroom , a common priority of education disability advocacy groups is to increase collaboration between general education teachers and special education teachers .

for example , the council for exceptional children ( cec ) recommends that esea reauthorization support mentoring and induction programs that support collaboration between general and special education .

cec asserts that such collaboration may lead to more successful teaching or co - teaching for students with disabilities and the provision of more appropriate accommodations and modifications for students with disabilities .

similarly , the council of administrators of special education recommends that esea reauthorization include language promoting collaboration so that students with disabilities can receive appropriate instruction in the least restrictive environment .

if general education teachers and special education teachers work more collaboratively , it may be more likely that all teachers take responsibility for the achievement of students with disabilities .

in addition , a collaborative model may create a system in which the educational needs of students with disabilities are more likely to be met , which may increase the quality of instruction received by students with disabilities .

as discussed above , under the current esea accountability system , the quality of instruction provided to students with disabilities likely contributes to a school's , lea's , or state's ability to meet ayp targets for students with disabilities .

teacher effectiveness .

some organizations , such as cec and the national coalition on personnel shortages in special education and related services , assert that special education teachers should be fully included in any teacher evaluation system that measures the effectiveness of general education teachers .

there may be difficulties associated with designing one teacher evaluation for all teachers ( i.e. , general education teachers and special education teachers ) .

teacher evaluation systems that include the measurement of "teacher effectiveness" rely on the ability to link student achievement data to the teacher or teachers who are responsible for the student's learning .

as discussed previously , students with disabilities are often taught in more than one setting by more than one teacher .

it may be difficult to determine which teacher should be held accountable for the achievement of students with disabilities .

in addition , it may be difficult to incorporate student achievement on alternate assessments into teacher evaluation systems .

some alternate assessments do not measure student achievement and growth in a standard way ; therefore , it would be difficult to determine whether a student made appropriate achievement gains that would indicate whether a teacher is "effective. .

due to the complexity of assessing teacher effectiveness , congress may want to require ed to conduct a pilot study or to provide guidance on how to incorporate special education teachers into teacher evaluation systems .

because of the difficulties associated with evaluating special education teachers based on "teacher effectiveness," another model may be to evaluate special education teachers based on whether or not their students achieve their iep goals .

an evaluation system based on iep goals may be more relevant for special education teachers ; however , such an evaluation system may complicate teacher evaluation because it would set up different systems of evaluating general education teachers and special education teachers .

it may also provide an incentive for iep teams to set lower goals for students with disabilities that seem more attainable and may potentially reduce the likelihood that iep teams set ambitious goals that could lead to increased achievement for students with disabilities .

furthermore , because special education teachers are required to be part of the iep team , it may be considered a conflict of interest if special education teachers are permitted to influence the iep goals against which they would be evaluated .

appendix a .

selected acronyms appendix b .

idea , part b indicator .

