insurance companies constitute a major segment of the u.s. financial services industry .

the industry is often separated into two parts: life and health insurance companies , which also often offer annuity products ; and property and casualty insurance companies , which include most other lines of insurance , such as homeowners insurance , automobile insurance , and various commercial lines of insurance purchased by businesses .

premiums for life / health companies in 2011 totaled $581.4 billion whereas premiums for property / casualty insurance companies totaled $436.0 billion .

assets held by the insurance industry totaled approximately $7.5 trillion according to the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) .

different lines of insurance present very different characteristics and risks .

life insurance typically is a longer - term proposition with contracts stretching into decades and insurance risks that are relatively well defined in actuarial tables .

property / casualty insurance typically is a shorter - term proposition with six - month or one - year contracts and greater exposure to catastrophic risks .

health insurance has evolved in a very different direction , with many insurance companies heavily involved with healthcare delivery , including negotiating contracts with physicians and hospitals and a regulatory system much more influenced by the federal government through medicare , medicaid , the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , and the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

this report addresses primarily life insurance and property / casualty insurance .

insurance companies , unlike banks and securities firms , have been chartered and regulated solely by the states for the past 150 years .

one important reason for this is an 1868 u.s. supreme court decision .

in paul v. virginia , the court held that the issuance of an insurance policy was not a transaction occurring in interstate commerce and thus not subject to regulation by the federal government under the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution .

courts followed that precedent for the next 75 years .

in a 1944 decision , u.s. v. south - eastern underwriters association , the court found that the federal antitrust laws were applicable to an insurance association's interstate activities in restraint of trade .

although the 1944 court did not specifically overrule its prior holding in paul , south - eastern underwriters created significant apprehension about the continued viability of state insurance regulation and taxation of insurance premiums .

by 1944 , the state insurance regulatory structure was well established , and a joint effort by state regulators and insurance industry leaders to legislatively overturn the south - eastern underwriters decision led to the passage of the mccarran - ferguson act of 1945 .

the act's primary purpose was to preserve the states' authority to regulate and tax insurance .

the act also granted a federal antitrust exemption to the insurance industry for "the business of insurance. .

after 1945 , the jurisdictional stewardship entrusted to the states under mccarran - ferguson was reviewed by congress on various occasions .

some narrow exceptions to the 50-state structure of insurance regulation have been enacted , such as one for some types of liability insurance in the liability risk retention act ( lrra ) created by congress in 1981 and amended in 1986 .

in general , however , when proposals were made in the past to transfer insurance regulatory authority to the federal government , they were successfully opposed by the states as well as by a united insurance industry .

such proposals for increased federal involvement usually spurred a series of regulatory reform efforts at the individual state level and by state groups such as the national association of insurance commissioners and the national conference of insurance legislators ( ncoil ) .

such efforts were directed at correcting perceived deficiencies in state regulation and forestalling federal involvement .

they were generally accompanied by pledges from state regulators to work for more uniformity and efficiency in the state regulatory process .

a major effort to transfer insurance regulatory authority to the federal government began in the mid - 1980s and was spurred by the insolvencies of several large insurance companies .

former house energy and commerce committee chairman john dingell , whose committee had jurisdiction over insurance at the time , questioned whether state regulation was up to the task of overseeing such a large and diversified industry .

he chaired several hearings on the state regulatory structure and also proposed legislation that would have created a federal insurance regulatory agency modeled on the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) .

state insurance regulators and the insurance industry opposed this approach and worked together to implement a series of reforms at the state level and at the naic .

among the reforms implemented was a new state accreditation program setting baseline standards for state solvency regulation .

under the accreditation standards , to obtain and retain its accreditation , each state must have adequate statutory and administrative authority to regulate an insurer's corporate and financial affairs and the necessary resources to carry out that authority .

in spite of these changes , however , another breach in the state regulatory system occurred in the late 1990s .

martin frankel , an individual who had previously been barred from securities dealing by the sec , slipped through the oversight of several states' insurance regulators and diverted more than $200 million in premiums and assets from a number of small life insurance companies into overseas accounts .

despite the embarrassment to state regulation , this did not bring long - term change to federal policy .

another state reform largely implemented in the late 1980s and early 1990s was the introduction of state insurance guaranty funds .

these funds , somewhat analogous in function to the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) for banks , provide protection for insurance consumers who hold policies from failed insurance companies .

if an insurance company is judged by a state insurance regulator to be insolvent and unable to fulfill its commitments , the state steps in to rehabilitate or liquidate the insurer's assets .

the guaranty fund then uses the assets to pay the claims on the company , typically up to a limit of $300,000 for property / casualty insurance and $300,000 for life insurance death benefits and $100,000 for life insurance cash value and annuities .

in most states , the existing insurers in the state are assessed to make up the difference should the company's assets be unable to fund the guaranty fund payments .

this after the fact assessment stands in contrast , for example , to the fdic , which is funded by assessments on banks prior to a bank failure and which holds those assessments in a segregated fund until needed .

insurers who are assessed by guaranty funds generally are permitted to write off the assessments on future state taxes , which indirectly provide state support for the guaranty funds .

although financial services is not an industry that produces a tangible good to be shipped across borders , the trade in such services makes up a large segment of international trade .

the united states has generally experienced a surplus in trade in financial services , other than insurance , but in insurance services the united states has consistently run a deficit with the rest of the world .

consolidations in the insurance industry are creating larger international entities with growing market shares , particularly in the reinsurance market .

some have speculated that the growing "internationalization" of the financial services industry means governments may find it difficult to reform their regulation in isolation .

the need for a single voice at the federal level to represent u.s. insurance interests on the international stage is a frequently heard argument for increased federal involvement in insurance regulation .

the fio is specifically tasked with developing federal policy in international insurance matters .

following the passage of glba , state insurance regulators working through the naic embarked on a regulatory modernization program .

these efforts were in response to both the mounting criticisms of state insurance regulation and the recognition of the growing convergence of financial services and financial services products .

in early 2000 , naic members signed a statement of intent: the future of insurance regulation , in which they pledged "to modernize insurance regulation to meet the realities of the new financial services marketplace. .

new naic working groups were formed addressing issues such as state privacy protections , reciprocity of state producer licensing laws , promotion of "speed to market" of new insurance products , development of state - based uniform standards for policy form filings , and other proposed improvements to state rate and form filing requirements .

highlights of the post - glba naic efforts include the following: certification of 47 states ( as of september 2008 ) as reciprocal jurisdictions for producer licensing laws , thus exceeding the glba requirements to prevent the establishment of narab .

the naic has also gone past the glba requirements and adopted heightened standards for reciprocity with 37 states possibly being considered as meeting these standards .

continued growth of the system for electronic rate and form filing ( serff ) , intended to be a single , one - stop point of entry for insurers to file changes to rates and forms .

more than 558,000 filings were made through the system in 2011 , up from about 3,700 in 2001 , although this is a small drop from 2010 .

forty - nine states participate in the system , which claims an average of a 47-day turnaround for life / health filings and a 28-day turnaround for property / casualty filings over the past 12 month .

state approvals of the interstate insurance product regulation compact .

this compact is intended to provide increased regulatory uniformity and a single point of product filing for four insurance lines — life , annuities , disability income , and long - term care .

it came into effect in may 2006 .

currently , 41 states have joined the compact .

these 41 states will represent approximately two - thirds of the insurance premium volume .

three additional states have current legislation pending to endorse the compact .

the naic maintains that states are better positioned than the federal government to serve the interests of u.s. insurance consumers , emphasizing that state regulators are better suited to ensure that the personal interests of consumers are not lost in the arena of commercial competition .

in 2010 , according to the naic , the total budget for the state insurance departments was nearly $1.3 billion .

the states handled more than 304,000 official consumer complaints and 2.1 million consumer inquiries regarding their policies and their treatment by insurance companies and agents .

in 2010 , the states collectively employed more than 11,600 employees to handle these complaints and perform the other functions of the state insurance departments .

in the aftermath of the financial crisis , the naic indicated support for federal efforts to address systemic risk "while preserving state - based insurance regulation," according to 2009 testimony before the senate .

more recent naic testimony before the house detailed several changes in response to the experience in the financial crisis independent of federal efforts .

these changes include strengthening the oversight of insurance holding companies through revisions to the naic model laws on holding company oversight and increasing oversight on insurers' securities lending , two areas that the experience with aig during the financial crisis showed to be particularly problematic .

the naic is also making changes to reduce insurance regulators' reliance on credit rating agencies .

in addition , the naic launched a "solvency modernization initiative" to examine "international developments regarding insurance supervision , banking supervision , and international accounting standards in order to consider their potential use in u.s .

insurance. .

2008 treasury blueprint in march 2008 , then - secretary of the treasury henry paulson released a blueprint for a modernized financial regulatory structure .

although the financial crisis had begun at that time , the treasury blueprint was not primarily a response to the crisis , but instead an attempt to create "a more flexible , efficient and effective regulatory framework. .

a wide - ranging document , the blueprint foresaw a completely revamped regulatory structure for financial services .

the 2008 treasury model proposed a prudential regulator to oversee the solvency of individual companies , a business conduct regulator to oversee consumer protection , and a market stability regulator to oversee risks to the entire system .

as an intermediate step , it made two specific recommendations on insurance regulation .

first , it called for the creation of a federal insurance regulator to oversee an optional federal charter for insurers as well as federal licensing for agents and brokers .

second , recognizing that the debate over an optional federal charter was ongoing in congress , it recommended the creation of an "office of insurance oversight" in the department of the treasury as an interim step .

this office would be charged with two primary functions: ( 1 ) dealing with international regulatory issues , including the power to preempt inconsistent state laws ; and ( 2 ) collecting information on the insurance industry and advising the secretary of the treasury on insurance matters .

president obama's financial regulatory reform plan in june 2009 , the treasury department under secretary timothy geithner released a whitepaper entitled financial regulatory reform: a new foundation , outlining president obama's plan to reform financial regulation in the united states .

the plan did not foresee as complete an overhaul as did the 2008 blueprint , but it would have substantially changed the financial regulatory system .

specific changes called for included explicitly introducing systemic risk oversight by the federal reserve , combining the office of comptroller of the currency and the office of thrift supervision into a single banking regulator , and creating a new consumer financial protection agency .

although the june report stated that the administration was open to additional changes in the insurance regulatory system , the specific regulatory changes called for in the released legislative language were focused on areas other than insurance .

most insurance products , for example , were excluded from the jurisdiction of the new federal consumer protection agency .

in general , the states were to continue to have a preeminent role in insurance regulation .

insurance regulation , however , would have been specifically affected through two other aspects of the president's plan: the regulation of large financial companies presenting systemic risk and the creation of a new office of national insurance within the treasury .

systemic risk regulation as proposed in the legislation would have been the primary responsibility of the federal reserve in conjunction with a new financial services oversight council made up of the heads of most of the federal financial regulators .

the powers to regulate for systemic risk enumerated in the draft legislation extended to all companies in the united states engaged in financial activities .

although the draft legislation did not specifically name insurers as subject to federal systemic risk regulation , it would seem to have included them under federal jurisdiction .

companies judged to be a possible threat to global or u.s. financial stability could be designated tier 1 financial holding companies and made subject to stringent solvency standards and additional examinations .

such companies would also be subject to enhanced resolution authority rather than standard bankruptcy provisions .

although the draft language did make reference in some places to state functional regulatory agencies , it was left open exactly how the federal reserve as regulator of the financial holding company would interact with the state regulators of the individual insurance subsidiaries .

whether federal regulatory deferral to state regulators would have continued under the proposed legislation seemed an unresolved question .

although systemic risk regulation would likely apply to a relatively small number of insurers , the called - for creation of an office of national insurance could have had a broader impact .

unlike the similarly named office in other legislation , such as h.r .

1880 in the 111 th congress , president obama's office of national insurance would not have overseen a federal insurance charter or have had direct regulatory power over insurers .

rather , this office was to operate as a broad overseer and voice for insurance at the federal level , including collecting information on insurance issues , setting federal policy on insurance , representing the united states in international insurance matters , and preempting some state laws where these laws are inconsistent with international agreements .

unenacted legislation in the 111 th congress several pieces of legislation addressing insurance regulation or regulatory requirements were introduced and not enacted in the 111 th congress , including both broad and narrow proposals .

this legislation included the following: the insurance industry competition act of 2009 ( h.r .

1583 ) representative peter defazio and five cosponsors introduced h.r .

1583 in the house on march 18 , 2009 .

h.r .

1583 was referred to the house judiciary committee , house financial services committee and house energy and commerce committee .

no hearings or markups were held on the bill .

h.r .

1583 would have abolished the current exemption from federal antitrust laws for the "business of insurance" that dates to the mccarran - ferguson act of 1945 and removed a prohibition on investigations of insurance companies by the federal trade commission .

it would not have changed the sections of the mccarran - ferguson act that give preeminence to state insurance regulators .

the national insurance consumer protection act ( h.r .

1880 ) representatives melissa bean and edward royce introduced h.r .

1880 in the house on april 2 , 2009 .

the bill was referred to the house financial services committee , house judiciary committee , and house energy and commerce committee .

no further action was taken on the bill .

this bill would have created a federal charter for the insurance industry , including insurers , insurance agencies , and independent insurance producers .

the federal insurance regulatory apparatus was to be an independent entity under the department of the treasury , and the federal law would have preempted most state insurance laws for nationally regulated entities .

thus , nationally licensed insurers , agencies , and producers would have been able to operate in the entire united states without fulfilling the requirements of each of the 50 states' individual insurance laws .

h.r .

1880 also addressed the issue of systemic risk by designating another entity to serve as a systemic risk regulator for insurance .

the systemic risk regulator was to have the power to compel systemically significant insurers to be chartered by the federal insurance regulator .

thus , although the bill shared some similarities with past optional federal charter legislation , and would have allowed some insurers to choose whether to obtain a federal charter , it was not purely an optional federal charter bill .

the national association of registered agents and brokers reform act of 2009 ( h.r .

2554 ) this bill was introduced by representative david scott along with 34 cosponsors on may 21 , 2009 .

a similar bill was introduced in the 110 th congress , where it passed the house but was not acted upon by the senate .

h.r .

2554 passed the house on march 3 , 2011 , and was subsequently referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , but was not acted upon by the senate .

h.r .

2554 would have established a national association of registered agents and brokers ( narab ) .

narab was to be a private , nonprofit corporation , whose members , once licensed as an insurance producer in a single state , would be able to operate in any other state subject only to payment of the licensing fee in that state .

the narab member was still to be subject to each state's consumer protection and market conduct regulation , but individual state laws that treated out - of - state insurance producers differently than in - state producers would be preempted .

narab would have been overseen by a board made up of five appointees from the insurance industry and four from the state insurance commissioners .

the appointments were to be made by the president , and the president would have had the power to dissolve the board as a whole or suspend the effectiveness of any action taken by narab .

the risk retention modernization act of 2010 ( h.r .

4802 ) h.r .

4802 was introduced by representative dennis moore ( along with representatives john campbell and suzanne kosmas ) on march 10 , 2010 .

it was referred to the house committee on financial services but was not acted upon further .

this bill would have expanded the federal preemption of state insurance laws , allowing risk retention groups to cover commercial property risks and risk purchasing groups to purchase coverage for commercial property risks .

the bill would also have changed the enforcement mechanism for federal preemptions in the lrra , and added additional federal corporate governance , disclosure , and fiduciary duty requirements for risk retention groups under the act .

under existing law , the federal preemptions in the lrra are enforced through court action .

if a risk retention group believes a state is attempting to regulate in a manner counter to the lrra , it can bring suit in a federal court .

h.r .

4802 would have created a process under which the secretary of the treasury could issue determinations as to whether a state's regulation of a rrg or rpg is preempted by the act .

in addition , the secretary of the treasury and the comptroller general would have studied and issued reports to congress on the states' regulation of rrgs and rpgs and the compliance with the lrra .

the corporate governance standards to have been put into place by the bill would have included requirements that a majority of directors on an rrg's board be independent ; any audit committee be made up of independent directors ; written governance standards be in place ; and contracts with service providers be limited to less than five years and be approved by the state insurance commissioner .

specific amendments to the lrra would have expanded the consumer disclosure required in the act and imposed a specific fiduciary duty on the board of directors of a risk retention group .

the federal license for reinsurers act of 2010 ( h.r .

6529 ) representative dennis moore introduced h.r .

6529 on december 16 , 2010 .

it was referred to the house committee on financial services but no hearings or markups were held on the bill .

h.r .

6529 would have created a federal license for reinsurers .

the licensing and regulatory authority would rest with the fio , which was created under the dodd - frank act , which would have the authority to determine that state laws were inconsistent with federal law and thus preempted .

