on february 2 , 2012 , the senate passed s. 2038 , the stop trading on congressional knowledge act of 2012 ( stock act ) .

title ii of the stock act , added as the leahy - cornyn amendment on the senate floor , carries forward much of what had appeared in s. 401 , when it emerged from the senate judiciary committee .

title ii , styled the public corruption prosecution improvements act , closely tracks the amended language of h.r .

2572 , which the house judiciary committee unanimously approved on december 1 of last year .

the house , however , stripped title ii from s. 2038 , and the bill was enacted into public law without it .

in the discussion that follows , title ii refers to title ii of the stock act as initially passed by the senate .

h.r .

2572 refers to the bill ordered to be reported as reflected in the manager's amendment in the nature of a substitute , as amended in judiciary committee markup .

federal officials prosecute corruption — public and private ; federal , state , local , territorial , and tribal — under a number of statutes including those that outlaw bribery , bribery involving federal programs , mail fraud , and / or wire fraud .

the bills would expand the scope of these and related federal statutes , increase the penalties for those convicted , and amend related procedures to facilitate prosecution .

the bills represent a merger of two prior efforts .

one involved reactions to the supreme court's skilling decision , which limited honest services mail and wire fraud prosecutions to cases of bribery and kickbacks .

the other involved a more general concern over the state of law in the area of public corruption .

the senate judiciary committee addressed this second concern when it reported s. 1946 to the floor during the 110 th congress .

the bills are reminiscent of many of the provisions in that earlier proposal .

several would extend the reach of federal anti - corruption statutes read more narrowly in skilling , sun diamond , and valdes .

section 641 outlaws the embezzlement or other theft of money or anything else of value belonging to the united states or one of its agencies or departments .

the district of columbia code outlaws embezzlement or other forms of theft , regardless of the victim .

violations of the d.c. provision carry a maximum 10-year term of imprisonment , if the value of the property exceeds $1,000 and a maximum of 180 days in other cases .

the bills would increase the maximum term of imprisonment for a violation of section 641 from 10 to 20 years .

h.r .

2572 , unlike title ii , and would also fold the property of the d.c. government and its agencies and departments into the coverage of section 641 .

the earlier committee report explained that the bill also contains a series of long - needed technical fixes to select statutes , as well as targeted increases in statutory maximum penalties for statutes used in public corruption cases .

for example , the bill amends the federal theft statute — 18 u.s.c .

sec .

641 — to bring within its purview the district of columbia government and its agencies .

this change is long overdue in view of the district's unique status , and it comports with the overarching statutory scheme because the district is already included in the federal bribery statute ( 18 u.s.c .

201 ) and the statute governing theft and bribery from programs receiving federal funds ( 18 u.s.c .

666 ) .

the need for this fix is acute: under current law , massive thefts of district of columbia funds — such as the recent d.c. tax and revenue allegations of a $44 million fraud — cannot be prosecuted on a federal theft theory .

when penalty increases were proposed for various federal public corruption offenses during the 110 th congress , the committee report noted that the increases would reflect "the committee's view of the serious and corrosive nature of these crimes , and ... harmonize the punishment of these public corruption - related offenses with similar statutes. .

moreover , the committee was of the opinion that "[i]ncreasing penalties in appropriate cases sends a message to would - be criminals and to the public that there are severe consequences for breaching the public trust. .

reacting to the same proposals replicated in the house and senate bills , a representative of the defense bar contended that the proposals would "dramatically expand already lengthy prison sentences ... without any evidence of whether such an expansion is necessary or what the costs of such an expansion would be. .

specifically , the house and senate bills would increase the maximum term of imprisonment for the following existing federal public corruption offenses .

sentencing defendants convicted of federal crimes begins with the sentencing guidelines .

the court must calculate the sentence recommended by the guidelines and then weigh the other statutory sentencing factors mentioned in 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) .

the sentence imposed will survive appellate scrutiny , if it is procedurally and substantively reasonable .

a sentence is procedurally reasonable if it is free of procedural error , such as a sentencing beyond the statutory maximum or below any statutory minimum , an incorrect guideline calculation , failure to consider the factors in subsection 3553 ( a ) , or a failure to explain the sentence imposed .

a sentence is substantively reasonable if it is appropriate given all the circumstances of the case , including the extent to which the sentence imposed varies from the sentence recommended by the guidelines .

the bills would direct the united states sentencing commission to examine the guidelines applicable in the case of a conviction under 18 u.s.c .

201 ( bribery of federal officials ) , 641 ( theft of federal property ) , or 666 ( theft or bribery in relation to federal programs ) .

the commission would be instructed to amend the guidelines consistent with the considerations identified in the bills .

h.r .

2572 and title ii are almost identical .

there are a few differences , however .

the penalty for bribery under 18 u.s.c .

201 ( b ) is now imprisonment for not more than 15 years .

the penalty for illegal gratuities under 18 u.s.c .

201 ( c ) is now imprisonment for not more than two years .

title ii would leave those penalties in place .

h.r .

2572 would increase the maximum term of imprisonment for bribery under subsection 201 ( b ) to 20 years and the maximum term for illegal gratuities under subsection 201 ( c ) to five years .

status gifts now fall outside the illegal gratuities proscriptions of subsection 201 ( c ) .

moreover , existing law places no minimum on the value of the bribe or illegal gratuity condemned under subsections 201 ( b ) or ( c ) .

both bills would extend the illegal gratuities offense to include status gifts , but both would limit the offense in status gift cases to gifts of $1,000 or more .

h.r .

2572 , unlike title ii , would also limit all other section 201 bribery or illegal gratuities offenses to cases involving $1,000 or more .

section 641 now prohibits the theft or embezzlement of federal property .

h.r .

2572 , unlike title ii , would expand the section to cover property of the district of columbia .

sponsors have made a number of changes in the provisions of h.r .

2572 and title ii since they were first proposed .

examples include provisions for additional rico predicates , the cleveland fix , and penalty increases for certain public corruption offenses .

the federal racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ( rico ) provisions outlaw conducting the affairs of an enterprise whose activities affect interstate commerce through the patterned commission of various state and federal crimes ( predicate offenses ) .

violations are punishable by imprisonment for up to 20 years ; may result in as well as the confiscation of related property ; and may trigger the application of federal money laundering provisions .

both h.r .

2572 , as introduced , and the predecessor to title ii , s. 401 as approved by the senate judiciary committee , would have enlarged the rico predicate offense list to include violations of 18 u.s.c .

641 ( relating to the theft or embezzlement of federal property ) , 666 ( relating to theft or bribery in connection with federally assisted programs ) , and 1031 ( relating to major fraud against the united states ) .

the mail and wire fraud statutes outlaw the use of mail or wire communications as part of a scheme to defraud another of money or property .

the supreme court in cleveland held that the statutes do not reach fraudulent schemes to induce a state to issue licenses , since in the hands of the state unissued licenses do not constitute money or property .

h.r .

2572 ( as introduced ) and s. 401 featured sections apparently designed to overcome the limitation identified in cleveland .

neither title ii nor h.r .

2572 has comparable sections .

