on march 1 , 2013 , president obama ordered the sequestration ( i.e. , cancellation ) of $85.33 billion in fy2013 budgetary resources from nonexempt budget accounts across the federal government .

the fy2013 sequestration order was issued pursuant to the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act ( bbedca ) , as amended by the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) .

under the bca , the fy2013 sequestration was to be ordered on january 2 , 2013 .

a provision in the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ) delayed the order by two months .

the fy2013 sequestration is the first of a series of automatic spending reductions under the bca , as amended by atra , that are required each year through fy2021 .

these annual spending reductions were triggered by the failure of the joint select committee on deficit reduction to propose , and congress and the president to enact , legislation to reduce the deficit by an amount greater than $1.2 trillion over the period fy2012-fy2021 .

based on the calculations of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , the fy2013 sequestration requires a 7.8% reduction in nonexempt defense discretionary spending and a 7.9% reduction in nonexempt defense direct ( i.e. , mandatory ) spending over the course of the fiscal year .

the sequestration also requires reductions of 5.0% to nonexempt nondefense discretionary spending , 2% to medicare , and 5.1% to other nonexempt nondefense mandatory programs .

there is considerable interest among policymakers in whether the automatic spending reductions triggered by the bca will impact implementation of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

among its many provisions , aca restructures the private health insurance market , sets minimum standards for health coverage , and , beginning in 2014 , will require most u.s. residents to obtain health insurance coverage or pay a penalty .

the law creates competitive private health insurance marketplaces — or exchanges — in each state through which individuals and small employers , beginning in 2014 , will be able to shop for , select , and enroll in qualified health plans .

qualifying individuals and families will be able to receive federal subsidies to reduce the cost of purchasing coverage through the exchanges .

in addition to expanding private health insurance coverage , aca , as enacted , requires state medicaid programs to expand coverage to all eligible nonelderly , non - pregnant individuals under age 65 with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

under aca , the federal government will initially cover 100% of the expansion costs , phasing down to 90% of the costs by 2020 .

medicaid law allows the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to withhold existing federal medicaid matching funds if states refuse to comply with the expansion .

however , in national federation of independent business v. sebelius , the u.s. supreme court found that the medicaid expansion violated the constitution by threatening states with the loss of their existing federal medicaid matching funds .

the court precluded the hhs secretary from penalizing states that choose not to participate in the medicaid expansion ( see text box ) .

aca also amends the medicare program in an effort to reduce the rate of its projected growth ; imposes an excise tax on insurance plans found to have high premiums ; and makes many other changes to the tax code , medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and other federal programs .

aca is projected to have a significant impact on federal direct spending and revenues .

the law includes direct spending to subsidize the purchase of health insurance coverage through the exchanges , as well as increased outlays for the expansion of state medicaid programs .

aca also includes numerous mandatory appropriations to fund temporary programs to increase access and funding for targeted groups , provide funding to states to plan and establish exchanges , and support many other research and demonstration programs and activities .

the costs of expanding public and private health insurance coverage and other spending are offset by revenues from new taxes and fees , and by savings from payment and health care delivery system reforms designed to slow the growth in spending on medicare and other federal health care programs .

implementing aca also is affecting discretionary spending , which is provided in and controlled by annual appropriations acts .

the law established numerous new grant programs and provided for each an authorization of appropriations .

it also reauthorized appropriations for many existing grant programs .

this report examines how automatic spending reductions triggered by the bca might affect health reform implementation under aca .

it is divided into three sections .

the first section provides an overview of aca's health insurance reforms and some analysis of the congressional budget office's ( cbo's ) estimates of the impact of the law's implementation on federal direct spending and revenues .

the second section examines the automatic spending reductions under the bca .

the final section discusses which types of health reform spending are likely subject to , or exempt from , those reductions .

the report is periodically revised and updated to reflect important legislative and other developments .

the primary goal of aca is to increase access to affordable health insurance for the millions of americans without coverage and make health insurance more affordable for those already covered .

in addition , aca makes numerous changes in the way health care is financed , organized , and delivered .

these provisions are intended to slow the growth in health care costs and improve the quality of care by aligning payment incentives to increase efficiency and achieve savings ; organizing care delivery systems to promote accountable , patient - centered , and coordinated care ; and establishing benchmarks for better health outcomes .

while many of the key provisions of the law do not take effect until 2014 , some provisions are already in place , and others are being phased in over the next few years .

as noted in the introduction to this report , the fy2013 sequestration is the first in a series of automatic annual spending reductions triggered under the bca by the failure of the joint select committee on deficit reduction to propose , and congress and the president to enact , deficit - reduction legislation .

the final section of this report discusses the potential impact of the bca - triggered automatic spending reductions , both in fy2013 and in future years , on the following types of aca - related spending: ( 1 ) mandatory spending on insurance coverage expansion , including exchange subsidies and medicaid ; ( 2 ) other mandatory spending ; ( 3 ) discretionary spending ; and ( 4 ) federal administrative expenses .

it appears that most of aca's projected spending on expanding insurance coverage is not subject to sequestration .

first , the bbedca exempts the medicaid and chip programs from sequestration .

according to cbo and jct's may 2013 estimates , medicaid and chip outlays are projected to account for $710 billion , or 39% , of the gross costs of $1,798 billion for coverage expansion over the fy2014-fy2023 period ( see table 4 ) .

second , the refundable tax credits available to individuals and families with incomes between 100% and 400% of the fpl for purchasing insurance coverage through the exchanges also appear to be exempt from sequestration .

while the aca premium tax credits are not specifically exempted from sequestration , the bbedca provides a general exemption for refundable individual tax credits .

these premium tax credits have the effect of limiting the cost of purchasing coverage to a specified percentage of income .

based on cbo and jct's may 2013 estimates , the premium tax credits account for approximately $920 billion , or 86% , of aca's total exchange subsidies and related spending of $1,075 billion over the fy2014-fy2023 period ( see table 4 ) .

exchange subsidies and related spending , in turn , represents about 60% of the $1,798 billion in gross costs for coverage expansion .

in addition to the premium tax credits for purchasing coverage through an exchange , certain individuals and families receiving the credits are also eligible for coverage with lower cost - sharing ( i.e. , out - of - pocket costs such as deductibles and co - pays ) than otherwise required under the law .

this is achieved through a cost - sharing subsidy , which is paid directly to the insurer to cover the extra costs associated with lower patient cost - sharing .

in the absence of any exemption under bbedca , the cost - sharing subsidies are fully sequestrable at the rate applicable to nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending .

based on cbo and jct's may 2013 estimates , the cost - sharing subsidies account for an additional $149 billion , or 14% , of aca's total exchange subsidies and related spending over the fy2014-fy2023 period ( see table 4 ) .

finally , mandatory spending on the small employer tax credits to help offset the cost of purchasing health insurance for their employees also appears to be fully sequestrable at the rate applicable to nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending .

these credits are available to for - profit and nonprofit employers with fewer than 25 ftes and average annual wages of less than $50,000 .

according to cbo and jct's may 2013 estimates , the small employer tax credits are projected to cost $14 billion over the fy2014-fy2023 period , or about 1% of the $1,798 billion in gross costs for coverage expansion ( see table 4 ) .

aca included numerous mandatory appropriations that provide billions of dollars to support new and existing grant programs and other activities .

many of the provisions are annual appropriations of specified amounts for one or more fiscal years .

a few of them are multiple - year appropriations , in which the amount appropriated is available for obligation for a definite period of time in excess of one fiscal year ( eg , for the period fy2011-fy2014 ) .

often the provision includes additional language stating that the funds are to remain available "until expended" or "without fiscal year limitation. .

aca appropriated billions of dollars for a number of temporary programs for targeted groups , including ( 1 ) $5 billion for the pre - existing condition insurance plan ( pcip ) , a temporary insurance program to provide health insurance coverage for uninsured individuals with a preexisting condition ; ( 2 ) $5 billion for a temporary reinsurance program to reimburse employers for a portion of the costs of providing health benefits to early retirees aged 55-64 ; and ( 3 ) $6 billion for the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program , to establish temporary health insurance cooperatives .

aca also included money for states to plan and establish health insurance exchanges .

the law provided $10 billion for the fy2011-fy2019 period — and $10 billion for each subsequent 10-year period — for the cmi to test and implement innovative payment and service delivery models , and it funded an independent board ( i.e. , ipab ) to provide congress with proposals for reducing medicare cost growth and improving quality of care for medicare beneficiaries .

aca created four special funds and appropriated substantial amounts to each .

first , the community health center fund ( chcf ) is providing a total of $11 billion in annual appropriations over five years ( fy2011-fy2015 ) to help fund health center operations and the national health service corps .

 ( a separate aca appropriation provided $1.5 billion for health center construction and renovation. ) .

second , the patient - centered outcomes research trust fund ( pcortf ) is supporting comparative effectiveness research through fy2019 with a mix of annual appropriations — some of which are offset by revenues from a fee imposed on private health plans — and transfers from the medicare trust funds .

third , the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) , for which aca provided a permanent annual appropriation , is intended to support prevention , wellness , and other public health - related programs and activities authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

finally , aca provided $1 billion to the health insurance reform implementation fund ( hirif ) within hhs to help cover the initial administrative costs of implementing the law .

in addition , aca appropriated $2.4 billion for maternal and child health programs .

overall , the law included more than $100 billion in direct appropriations over the 10-year period fy2010-fy2019 , including $40 billion to provide two more years of funding for chip ( see table 4 ) .

a few of the appropriations in aca are included in cbo and jct's estimates of the gross costs of insurance coverage expansion ( eg , pcip , co - op , exchange establishment grants ) .

all the remaining amounts — including funding for community health centers , health workforce programs , and public health activities — are captured in cbo's overall estimate of the impact of the law's payment and delivery system reform provisions on direct spending .

generally , the annual appropriations in aca are fully sequestrable at the rate applicable to nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending .

that includes annual appropriations for pphf , pcortf , exchanges grants , and the maternal and child health programs .

however , for reasons discussed below , sequestration of aca's annual chcf appropriation is capped at 2% .

for any given fiscal year in which sequestration is ordered , only new budget authority for that year ( including advance appropriations that first become available for obligation in that year ) is reduced .

unobligated balances ( non - defense only ) carried over from previous fiscal years are exempt from a sequestration order .

thus , the march 1 , 2013 , sequestration of fy2013 budgetary resources does not apply to unobligated aca funds that were appropriated in a prior fiscal year ( i.e. , fy2010-fy2012 ) and are still available for obligation .

the exemption for unobligated balances carried over from prior fiscal years applies to a number of aca appropriations that provide multiple - year funding or that specify that the funds are to remain available "until expended" or "without fiscal year limitation. .

one example is the pcip program to provide health insurance coverage for eligible individuals who have been uninsured for six months and have a preexisting condition .

the program terminates on january 1 , 2014 .

aca appropriated $5 billion in fy2010 , to remain available without fiscal year limitation , to pay claims against the pcip that are in excess of the premiums collected from enrollees .

any unobligated pcip funds still available for obligation in fy2013 are exempt from sequestration .

another example is cmi , which received a $10 billion multiple - year appropriation in fy2011 to remain available for obligation through fy2019 .

aca implementation will affect not only direct spending and revenues but also discretionary spending , which is provided in and controlled by annual appropriations acts .

the law reauthorized appropriations for numerous existing discretionary grant programs and activities authorized under the phsa , and permanently reauthorized appropriations for programs and services provided by the indian health service ( ihs ) .

aca also created a number of new discretionary grant programs and provided for each an authorization of appropriations .

many of aca's discretionary spending provisions authorized annual appropriations of specified amounts for one or more fiscal years .

other provisions authorized the appropriation of specified amounts for fy2010 or fy2011 and unspecified amounts — such sums as may be necessary , or ssan — for later years .

a few provisions authorized multiple - year appropriations , available for obligation for a period in excess of one fiscal year .

numerous other provisions simply authorized the appropriation of ssan , in a few cases without specifying any fiscal years .

funding for all these discretionary programs depends on actions taken by congressional appropriators , a process that may lead to greater or smaller amounts than the sums authorized by aca .

with congress now operating under enforceable discretionary spending caps imposed by the bca , it may prove difficult to secure funding for new programs and activities .

to date , few new discretionary grant programs authorized by aca have received funding through the annual appropriations process , though a handful of programs have received funding from the pphf .

even maintaining current funding levels for existing programs with broad support and an established appropriations history can be a challenge when there is pressure to reduce federal discretionary spending .

cbo estimated that aca's discretionary spending provisions , if fully funded by future appropriations acts , would result in appropriations of almost $100 billion over the period fy2012-fy2021 ( see table 4 ) .

however , most of that funding — about $85 billion — would be for programs that were in existence prior to , and were reauthorized by , aca ; namely , the national health service corps , the health centers program , and the ihs .

in general , aca - related discretionary spending in fy2013 is fully sequestrable at the rate applicable to nonexempt nondefense discretionary spending .

importantly , omb has concluded that the sequestration rules under bbedca section 256 , which include a 2% limit on cuts in spending on community health centers , migrant health centers and the ihs , apply only to mandatory spending reductions and not to cuts in discretionary spending .

thus , while fy2013 discretionary spending on all health centers is fully sequestrable , cuts in chcf ( mandatory ) funding for community health centers and migrant health centers are capped at 2% .

for each of the remaining years ( i.e. , fy2014-fy2021 ) , discretionary spending reductions will be achieved through a downward adjustment of the revised statutory spending caps .

in contrast to the automatic spending reductions achieved through sequestration , lowering the annual discretionary spending caps allows congress and the president to determine through the annual appropriations process which accounts are to be reduced , and by how much , in order to meet those caps .

lowering the annual discretionary spending caps also may make it more difficult to maintain funding levels for existing programs .

in general , under bbedca section 256 , federal administrative expenses are subject to sequestration , regardless of whether they are incurred in connection with a program or activity that is otherwise exempt or subject to a special rule .

thus , while the aca refundable tax credits may be exempt from sequestration , the federal administrative expenses associated with the program would be fully sequestrable .

section 256 provides an exception for federal payments to state and local governments that match or reimburse these governments for their own administrative costs .

such payments are not considered federal administrative expenses and are subject to sequestration , but only to the extent that the relevant federal program is subject to sequestration .

for example , federal payments to state medicaid programs for administrative costs would be exempt from sequestration because the medicaid program as a whole is exempt .

however , as discussed in the previous section , omb has determined that the sequestration rules in bbedca section 256 apply only to mandatory spending reductions required by the joint committee sequestration , and not to reductions in discretionary spending .

with regard to federal administrative expenses , omb concluded that mandatory administrative expenses for an otherwise exempt ( i.e. , non - sequestrable ) program are subject to sequestration ( pursuant to section 256 ) , whereas discretionary administrative expenses for an otherwise exempt ( i.e. , non - sequestrable ) program are not sequestrable .

cbo has projected that both the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) within hhs and the internal revenue service ( irs ) will incur substantial administrative costs to implement aca .

cbo estimated that the costs to the irs of implementing the eligibility determination , documentation , and verification processes for premium and cost - sharing subsidies will probably total between $5 billion and $10 billion over 10 years .

it further estimated that the costs to cms for implementing the changes in medicare , medicaid , and chip , as well as some of the reforms to the private insurance market , will require similar amounts over 10 years .

aca provided $1 billion in mandatory funds through the hirif to help cover the initial administrative costs of implementation .

the administration's fy2013 budget projected that all the hirif funds would be obligated by the end of fy2012 and so requested more than $1 billion in new discretionary funding for cms and the irs to pay for ongoing administrative costs of aca implementation .

however , congress did not provide any new discretionary funds for fy2013 for aca implementation .

in fy2013 , cms reportedly will spend about $1.5 billion on aca implementation , primarily to establish federally facilitated insurance exchanges in states that elect not to run their own exchanges and to engage in consumer education and outreach .

hhs officials recently announced that , in the absence of any new fy2013 discretionary funding for aca implementation , the department will use funds from the following sources: $235 million in unobligated hirif funds carried over from fy2012 ; $454 million from pphf ; $450 million from the non - recurring expenses fund ; and $116 million from the secretary's authority to transfer funds from other hhs accounts .

on april 9 , 2013 , hhs announced that it planned to use up to $54 million of the pphf funds to award grants to eligible entities in states with a federally - facilitated exchange or state partnership exchange to develop and implement navigator programs .

the purpose of these programs is to provide outreach and education to raise awareness about the exchanges , and to help consumers establish eligibility for , and enroll in , qualified health plans offered through the exchanges .

on may 9 , 2013 , hhs announced the availability of $150 million in fy2013 chcf funds for health center outreach and enrollment assistance grants .

this funding will be awarded based on a formula to all eligible health centers that currently receive federal operating funds .

health centers will use the funding to hire and train new staff to conduct outreach and facilitate enrollment in the exchanges , medicaid , and chip .

these efforts are intended to complement the navigator programs nationwide .

