p.l .

112-29 , the leahy - smith america invents act , or "aia," arguably made the most significant changes to the patent statute since the 19 th century .

among other provisions , the statute introduced into u.s. law a first - inventor - to - file priority rule , an infringement defense based upon prior commercial use , and assignee filing .

the legislation prevented patents from claiming or encompassing human organisms , limited the availability of patents claiming tax strategies , and restricted the best mode requirement .

the aia also made notable reforms to administrative patent challenge proceedings at the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) and to the law of patent marking .

along with numerous other changes to patent laws and procedures , these reforms were intended to modernize the u.s. patent system and to improve its fairness and effectiveness .

congressional interest in patent reform was evidenced by sustained legislative activity that led to enactment of the aia .

there is broad agreement that more patents are sought and enforced than ever before ; that the attention paid to patents in business transactions and corporate boardrooms has dramatically increased ; and that the commercial and social significance of patent grants , licenses , judgments , and settlements is at an all - time high .

as the united states becomes even more of a high - technology , knowledge - based economy , the importance of patents may grow even further in the future .

most experts agree that patent ownership is an incentive to innovation , the basis for the technological advancement that contributes to economic growth .

it is through the commercialization and use of new products and processes that productivity gains are made and the scope and quality of goods and services are expanded .

award of a patent is intended to stimulate the investment necessary to develop an idea and bring it to the marketplace embodied in a product or process .

patent title provides the recipient with a limited - time monopoly over the use of his discovery in exchange for the public dissemination of information contained in the patent application .

this is intended to permit the inventor to receive a return on the expenditure of resources leading to the discovery but does not guarantee that the patent will generate commercial benefits .

the requirement for publication of the patent is expected to stimulate additional innovation and other creative means to meet similar and expanded demands in the marketplace .

passage of the aia was preceded by several years of legislative debate about the current workings and future direction of the u.s. patent system .

although the discussion was wide - ranging , several points of concern were frequently mentioned .

one was the recognition that differences between u.s. patent laws and global patent norms might increase the difficulty of domestic inventors in obtaining rights abroad .

another was that poor patent quality and high costs of litigating patent disputes might encourage speculation , or "trolling," by entrepreneurs that acquire and enforce patents .

congress also recognized that individuals , universities , and small entities play a role in the technological advancement and economic growth of the united states .

a number of provisions of the aia addressed these issues and concerns in different ways .

as ultimately enacted , the aia also reflects the reality that the courts have been active in making changes to important patent law principles .

some observers believe that several court decisions addressed the same concerns that had motivated earlier legislative reform proposals , thereby obviating or reducing the need for congressional action .

for example , judicial opinions issued in the past several years have addressed the availability of injunctive relief against adjudicated patent infringers , the standards for deciding which venue is appropriate for conducting a patent trial , and the assessment of damages in patent infringement cases .

as a result of these and other developments , several provisions found in predecessor versions of the aia were not included in the final version of the statute .

this study provides an overview of the aia .

it begins by offering a brief overview of the patent system .

the specific components of this legislation are then identified and reviewed in greater detail .

the report closes with further considerations .

the patent system is grounded in article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the u.s. constitution , which states that "the congress shall have power ... to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries...." as mandated by the patent act of 1952 , u.s. patent rights do not arise automatically .

inventors must prepare and submit applications to the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) if they wish to obtain patent protection .

uspto officials known as examiners then assess whether the application merits the award of a patent .

the patent acquisition process is commonly known as "prosecution. .

in deciding whether to approve a patent application , a uspto examiner will consider whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention .

in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention .

the examiner will also determine whether the invention itself fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

to be patentable , an invention must consist of a process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter that is useful , novel , and nonobvious .

the requirement of usefulness , or utility , is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit .

to be judged novel , the invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge that is collectively termed the "prior art. .

a nonobvious invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan at the time the invention was made .

if the uspto allows the patent to issue , the patent proprietor obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the patented invention .

those who engage in these acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement .

adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts .

the patent statute also provides for the award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. .

the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed .

at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent .

patent rights are not self - enforcing .

patentees who wish to compel others to observe their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses national jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts .

the u.s. supreme court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

the aia was the product of years of discussion and debate , but some observers believe that congress did not address certain issues of pressing concern to the patent system .

one of these issues involves the propriety of current judicial assessments of damages in patent infringement cases .

some observers believe that judges and juries have tended to overcompensate patent holders when they make damages awards , particularly in cases where the accused infringement includes additional features not covered by the patent .

other commentators found the level of compensation to be appropriate and expressed concerns that legislative reforms might reduce damages awards to such a degree as to diminish the value of patent ownership .

a number of recent judicial opinions , including lucent technologies , inc. v. gateway , inc. , appear to have recognized expressed concerns about damages awards in patent cases and the federal circuit has issued rulings designed to increase their fairness and predictability .

perhaps because of these judicial developments , the aia ultimately did not address the award of damages in patent cases .

for some , however , concerns linger concerning the damages issues .

some observers believe that congress should have required the uspto to publish all patent applications during their pendency .

when enacting the american inventors protection act of 1999 , congress for the first time introduced the concept of pre - grant publication into u.s. law .

since november 29 , 2000 , u.s. patent applications have been published 18 months from the date of filing , with some exceptions .

the most significant of these exceptions applies where the inventor represents that he will not seek patent protection abroad .

in particular , if an applicant certifies that the invention disclosed in the u.s. application will not be the subject of a patent application in another country that requires publication of applications 18 months after filing , then the uspto will not publish the application .

as a result , inventors who do not wish to seek foreign patent rights retain the possibility of avoiding pre - grant publication .

congress had previously considered eliminating this exception , and some observers continue to believe this was the preferable option .

on the other hand , many commentators believe that this exception is more fair to individuals , small firms , and other innovators that may be especially vulnerable to piracy of their products .

another concern that some observers argue has not been sufficiently addressed is that of patent fee "diversion. .

under that practice , the uspto is not provided the budget authority through the appropriations process to spend all fees collected within a fiscal year .

beginning in 1990 , appropriations measures have , at times , limited the ability of the agency to use the full amount of fees collected in each fiscal year .

some observers believe that "fee diversion" has limited the ability of the uspto to discharge its statutory duties effectively .

on the other hand , others believe that the agency obtains sufficient financial support and point to the need to support other governmental programs .

the approach embodied in the aia keeps uspto use of fees within the appropriations process , but mandates that any excess fees be used only to fund uspto activities .

the aia is by any reasonable measure a watershed event in the field of intellectual property law .

the numerous reforms introduced by the legislation , intended to improve , update , and adopt global best practices , will undoubtedly bring immediate changes to patent practice by the uspto , the private bar , and innovative firms .

experience will inform us whether the legislation meets its intended goals of increasing patent quality , making patent dispute resolution more fair and efficient , improving the environment for innovation , and enhancing the economic growth of the united states .

