congress established the advanced technology vehicles manufacturing ( atvm ) program in 2007 as a way to help raise u.s. fuel economy standards for vehicles and to encourage domestic production of more fuel - efficient cars and light trucks .

the legislation establishing the program , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) , was enacted as the domestic auto industry was experiencing declining sales in a weakening economy .

according to a government accountability office ( gao ) report , the detroit 3 faced more difficulty in achieving substantial improvements in fuel economy than most foreign - based manufacturers , which historically had produced and sold more fuel - efficient vehicles .

when proposing new , more stringent cafe standards [in 2007] , nhtsa estimated that the detroit 3 would face significantly higher costs to meet revised standards than the major japanese automakers .

the atvm program is neither unique nor without precedent .

the federal government has supported a wide range of research , development , and production incentives for new domestic energy sources for several decades , as part of an overall commitment to reduce petroleum imports and , in the case of automobiles , raise fuel - efficiency levels .

efforts to spur energy innovation in vehicles go back at least to the ford administration , when the first efforts to promote research and development of electric vehicles were enacted .

since those initial efforts in the 1970s , the department of energy ( doe ) has continuously supported research initiatives on new types of electric batteries , fuel cells , and other vehicles and technologies as possible alternatives to vehicles fueled by petroleum .

during these years , federal support has also extended to various interagency initiatives such as the partnership for a new generation of vehicles ( pngv ) and the freedom cooperative automotive research ( freedomcar ) initiative .

in 2005 , congress enacted tax credits for the purchase of certain alternative fuel and advanced technology vehicles as a step to encourage buyers to purchase new types of cars and light trucks .

concerns over the longer - term competitive decline of the detroit 3 — general motors ( gm ) , ford , and chrysler — provide the background to the atvm program .

as shown in figure 1 , the detroit 3 saw the 66% market share they held in 2000 erode steadily , as american consumers turned increasingly to imports and vehicles produced by german , japanese , and south korean companies at plants located in the united states .

since a low point of 44% market share in 2009 during the recession , the detroit 3 have gained some ground , as their sales accounted for nearly 47% of all u.s. sales in 2011 and about 45% each year since 2012 .

the atvm program was established in 2007 and funded in 2009 .

in the fall of 2011 , it was discussed in congress in the context of using a reduction in the program as an offset to proposed increased funding for disaster relief in the fy2012 continuing resolution .

ultimately , congress did not reduce atvm funding and the program remains as originally authorized and funded , although two recent reports have called for the unused funds to be rescinded .

the atvm program has three goals: 1. increase the fuel economy of u.s. passenger vehicles , 2. improve the use of advanced technologies in cars and components manufactured in the united states , and 3. protect the u.s. government's financial stake in these auto companies .

as of january 8 , 2015 , doe had approved atvm loans to five companies totaling $8.4 billion .

the last atvm loan was made in 2011 .

the five companies , the loan amounts , and a short description of the covered projects are shown in table 1 , listed chronologically .

approved projects include parts production and assembly for all - electric and plug - in hybrid vehicles , assembly of natural gas vehicles , and production and installation of advanced components for conventional vehicles .

all of the loans are to original equipment manufacturers ( oems ) , which assemble vehicles , although some of the projects will develop components , most notably plug - in vehicle batteries .

doe estimated at the time of the loan announcements that , in aggregate , the vehicles produced from these projects would displace 282 million gallons of gasoline ( roughly 18,000 barrels per day , or about 0.2% of u.s. consumption ) and avoid 2.4 million tons of carbon dioxide emissions annually ( about 0.04% of total u.s. emissions ) , compared to similar my2005 vehicles .

however , doe's current performance measures estimate the savings relative to benchmark my2005 vehicles , as opposed to estimating the additional effect of the vehicles attributable to the loan program given rapidly increasing cafe standards ( see figure 3 ) that will raise the fuel economy of all new vehicles relative to my2005 .

according to gao , "atvm borrowers might have acted to increase fuel economy and reduce the petroleum use of their vehicles in order to meet the more stringent cafe standards — even without the atvm funds .

without knowing the actions these companies might have taken in the absence of atvm funding , the program will not be able to measure the extent to which the improvements in fuel economy and reductions in petroleum used by atvm - funded vehicles resulted directly from the program. .

thus doe's estimates of avoided gasoline consumption and carbon dioxide emissions may overstate the benefits of the program .

\s doe and gao estimate that vehicles produced under the program will exceed cafe targets .

however , it is unclear whether these improvements will lead to fleet averages that exceed the cafe standards , or whether automakers will use these vehicles to balance out other vehicles that fall below their cafe targets .

although a broad range of technologies can be applied to increase the fuel economy of cars and trucks , the bulk of atvm lending to date , in the form of the loan to ford , has gone toward vehicles with gasoline - powered internal - combustion engines .

ford's share of projected gasoline savings from all approved loans is 81% .

the atvm program has also made loans for natural gas , hybrid , and all - electric vehicles , but those loans account for only 30% of total loan originations .

doe originally estimated that these loans will save or create about 38,700 jobs in the motor vehicle industry .

see the appendix for a breakdown of projected job savings / creation and summary of the business lines of the loan recipients .

according to doe , nearly all of the 38,700 saved or created jobs shown in its database would be at the loan recipients' facilities .

these estimates reflect employment changes that in some cases could account for nearly half of the recipient's workforce , and in other cases , a doubling or tripling of their current employment base .

if other jobs are expected to be created or saved among recipients' parts suppliers , the doe data do not show it .

according to doe , only in one case are the jobs cited in doe calculations also at supplier firms .

of the more than 900 saved / created jobs at the vehicle production group ( vpg ) , 49 jobs were to have been at vpg , 613 at companies supplying parts and doing final assembly , and 267 at dealers and service organizations .

neither gm nor chrysler is in the current list of loan recipients .

chrysler had a loan request of $3.5 billion pending with doe , but withdrew it in 2012 .

general motors applied for three atvm loans totaling $10.3 billion in july 2009 , when it was operating under bankruptcy court protection , but according to a gm filing , doe determined that the company did not meet the viability requirements for section 136 loans .

several months later , the company submitted an application for $14.4 billion of loans .

doe did not make a decision , and on january 27 , 2011 , gm withdrew its application .

at that time , gm's then cfo chris liddell said , "withdrawing our doe loan application is consistent with our goal to carry minimal debt on our balance sheet. .

other applicants reportedly complained about the slow pace of consideration of loan applications , indicating that a lack of doe action was undercutting their ability to compete with rivals in asia and europe .

others opted to use the commercial loan market for support with their business plans , as the costs of the current program may outweigh the benefits to their companies ( according to a 2013 gao report ) .

in its 2011 report , gao found that the atvm program could better meet its objectives if it would apply greater use of independent engineering analysis to improve program evaluation .

before additional loan disbursements are made , atvm procedures require that its staff will ensure that borrowers have made significant technical progress .

gao's review of the program found that doe's atvm staff did not have sufficient engineering skills to effectively evaluate such progress .

gao noted that without such independent evaluations of the manufacturing processes , atvm "cannot be adequately assured that the borrowers are delivering the vehicle and component projects as required by the loan agreements. .

gao cited instances in which borrowers had not spent funds as required and had spent loan funds outside the united states .

in addition , gao said that four atvm projects ( those of nissan , ford , fisker , and tesla ) had reached critical stages where "heightened technical monitoring" was appropriate to avoid the "risk of not identifying critical deficiencies. .

gao also called upon doe to use additional performance measures so it could better assess whether loan recipients were meeting the program goals .

they noted that doe has performance measures that will indicate how well atvm - funded vehicles improve specific fuel efficiency , but it did not have measures showing whether doe has "accomplished its overall goal of improving the fuel economy of all passenger vehicles used in the united states. .

specifically , doe may not be able to determine what automakers would have done in the absence of atvm to meet new cafe standards .

gao also faulted doe's inability to assess how its atvm - supported technologies are being applied in the marketplace and its lack of performance standards to gauge the ongoing financial condition of the loan recipients .

