four major principles currently underlie u.s. policy on legal permanent immigration: the reunification of families , the admission of legal permanent residents ( lprs ) with needed skills , the protection of refugees , and the diversity of admissions by country of origin .

these principles are embodied in federal law , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) first codified in 1952 .

the immigration amendments of 1965 replaced the national origins quota system ( enacted after world war i ) with per - country ceilings .

the immigration act of 1990 was the last law to significantly revise the statutory provisions on employment - based permanent immigration to the united states .

currently , permanent immigrants ( or lprs ) enter the united states based on a preference system .

nonimmigrants , who are admitted into the united states temporarily , are not admitted through this preference system .

there are five preference categories for employment - based lprs and each has its own eligibility requirements and numerical limitations , and at times different application processes .

per - country ceilings are an additional numerical limitation placed on permanent immigration in order to prevent any one country from taking too large of a share of the visas .

interest has grown in the per - country ceilings , which limit the number of employment - based lprs coming from specific countries each year .

while no one is arguing for a return to the country - of - origin quota system that was the law from 1921 to 1965 , some assert that the current numerical limits on employment - based lprs are not working in the national interest .

to inform this debate , this report analyzes the impact of the per - country ceilings on the employment - based immigration process .

the departments of state ( dos ) and homeland security ( dhs ) each play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of migrants .

although dos consular affairs is responsible for issuing visas , the u.s .

citizenship and immigrant services ( uscis ) in dhs must first approve immigrant petitions .

dos is responsible for the allocation , enumeration , and assignment of all visas .

in addition , the department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for ensuring that employers seeking to hire employment - based lprs are approved to do so .

the prospective immigrant must maneuver this course through these federal departments and agencies to obtain lpr status .

the report opens with brief explanations of the employment - based preference categories and the per - country ceilings governing annual admissions of lprs .

the focus is on the five major employment - based preference categories .

the report continues with a statistical analysis of the pending caseload of approved employment - based lpr petitions .

the same analyses of approved pending employment - based petitions are performed on two different sets of data: approved pending petitions with the dos national visa center ; and approved pending petitions with uscis , known by the petition number as the i - 485 inventory .

the report concludes with a set of legislative options to revise per - country ceilings that are meant to serve as springboards for further discussions .

the ina provides for a permanent annual worldwide level of 675,000 lprs , which is further broken down by specific levels for each preference category .

however , the worldwide level is flexible and certain categories of lprs are permitted to exceed the limits .

the permanent worldwide immigrant level consists of the following components: family - sponsored immigrants , including immediate relatives of u.s. citizens and family - sponsored preference immigrants ( 480,000 plus certain unused employment - based preference numbers from the prior year ) ; employment - based immigrants ( 140,000 plus certain unused family preference numbers from the prior year ) ; and diversity immigrants ( 55,000 ) .

immediate relatives of u.s. citizens as well as refugees and asylees who are adjusting to lpr status are exempt from direct numerical limits .

as a result , roughly 1 million lprs are admitted or adjusted annually .

in addition to preference category numerical limitations , the ina specifies that each year countries are held to a numerical limit of 7% of the worldwide level of u.s. immigrant admissions , known as per - country limits or country caps .

the actual number of immigrants that may be approved from a given country , however , is not a simple percentage calculation , as certain types of lprs ( such as immediate relatives ) are exempt from the country caps .

employment - based immigrant visas ( and family - sponsored visas ) are issued to eligible immigrants in the order in which petitions have been filed under that specific preference category for that specific country .

spouses and children of prospective lprs are entitled to the same status , and the same order of consideration as the person qualifying as the principal lpr , if accompanying or following to join the lpr ( referred to as derivative status ) .

when visa demand exceeds the per - country limit , visas are prorated according to the preference system allocations ( detailed in table 1 ) for the oversubscribed foreign state or dependent area .

the ina bars the admission of any migrant who seeks to enter as a 2 nd or 3 rd preference lpr to perform skilled or unskilled labor , unless it is determined that ( 1 ) there are not sufficient u.s. workers who are able , willing , qualified , and available ; and ( 2 ) the employment of the migrant will not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of similarly employed workers in the united states .

the foreign labor certification program in the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for ensuring that foreign workers do not displace or adversely affect wages or working conditions of u.s. workers .

therefore , employers applying for foreign workers under the 2 nd and 3 rd preference categories must first get a foreign labor certification from dol before filing a visa petition with uscis .

petitions for employment - based lpr status are first filed with uscis in dhs by the sponsoring employer in the united states or , in some cases , the individual can self - petition .

petitions are sent to the national visa center ( nvc ) at dos and individuals are assigned a priority date which represents their place in line .

individuals must then wait for their priority date to become current before they can proceed to the next steps .

once an individual's priority date becomes current , the next steps they take will depend on whether they are already in the united states or are abroad .

if the prospective immigrant is already residing in the united states , the individual must apply for an adjustment of status ( with form i - 485 ) , which involves the individual , who is currently in the country , switching from a temporary category ( eg , an individual with an f - 1 student temporary visa ) to a permanent category .

uscis handles the processing of applications for adjustment of status .

if the prospective lpr does not have legal residence status in the united states or is living abroad , the national visa center will handle the processing of the petition and will then forward the petition to the dos bureau of consular affairs in the applicant's home country .

regardless of whether the potential lpr is adjusting status with uscis in the united states or obtaining a visa abroad from consular affairs , dos assigns the visa priority dates and allocates the visa numbers .

most foreign nationals who become lprs were already living in the united states .

for example , approximately 86% of employment - based lprs adjusted to lpr status in fy2014 and only 14% arrived from abroad .

figure 2 shows that over the last decade , within almost all employment - based lpr preference categories , most individuals were adjusting from within the united states , typically as nonimmigrants .

the 5 th preference immigrant investors were the exception and had a majority of individuals being admitted as new arrivals ( 82% from fy2004-fy2014 ) .

the implications of this difference — whether the lpr is "arriving" or "adjusting" — are significant , in that it requires two separate departments to take charge of processing employment - based immigrant visas .

therefore , there are two different sources for data .

data from dos's nvc caseload of approved pending petitions reflects visa petitions that dos has received and therefore excludes adjustment of status i - 485 applications ( processed by uscis ) .

in addition , uscis publishes data on their inventory of pending adjustment of status applications ( i - 485 applications ) .

 table 3 and figure 9 provide a comparative set of perspectives from which the effects that the per - country limits on legal immigration have on the oversubscribed countries may be assessed .

each depicts the pending caseload of approved employment - based lpr petitions in the 1 st through 5 th preference categories for both the national visa center's approved visa pending and the uscis's i - 485 inventory of approved petitions .

figure 9 shows the data by top source country , and table 3 presents the data by visa category .

the data presented in table 3 demonstrates that the i - 485 inventory holds more pending visa applications for adjustments of status ( 117,731 ) compared to the nvc pending applications for new arrivals ( 100,747 ) .

the i - 485 inventory has higher numbers of pending visas for the 1 st , 2 nd , and 4 th preference categories than the nvc .

these patterns are consistent with the earlier analysis of "new arrivals" and "adjustments" showing that more employment - based migrants were adjusting status rather newly arriving .

however , the 3 rd and 5 th preference categories have a higher number of pending visa applications in the nvc for new arrivals than they do in the i - 485 inventory .

the data in figure 9 , along with the previous analyses , suggest that the majority of indians are waiting to adjust status in the united states , while the majority of filipinos are waiting to immigrate from abroad .

those with approved pending petitions from china seem to be more evenly split among those who might be adjustments and those who might be new arrivals .

it is also evident that policy options aimed at advancing approved petitions from india and china would also bear on approved petitions pending from the philippines .

employment - based immigration often raises concerns about foreign workers competing with or displacing u.s. workers .

the concerns were especially prevalent during the past decade when economic indicators showed that the economy went into a recession .

although some economic indicators suggest modest growth , unemployment levels remained high long after the end of the recession and only fell back to their pre - recession level in late 2015 .

the bureau of labor statistics reported that in may 2016 there were 7.4 million unemployed persons , compared with 5.5 million job openings ( a ratio of 13 job seekers for every 10 job openings ) .

even as the number of unemployed individuals outnumbers the number of open positions , some employers assert that they continue to need the "best and the brightest" workers , regardless of their country of birth , to remain competitive in a worldwide market and to keep their firms in the united states .

while support for the option of increasing employment - based immigration may be dampened by economic conditions , proponents argue it is an essential ingredient for economic growth .

those opposing increases in employment - based lprs in particular assert that there is no compelling evidence of labor shortages and cite the rate of unemployment across various occupations and labor markets .

they argue that recruiting foreign workers while many americans remain unemployed would have a deleterious effect on salaries , compensation , and working conditions in the united states .

with this economic and political backdrop , the option of lifting the per - country caps on employment - based lprs has gained attention .

some observers contend that the elimination of the per - country caps would increase the flow of high - skilled immigrants without increasing the total annual admission of employment - based lprs .

the presumption is that many high - skilled people ( proponents cite those from india and china , in particular ) would then move closer to the head of the line to become lprs .

legislative options that have been suggested include the following: a targeted lifting of the country caps on the top two preference categories of priority workers and those who are deemed exceptional , extraordinary , or outstanding individuals ; a categorical lifting of the country caps on all employment - based preference categories , up to the 140,000 worldwide ceiling on employment - based lprs ; or a complete lifting of the country caps on all employment - based preference categories as well as excluding employment - based lprs from the calculation of the family - based and worldwide per - country ceilings .

while this report is expressly focused on the per - country ceilings in the ina , revising the country caps is just one of many ways to foster high - skilled immigration to the united states .

several possible alternatives include the following: reallocate the employment - based preferences: if the objective is to increase the number of the highest - skilled immigrants without raising the worldwide level , then reallocating additional visas to the 1 st and 2 nd preference categories is another option .

in doing so , it would increase the flow of employment - based immigrants .

this alternative , however , would not address the sheer number of approved lpr petitions from china , india , mexico , and the philippines .

many advanced - degree workers and all professional and skilled workers who have approved petitions have employers who have already been certified to hire them and have offered jobs to them .

reallocate the diversity visas: some have observed that the 50,000 diversity visas would be better used for high - skilled immigrants .

permit selected nonimmigrants to adjust to lpr status outside the numerical limits: this alternative would be establishing an employment - based lpr category for foreign students who have obtained a graduate degree at the level of master's or higher in a science , technology , engineering , or mathematics ( stem ) field from a u.s. institution .

it is not possible to statistically project the effects of revising the per - country limits for several reasons .

foremost , it is not known whether approved petitions may be counted in both the national visa center data and the uscis i - 485 inventory .

if so , how is the number of approved employment - based petitions affected ? .

secondly , the full effect that the 2007 visa retrogression has had on the processing of employment - based visas is not known .

more precisely , if the visa priority dates meaningfully advanced , would a substantial number of post - 2007 petitions be approved and advance to the pending caseload ? .

how many petitions are in the pipeline ? .

it is quite likely that additional people would seek employment - based lpr visas if the wait times were shorter .

employers as well as prospective foreign workers may be more likely to file petitions if the delays were shortened .

in other words , the reduction in the number of approved petitions pending might be short - lived .

finally , if the per - country ceilings were eliminated for employment - based lprs without any other revisions to permanent legal immigration , it would likely have "ripple" effects on family - based immigration as well as other potential employment - based lprs .

some observe that the per - country ceilings are arbitrary and argue that country caps should not be applied to employment - based preference categories .

they maintain that employability has nothing to do with country of birth and that u.s. employers are not allowed to discriminate based on nationality or country of origin .

they further opine that it is discriminatory to have laws that limit the number of employment - based lprs according to country of origin .

proponents of per - country ceilings maintain that the statutory per - country ceilings restrain the dominance of high - demand countries and preserve the diversity of the immigrant flows .

the immigration amendments of 1965 ended the country - of - origin quota system that overwhelmingly favored european immigrants , and subsequent amendments to the ina included immigrants from western hemisphere countries within the worldwide and per - country limits .

supporters of current law maintain that u.s. immigration policy has been more equitable and less discriminatory in terms of country of origin as a result of these reforms , because the ina puts country of origin on an equal playing field .

appendix a .

further breakdowns of employment - based petitions pending by top countries further analysis that compares the distributions of the employment - based preference categories reveals additional differences among the top countries .

even more striking , however , are the country differences between those approved visa petitions pending with the national visa center ( nvc ) and those approved i - 485 petitions pending with the uscis .

approved visa petitions pending at the national visa center the number of approved 1 st , 2 nd , 4 th , and 5 th preference visas pending is small in contrast to the 3 rd preference category .

table a - 1 presents the data for the different preference categories' top five countries .

china makes up the largest portion of the approved visas pending at the nvc for the 1 st and 5 th preference categories .

india has the largest number of approved visas pending with the nvc for the 2 nd and 3 rd preference categories combined and the philippines is responsible for the largest portion within 3 rd preference category .

approved i - 485 petitions pending the following table looks at the portion of approved i - 485 petitions pending from select countries for each of the five employment - based preference categories .

india has the largest number of approved pending i - 485 petitions for all categories , except the 5 th preference , where china is responsible for the largest portion .

china also has the 2 nd largest number of approved pending i - 485 petitions for the 1 st and 2 nd preference categories .

