u.s. actions in a foreign country in wartime can have effects that go far beyond the immediate situation .

building a power plant may not be just about generating power — it may be about employing local nationals who otherwise might join the insurgency , developing relationships with the local population , or developing the economic capacity of the region .

u.s. government contracting efforts encompass a significant portion of u.s. activity in afghanistan and are a key component of the current counterinsurgency ( coin ) effort .

from fy2005 through 2011 , the u.s. government obligated over $50 billion for contracts performed primarily in afghanistan .

as u.s. general allen , commander , international security assistance force – afghanistan ( isaf ) , wrote in september 2011 , "integrating contracting into intelligence , plans , and operations , can serve as a force multiplier in obtaining our campaign objectives.... we must improve our contracting practices to ensure they fully support our mission. .

because the primary goal of defense contracting in afghanistan is to support the overall mission , which in turn is intended to promote u.s. interests abroad , it is deemed essential that contracting is not only thought of as a response to immediate practical needs but also as part of the larger strategy .

u.s. government contracting in afghanistan and other wartime environments is different than contracting in peacetime .

in peacetime , the goal of contracting is generally to obtain the good or service that is required .

the measurements of success are generally getting the right good or service , on schedule and at a fair price .

in wartime , however — and particularly in a counterinsurgency environment — cost , schedule , and performance are often secondary to the larger strategic goals of promoting security and denying popular support for the insurgency .

for example , in peacetime , the primary purpose of building a road is often to have the road built to specification in the most efficient and least expensive way .

other policy considerations may be factored in ( such as small business or environmental concerns ) , but if the road is built on time , on schedule , and to the required specifications , the contract is usually deemed a success .

in wartime , however , these may not be the right measures , as other goals may be equally or more important .

winning the support of the local village is often more important than staying on schedule .

helping train local nationals and building up the technical capabilities of local firms may be well worth a substantial increase in contract costs .

contract risks can also differ greatly between peacetime and wartime .

peacetime risks generally include cost overruns , schedule slips , and poor performance .

additional risks that must be considered when awarding a contract in an environment such as afghanistan include diverting millions of dollars to warlords , criminal networks , or insurgents ; hiring private security and other contractors who may engage in abuses that undermine the legitimacy of coalition forces ; and the inflow of large sums of poorly managed contracting dollars fueling corruption .

as general allen stated in his contracting guidance to commanders in afghanistan , it is important to "look beyond cost , schedule , and performance .

evaluate the success of a contract by the degree to which it supports the afghan people and economy and our campaign objectives .

include operational criteria in decisions to award contracts , such as the effect of the contract on security , local power dynamics , and the enemy. .

for these reasons , contracting in wartime is often far more complex than contracting in peacetime .

some of the weaknesses of the current federal government acquisition process can be exacerbated by and exploited in a wartime environment , making it more difficult to adhere to best practices .

these weaknesses include inadequate acquisition planning , poorly written requirements , and an insufficient number of qualified and capable acquisition and contract oversight personnel .

for example , in a wartime environment , it is more difficult to write a good contract that incorporates the sometimes competing goals of counterinsurgency ( coin ) contracting , more difficult to research and evaluate companies bidding on a contract , and more difficult to conduct oversight of projects being built in dangerous locations .

it is also more difficult to protect against contracting fraud and corruption in countries that have weak law enforcement and judicial systems .

corrupt officials and warlords can exploit these weaknesses to divert contracting funds to their own coffers .

the allocation of billions of contracting dollars to support military operations and reconstruction efforts in afghanistan raises a number of potential questions for congress that may have significant policy implications for current and future overseas operations .

billions of contracting dollars have been spent to support u.s. interests in afghanistan , yet it is not always clear to what extent these contracting efforts are actually supporting strategic - level campaign goals .

for example , an april 2011 report by the counterinsurgency advisory & assistance team – isaf , stated despite hundreds of millions in investments , there is no persuasive evidence that the commander's emergency response program ( cerp ) has fostered improved interdependence relationships between the host government and the population – arguably the key indicator of counterinsurgency success .

given the extent of corruption in afghanistan , the lack of effective planning and coordination of many projects , and the inability of the afghan government to sustain the projects that have already been completed , congress may wish to examine more closely the extent to which u.s. contracting activities effectively meet overall strategic objectives .

many of the problems with contracting in afghanistan are partly a result of the difficulties inherent in contracting in a wartime environment .

these weaknesses include a lack of reliable data upon which to make contracting decisions , failure to sufficiently integrate contracting into operational plans , insufficient oversight , and the difficulty in executing contracts quickly .

this raises a number of issues which may be of interest to congress , including: what are dod and other agencies doing to gather reliable data upon which to coordinate activities and to make critical contracting decisions ? .

what steps are being taken to understand the root causes of the weaknesses in the way dod acquires goods and services ? .

what is dod doing to improve wartime contracting ? .

to what extent are the efforts being taken to improve contracting addressing the underlying problems with the contracting effort as it is performed in afghanistan ? .

is legislation required to address some of the differences between peacetime and wartime contracting ? .

according to the commission on wartime contracting , the u.s. government has built many projects in iraq and afghanistan that have proved unsustainable .

as the world bank noted , these investments and programs are creating substantial expenditure liabilities for the future that the afghan government cannot afford .

senior u.s. officials have publicly acknowledged that afghanistan cannot sustain its own security budget .

this raises a number of issues which may be of interest to congress , including: given the inability of the afghan government to independently sustain existing projects , should contracts for new or ongoing projects be suspended until the afghan government can afford to maintain the projects ? .

instead of funding new or completing current projects that cannot be sustained , should aid money be deposited into an account that will fund future operations and maintenance ? .

do all appropriate reconstruction projects require that afghan firms be sufficiently trained and capable of operating and maintaining the completed project ? .

should all new and ongoing contracts be structured to ensure that sufficient funds are set aside to guarantee that the project can be sustained for a specified number of years ? .

should funding and authorization documents include operation and maintenance funds when procurement or military construction funds are committed ? .

according to u.s. military officials , in some instances , contractors will be used to replace uniform personnel who are withdrawing from afghanistan .

replacing uniform personnel with contractors could result in an increase in the proportion of contractors in afghanistan .

in addition , the drawdown could result in fewer acquisition personnel and fewer resources dedicated to contract management and oversight .

to what extent will the drawdown result in an increased reliance on contractors ? .

to what extent is the drawdown being planned to account for contract management and oversight ? .

will task force 2010 and other task forces or organizations involved in acquisitions be disproportionally affected by the drawdown ? .

as a number of congressional reports have pointed out and dod officials have acknowledged , many lessons can be learned from the experience in iraq and afghanistan .

yet there does not appear to be a clear , comprehensive strategy to capture contracting lessons learned and incorporate those lessons into training , education , and doctrine .

to what extent is dod integrating the use of contractors into future planning ? .

how are lessons learned being used to update doctrine ? .

to what extent is the development of the future force structure being informed by a well - thought - out plan for how contractors will be used in future operations ? .

to what extent is dod adapting what is taught in military educational institutions and how field exercises are conducted to prepare the operational force for how contractors will be used in future operations ? .

