synthetic drugs , as opposed to natural drugs , are chemically produced in a laboratory .

their chemical structure can be either identical to or different from naturally occurring drugs , and their effects are designed to mimic or even enhance those of natural drugs .

when produced clandestinely , they are not typically controlled pharmaceutical substances intended for legitimate medical use .

designer drugs are a form of synthetic drugs .

they slightly modify the molecular structures of illegal or controlled substances to circumvent existing drug laws .

for over three decades , there has been national - level attention on the use and abuse of synthetic drugs .

congress became concerned about the abuse of designer drugs in the early 1980s when policymakers were examining the diversion of controlled substances — intended for medical use — to the black market .

there was concern about the health and safety effects of using and abusing pharmaceutically created drugs as well as other modified synthetics .

while a bulk of this focus has been on methamphetamine , the spotlight has recently shifted to other synthetic stimulants as well as synthetic cannabinoids .

due to the lack of research on many of these synthetics and their various analogues , the full scope of their effects and potential dangers is still not well known .

concern over the reported increase in use of certain synthetic cannabinoids and stimulants led some to call on congress to legislatively schedule specific substances .

this is , in part , because congressional action could place certain substances onto schedule i of the controlled substances act ( csa ) more quickly than might occur through administrative scheduling actions by the attorney general and secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , as authorized by the csa .

in june 2012 , congress passed the synthetic drug abuse prevention act of 2012 — subtitle d of title xi of the food and drug administration safety and innovation act ( p.l .

112-144 ) — to , among other things , permanently schedule selected synthetic stimulants and other synthetic substances .

congress has continued to debate whether to schedule additional synthetic substances as well as how to curb the manufacture , importation , distribution , and use of these constantly changing synthetic substances .

this report discusses the federal scheduling of controlled substances , including the temporary scheduling of substances .

it also provides an overview of current trends in selected synthetic cannabinoids and stimulants .

it concludes with a review of relevant legislation as well as possible issues policymakers might consider .

the controlled substances act ( csa ) was enacted as title ii of the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-513 ) .

it regulates the manufacture , possession , use , importation , and distribution of certain drugs , substances , and precursor chemicals .

under the csa , there are five schedules under which substances may be classified — schedule i being the most restrictive .

substances placed onto one of the five schedules are evaluated on actual or relative potential for abuse ; known scientific evidence of pharmacological effects ; current scientific knowledge of the substance ; history and current pattern of abuse ; scope , duration , and significance of abuse ; risk to public health ; psychic or physiological dependence liability ; and whether the substance is an immediate precursor of an already - scheduled substance .

there are designated procedures under which the scheduling of substances normally occurs .

specifically , the attorney general — through the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , and in consultation with the secretary of hhs — may place a drug or substance on schedule i if it meets all of the following criteria: ( a ) the drug or other substance has a high potential for abuse .

 ( b )  the drug or other substance has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states .

 ( c )  there is a lack of accepted safety for use of the drug or other substance under medical supervision .

synthetic compounds have been created across the various classes of drugs .

law enforcement and policymakers — at both the state and federal levels — have taken an interest in and responded to the increasing use of certain synthetic cannabinoids and stimulants .

the united nations office on drugs and crime reported the global emergence of certain synthetic cathinones and cannabinoids from 2009 to 2011 .

of note , synthetic drugs often do not fit neatly into one class of drugs for several reasons , including that their precise chemical makeups are often unknown , and their chemical effects on individuals can be both unpredictable and replicative of more than one class of drugs .

for example , the synthetic stimulant known as "flakka" causes both stimulant and hallucinogenic effects .

while drugs and substances can be scheduled administratively by the attorney general and the secretary of hhs , through processes outlined in the csa , they can also be scheduled directly through congressional legislation .

on july 9 , 2012 , the president signed the synthetic drug abuse prevention act of 2012 — subtitle d of title xi of the food and drug administration safety and innovation act ( p.l .

112-144 ) .

the act added "cannabimimetic agents" to schedule i of the csa .

under this act , a cannabimimetic agent is defined as one of five structural classes of synthetic cannabinoids ( and their analogues ) .

the act also provided 15 specific examples of cannabimimetic substances: 5- ( 1,1-dimethylheptyl ) - 2-[ ( 1r,3s ) - 3-hydroxycyclohexyl] - phenol ( cp - 47,497 ) ; 5- ( 1,1-dimethyloctyl ) - 2-[ ( 1r,3s ) - 3-hydroxycyclohexyl] - phenol ( cannabicyclohexanol or cp - 47,497 c8-homolog ) ; 1-pentyl - 3- ( 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( jwh - 018 and am678 ) ; 1-butyl - 3- ( 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( jwh - 073 ) ; 1-hexyl - 3- ( 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( jwh - 019 ) ; 1-[2- ( 4-morpholinyl ) ethyl] - 3- ( 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( jwh - 200 ) ; 1-pentyl - 3- ( 2-methoxyphenylacetyl ) indole ( jwh - 250 ) ; 1-pentyl - 3-[1- ( 4-methoxynaphthoyl ) ]indole ( jwh - 081 ) ; 1-pentyl - 3- ( 4-methyl - 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( jwh - 122 ) ; 1-pentyl - 3- ( 4-chloro - 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( jwh - 398 ) ; 1- ( 5-fluoropentyl ) - 3- ( 1-naphthoyl ) indole ( am2201 ) ; 1- ( 5-fluoropentyl ) - 3- ( 2-iodobenzoyl ) indole ( am694 ) ; 1-pentyl - 3-[ ( 4-methoxy ) - benzoyl]indole ( sr - 19 and rcs - 4 ) ; 1-cyclohexylethyl - 3- ( 2-methoxyphenylacetyl ) indole ( sr - 18 and rcs - 8 ) ; and 1-pentyl - 3- ( 2-chlorophenylacetyl ) indole ( jwh - 203 ) .

of note , five of these substances were temporarily placed onto schedule i of the csa by the dea on march 1 , 2011 .

on february 29 , 2012 , the dea extended this temporary scheduling by six months .

these five substances would have been removed from schedule i of the csa at the end of august 2012 if congress had not legislatively scheduled these and other substances .

the synthetic drug abuse prevention act of 2012 also added 11 synthetic stimulants and hallucinogens to schedule i of the csa: 4-methylmethcathinone ( mephedrone ) ; 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone ( mdpv ) ; 2- ( 2,5-dimethoxy - 4-ethylphenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - e ) ; 2- ( 2,5-dimethoxy - 4-methylphenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - d ) ; 2- ( 4-chloro - 2,5-dimethoxyphenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - c ) ; 2- ( 4-iodo - 2,5-dimethoxyphenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - i ) ; 2-[4- ( ethylthio ) - 2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine ( 2c - t - 2 ) ; 2-[4- ( isopropylthio ) - 2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine ( 2c - t - 4 ) ; 2- ( 2,5-dimethoxyphenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - h ) ; 2- ( 2,5-dimethoxy - 4-nitro - phenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - n ) ; and 2- ( 2,5-dimethoxy - 4- ( n ) - propylphenyl ) ethanamine ( 2c - p ) .

the synthetic drug abuse prevention act of 2012 also extended the attorney general's temporary scheduling authority .

prior to enactment of this act , the attorney general ( through the dea ) was able to temporarily place a substance on schedule i of the csa for one year , with a potential extension of six months .

now , once a substance is scheduled through this temporary scheduling process , it may remain on schedule i for two years .

the attorney general then has the authority to keep the substance on schedule i for an additional one year before it must be removed or permanently scheduled .

congress may confront several issues when considering whether to schedule certain synthetic substances .

these issues include potential implications on the federal criminal justice system , the influence of research on scheduling , possible effects of scheduling on future medical research , and the ability to use the analogue enforcement act to enforce drug laws for synthetic substances of concern .

the scheduling of controlled substances has implications for the would - be violators of the csa , as well as for the federal criminal justice system as a whole .

penalties for trafficking , manufacturing , and possession of schedule i controlled substances range from fines to life in prison , depending on a number of factors pursuant to the crime .

factors considered in federal sentencing include , but are not limited to , the amount of drugs that is involved in the crime , the number of offenders , the type of drug , the number of prior offenses , and aggravating factors ( eg , death , weapons involved in the crime ) .

for example , now that congress has legislatively placed mdpv onto schedule i of the csa , anyone convicted of simple possession of this substance is subject to a minimum fine of $1,000 and could be imprisoned for up to one year .

of the inmates residing in federal prisons as of december 2015 , and for whom offense data are known , nearly half ( 86,080 or 46.5% ) are serving sentences for federal drug offenses .

and of the 21,907 federal drug offenders known to have been sentenced for drug - related offenses , 6,304 were sentenced for methamphetamine - related offenses in fy2014 .

it is unknown whether or how the relative number of drug - specific offenders may change with the most recent addition of certain synthetic drugs to schedule i .

prison crowding continues to concern the bureau of prisons ( bop ) and policymakers .

although the federal prison population has been declining in recent years , it is still considerably high compared to fy1980 when the number of inmates under bop jurisdiction facilities was 25,000 .

in 2015 , the bop was operating at 23% over rated capacity , down from 36% in 2013 and 30% in 2014 .

given that nearly half of the federal prison population is incarcerated for drug - related offenses , congress may question the potential effect on the prison population and crowding now that it has scheduled additional substances .

it is unknown whether bop , in the current fiscal environment , is able to accommodate increases in the number of inmates .

there is consideration of drug research and data when the dea and hhs seek to add a substance to schedules i - v of the csa .

as required by the csa , a drug must be evaluated on its history and current pattern of abuse ; scope , duration , and significance of abuse ; and risk to public health factors in order to be eligible for temporary or permanent scheduling by the attorney general .

the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) has noted that synthetic cathinones and cannabinoids are understudied substances , and there is limited research on these drugs .

this lack of research may influence whether the attorney general ( through the dea ) permanently schedules certain synthetic stimulants under the csa .

of note , while congress has scheduled several substances commonly marketed as "bath salts" ( including mephedrone and mdpv ) , congress did not schedule the full array of substances that have been and may be marketed as such ( eg , methylone ) .

the dea permanently scheduled methylone on schedule i in april 2013 , and may still consider temporary and permanent scheduling of not - yet - scheduled substances .

in contrast to what is required of hhs and the dea , congress is not statutorily required to consider research and data in its decision to schedule a drug under the csa .

in the past , congress has exercised its scheduling authority by passing legislation to add drugs to the list of controlled substances , and congress has cited public safety interests as the reason for taking legislative action .

in 2000 , for example , congress passed legislation that provided for emergency scheduling of gamma hydroxybutyric acid ( ghb ) , a synthetic stimulant also known as "liquid ecstasy. .

in doing so , congress cited ghb as "an imminent hazard to public safety that requires immediate regulatory action. .

congress may debate whether to exercise its authority and pass legislation to permanently schedule certain synthetic drugs under the csa .

one related consideration is whether there is an imminent threat such that immediate scheduling through legislation may be more effective than the dea and hhs carrying out the scheduling process laid out under the csa .

in doing so , policymakers may also consider how to best evaluate whether a particular substance is an imminent hazard or threat and whether congress has reliable and valid standards for evaluating the potential threats posed by each substance of concern .

in addition to considering legislative actions surrounding synthetic substances , congress may choose to exercise its oversight role in this area .

policymakers may evaluate whether the dea and hhs are effectively and efficiently evaluating each identified synthetic drug of concern and subsequently taking appropriate action .

another issue for consideration is future medical research involving synthetic drugs .

there is shared concern among researchers that adding certain synthetic substances to schedule i could hinder medical research .

the csa does not prohibit research with schedule i controlled substances , but it requires that researchers go through a registration process that involves approval from their associated institutions , an external review board , the u.s. food and drug administration ( under hhs ) , and the dea .

congress may consider whether or not placing certain synthetic drugs on schedule i will hinder future research on these substances .

as mentioned , the controlled substances analogue enforcement act of 1986 treats controlled substance analogues as schedule i controlled substances under the csa ; however , this only applies to analogues that are intended for human consumption .

one barrier to prosecuting individuals for violations relating to synthetic substances such as "bath salts" that are marketed as "not intended for human consumption" is proving that despite this labeling , these substances are indeed intended for consumption .

in addition , the analogue enforcement act requires that a substance must be chemically similar to a controlled substance in order to be considered an analogue .

the dea has noted that the chemical structure of a substance can be manipulated such that it is not chemically similar to a controlled substance but still produces effects that are pharmacologically similar to a schedule i or schedule ii controlled substance .

these manipulations can continuously occur to stay ahead of researchers and law enforcement .

the dea has also pointed out several prosecutorial challenges for using the analogue enforcement act to prevent drug use and abuse .

these challenges include the following: each case requires additional investigation to determine whether the substance in question was "intended for human consumption" and can therefore be considered an analogue .

a forensic chemist can testify to laboratory analysis that would identify a controlled substance in a case ; however , to establish that a substance is an analogue , additional testimony from experts in other disciplines is needed .

in cases involving potential analogue substances , experts must establish that the substance has a substantially similar chemical structure ( and pharmacological effect ) to a schedule i controlled substance .

the threshold for "substantially similar" is subjective and may differ from expert to expert .

establishing a substance as an analogue in one case does not carry over to other cases .

each case involving the potential analogue substance must separately establish that the substance is indeed an analogue .

while some may argue that the analogue enforcement act is insufficient or too cumbersome to investigate and prosecute cases involving the wide range of potential analogues , others may disagree .

on the one hand , scheduling each analogue substance under the csa could allow more efficient prosecution of cases involving that particular substance .

on the other hand , as the dea and others have noted , the chemical structure of substances can be continuously manipulated , thus constantly creating new analogue substances that are not scheduled under the csa .

policymakers may deliberate whether the pace of scientific research , drug scheduling by the attorney general in consultation with the secretary of hhs , and legislative scheduling by congress is sufficient in response to the current synthetic drug problem .

congress may also consider whether the rapid creation of new analogues could outpace such scheduling , leaving the analogue enforcement act as a more efficient method of prosecution .

over the last several years , the dea has led major enforcement efforts against the synthetic drug industry .

in june 2013 , the dea announced enforcement actions in 35 states "targeting the upper echelon of dangerous designer synthetic drug trafficking organizations" as part of the cooperative operation , "project synergy. .

according to the dea , these enforcement actions involved retailers , wholesalers , and manufacturers , and exposed "the massive flow of drug - related proceeds back to countries in the middle east and elsewhere. .

in may 2014 , as part of "project synergy phase ii," the dea arrested more than 150 individuals and seized "hundreds of thousands of individually packaged , ready - to - sell synthetic drugs as well as hundreds of kilograms of raw synthetic products to make thousands more. .

the 15-month effort of project synergy iii concluded in october 2015 .

this phase involved 151 arrests in 16 states , seized over $15 million in cash and assets and over 4,000 kilograms of synthetic drugs , and further revealed "the flow of millions of dollars in u.s. synthetic drug proceeds to countries of concern in the middle east. .

of note , the dea stated that a number of "project synergy" cases will be prosecuted under the analogue enforcement act .

in considering enforcement challenges identified by the dea , congress may consider a number of options in addressing the continuing sales of synthetic drugs .

congress may amend the csa in several ways to better facilitate enforcement action against the illicit synthetic drug industry .

the csa could be amended so that additional factors may be considered in determining whether a controlled substance analogue was intended for human consumption or remove the human consumption consideration altogether .

congress may also alter the definition of a controlled substance or a controlled substance analogue to try to capture more of these rapidly evolving synthetic compounds .

alternatively , congress may consider legislative options outside of the csa .

for example , congress may choose to enhance criminal penalties for false advertisement by manufacturers and distributors of these synthetic drugs that are often sold with false labels .

congress may also question whether u.s. policies on importation of substances sufficiently protect against dangerous analogue substances .

