beginning with the 1948 hook commission , few military subjects have generated as much interest or commentary as the military retirement system .

the number of reports , analyses and studies aimed at modifying or reforming the system have been voluminous .

this has been especially true during periods when the system has been viewed as excessively expensive or when personnel costs have been highlighted for reduction in the defense budget .

as congress addresses the deficit , the escalating cost of military retirement is an area of concern .

positions on the issue of military retirement reform can range from intense criticism to intense support among the community of defense manpower analysts , politicians , veterans support organizations , and military personnel .

those who are critical generally find fault with the 20-year "cliff" vesting , the generous retirement benefits to youthful beneficiaries , the overall cost of the system , the lack of force management flexibility , and the inefficiency of the system .

those who defend the current 20-year retirement system argue that it is compensation for a career of arduous , and frequently hazardous , service and sacrifice for the nation and that it is relatively consistent with retirement systems for other high - risk occupations .

others view the retirement annuity as a "retainer" since retired military personnel can be recalled to active duty at any time .

the military retirement system is a noncontributory , defined benefit system that is viewed as a significant incentive in retaining a career military force .

the system provides inflation - protected monthly compensation and other benefits after an active or reserve military career , disability retirement for those physically unfit to continue to serve , special retirement programs such as the temporary early retirement authority ( tera ) , and survivor benefits for the eligible survivors of deceased retirees .

these retirement variations are all separate but interrelated .

retired pay is subject to federal income tax .

active duty personnel become eligible for retirement by completing 20 years of service , regardless of age , but may , under certain conditions , remain on active duty for up to 40 years .

retirement eligibility for reserve component personnel is based on "points" and equivalent years of service but reservists do not generally begin to receive their retired pay until age 60 .

those who are retired due to physical disability will receive retired pay regardless of their length of service .

disability retirement offers a choice between two retirement options: one based on years of service and one on the severity of the disability .

servicemembers who voluntarily separate prior to completing the minimum 20 years of service will generally receive no retirement benefits .

the military retirement system shares some similarities with private sector retirement systems , but it exists for very different purposes .

according to the department of defense , military retirement is intended to support: "the provision of a socially acceptable level of payments to members and former members of the armed forces during their old age .

the provision of a retirement system that will enable the armed forces to remain generally competitive with private - sector employers and the federal civil service .

the provision of a pool of experienced military manpower that can be called upon in time of war or national emergency to augment the active - duty forces of the united states , and the establishment of a mechanism whereby persons in this pool can move into and out of active duty smoothly .

the provision of a socially acceptable means of keeping the military forces of the united states young and vigorous , thereby insuring promotion opportunities for younger members. .

military retirees are subject to an involuntary recall to active duty and therefore remain subject to the uniform code of military justice to enforce the recall authority .

in contrast to many private sector plans , the military retirement system also does not provide for the gradual vesting of benefits , it is an "all - or - nothing" proposition based on serving a minimum of 20 years .

at the conclusion of fy2010 , there were approximately 2,271,000 beneficiaries of the military retirement system at an annual cost to the federal government of $50.842 billion .

table 1 reflects the various categories of beneficiaries and the cost associated with each program: in addition to retired pay , military retirees are also entitled to commissary and exchange access , medical care through tricare , and access to morale , welfare and recreation facilities and programs , and certain other benefits .

there are currently three different methods of calculating retired pay for active component personnel: final basic pay , high - three , and redux .

eligibility is based on the date the person first became a member of the armed forces .

although there has been a military retirement system since 1861 , the army and air force vitalization and retirement equalization act of 1948 established the general framework for today's military retirement system .

it featured vesting at 20 years of service , computed retired pay at the standard 2.5% per year of service , and applied to all of the services .

in the six decades since then , there have only been three significant modifications or reforms of the system , mostly focused on the cost of the system .

in 1980 , the final pay methodology was changed to the high - 3 calculation .

six years later , a major reform initiative , focused on saving $2.9 billion , resulted in the "1986 act" or redux plan .

redux reduced the retirement benefit at 20 years from 50% to 40% but kept it the same at 30 years of service ( 75% ) to encourage longer careers .

it also reduced the annual cost - of - living ( cola ) increase by 1% per year until age 62 .

by 2000 , congress was convinced that redux had a negative impact on retention and allowed servicemembers to choose either high - 3 or redux , while adding a $30,000 career status bonus to the redux plan to incentivize participation .

this section will review the legislative history of the past three retirement reforms which may lend perspective for policy makers reviewing the more recent reform proposals .

there have been two major administration military retirement reform proposals in the past five years .

they are examined below .

the ongoing economic recession , persistently high unemployment , and the growing national deficit resulted in a number of studies and reports during 2010 and 2011 that focused on reducing the cost of government , including defense .

some of these reports made recommendations concerning the military retirement system .

the six most prominent reports ( the quadrennial defense review independent panel , the sustainable defense task force , the defense business board , the debt reduction task force , the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform and the president's plan for economic growth and deficit reduction ) are discussed and reviewed below and incorporated into table 3 at the end of this section for comparison .

those who advocate reform of the military retirement system generally offer several criticisms of the current system .

congress could determine that the current military retirement system , primarily the high - 3 , is the most appropriate method of meeting the retention requirements of an all - volunteer force and retain the current system .

using the work of the dacmc and the qrmc to establish the foundation of a reformed retirement system , other options could be added or deleted to reduce costs or provide additional incentives .

the resulting hybrid system could provide enhanced flexibility for force managers to retain personnel in critical skill areas , unconstrained by the current 20-year "all or nothing" system .

it could also introduce a contributory element , the thrift savings plan , which has already proven popular with military personnel .

with the framework established , congress could authorize dod to conduct a multiyear demonstration project prior to implementing the new system force - wide .

if the demonstration is successful , it could be implemented for all new entrants and offered to currently serving members who otherwise are limited to redux or the high - 3 .

congress could establish a national commission on military personnel — one of the recommendations made by the quadrennial defense review independent panel .

the panel found that the complementary relationship between pay , bonuses , allowances , incentives , retirement , healthcare , and deferred and in - kind benefits resulted in a cost to dod that was unsustainable for the future and required a separate review process .

specifically , the panel recommended the following areas to be addressed by the commission: compensation reform "continuum - of - service" issues such as promotion , professional development , career length and retirement age the active - reserve force mix active , reserve , and retired healthcare and retiree benefits reduction of the numbers and composition of headquarters and staffs the panel felt that a commission could complete this effort in a year .

alternatively , as recommended in the president's plan for economic growth and deficit reduction , congress could set up a commission to develop recommendations for reforming the current system .

the commission would receive input from dod , alter this proposal as appropriate and forward to the president for approval and release .

the president , if concurring with the commission's recommendations , would then forward it to congress .

congress would be required to approve or disapprove without modification .

