this report provides background information for congress concerning the international monetary fund ( imf , the fund ) , the central multilateral organization for international monetary cooperation .

the united states is the largest financial contributor to the imf and congressional interest in imf activities has increased since the onset of the international financial crisis in 2008 .

imf lending has surged during the past decade , including large loans to greece , ireland , and portugal .

potential policy issues for congress include the role of the imf as a lender of last resort , the adequacy of imf resources , and the effectiveness of imf surveillance of financial and monetary conditions in its member countries and of the world economy .

as set forth in its articles of agreement , the purposes of the imf are ( 1 ) to promote international cooperation on international monetary problems , ( 2 ) to facilitate the expansion and balanced growth of international trade , promoting high levels of employment and real income and the development of productive resources in all member countries , ( 3 ) to promote exchange rate stability and to avoid competitive exchange rate depreciation , ( 4 ) to help establish a multilateral system of payments among countries for current transactions and to help eliminate foreign exchange restrictions which hamper world trade , ( 5 ) to make loans to member countries on a temporary basis with adequate safeguards for repayment , "thus providing them with opportunity to correct maladjustments in their balance of payments without resorting to measures destructive of national or international prosperity," and ( 6 ) to shorten with such loans the duration and to lessen the degree of disequilibrium in the international balances of payments of members .

in practice , the imf's mandate of promoting international monetary stability translates into three main functions: ( 1 ) surveillance of financial and monetary conditions in its member countries and in the world economy ; ( 2 ) financial assistance to help countries overcome major balance - of - payments problems ; and ( 3 ) technical assistance and advisory services to member countries .

increased attention to the imf since the financial crisis has revived long - standing debates about the institution's role in the global economy and the future of u.s. support for the institution .

some analysts argue that with the end of the pegged - exchange rate system , the imf is no longer needed and it should be abolished .

others say the imf is still vital , but needs to be restructured and refocused .

still others suggest that new functions should be added to the imf and its role in the international monetary system should be expanded .

events since 2008 have shown that substantial risks remain in the global economy .

global imbalances , exchange rate misalignment , volatile capital flows and exchange rate movements , and the accumulation of large stockpiles of foreign exchange reserves have led many analysts to question the functioning of the international monetary system , and by extension , the future of the imf .

while many emerging and some advanced economies drew on imf resources during the recent financial crisis , the majority resorted to an ad hoc network of central bank swap arrangements .

at the height of the crisis , in the face of a massive global shortage of dollars , the u.s. federal reserve deployed over $600 billion in global liquidity to many other advanced and emerging economies , double the available resources of the imf .

the european central bank ( ecb ) set up €250 ( $360 ) billion in swap lines , of which about €200 ( $288 ) billion was with the u.s. fed .

in october 2008 , the fed also authorized swap lines of $30 billion each to four emerging economies with large exposure to u.s. financial institutions , brazil , south korea , mexico , and singapore .

thus , the fed , and not the imf , was the de facto lender of last resort for major economies .

at the same time , several other countries , primarily in asia , relied on their accumulation of foreign exchange reserves built up during the 2000s to prevent their economies from collapsing due to the liquidity crisis .

while central bank swap lines and self - insurance through reserve accumulation were effective in mitigating the effects of the crisis , and restoring liquidity in the global economy , the costs associated with these mechanisms are substantial , both for individual countries and for the system as a whole .

by their very nature , the fed and ecb swap lines were selective , and subject to domestic monetary policy , as well as political pressure .

it is uncertain whether the united states will be willing to play this role again in the future .

large accumulation of foreign exchange reserves is expensive , since they typically earn little interest and are susceptible to exchange rate risk .

they also contribute to systemic instability , by creating excessive demand for reserve currencies , thus putting downward pressure on interest rates in the economies of reserve currencies , such as the u.s. dollar .

large swings in official portfolios of foreign exchange reserves can also have significant impact on exchange rates and the price of sovereign bonds .

some analysts have proposed improving the fund's lender of last resort function .

for example , one recent study proposed three main elements of what such reform could look like: ( 1 ) an automatic trigger to access the facility ; ( 2 ) unilateral country prequalification to the facility during article iv consultations ; and ( 3 ) liquidity funded by the world's "issuers of last resort. .

when considering expanding the role of the imf , however , the concept of moral hazard has often been considered .

as imf lending increased after the financial crisis , especially after the large loans to greece , ireland , and portugal , many observers , including some members of congress , raised concerns that financing by the imf , particularly emergency financing provided during financial crises , encouraged the very behavior that it sought to prevent .

simply put , imf lending may send the wrong signals to government officials .

according to this view , in the best - case scenario , countries are spared the worst consequences of their poor economic decisions .

in other cases , the imf program may not stabilize the crisis , further indebting the crisis - afflicted country .

other analysts argue that , as the 1994-1995 mexican crisis , the 1997-1999 asian crisis , and the more recent 2008 crisis have demonstrated , residents of imf - recipient countries suffer painful consequences of a forced economic adjustment .

the policy question is whether economic pain is mitigated by external financial support tied to a conditional economic adjustment program .

a different type of "moral hazard" also arises with regard to investors .

does the existence of an emergency financial mechanism encourage private investors to take on risks that they might otherwise shun in an attempt to reap greater financial returns ? .

in this context , some are troubled that , as a by - product of a "bailout," professional investors , who took on higher risks and were probably rewarded with higher returns , are made whole .

imf conditionality and pre - qualification of imf loans might reduce concerns about moral hazard .

edwin truman at the peterson institute for international economics argues that the imf's role can be improved , addressing moral hazard at the same time , through a "comprehensive prequalification" process where the fund presents "policy terms for lending" to every member country potentially eligible to borrow from the imf , based on the imf's bilateral and multilateral economic surveillance .

