at the height of soviet military power in 1985-1986 , there were 4.9 million servicemen and women in the active duty forces , and about another 1 million belonged to the warsaw treaty organization ( a mutual defense alliance including several eastern european countries ) .

after the collapse of the soviet union at the end of 1991 , severe budgetary problems in russia — which inherited the bulk of former soviet military forces — precipitated deep cuts in troop numbers and weapons acquisition .

although russia's economy improved in the 2000s , permitting higher defense expenditures , the military continued to resist reforms to its mission and organization .

despite the sizeable reduction in the size of the armed forces , the russian military is still the fifth largest in the world in terms of active personnel — officially 1 million in 2011 — exceeded only by militaries in china , india , north korea , and the united states .

although russian defense spending also has greatly decreased , it still is among the highest in the world .

because of the lessened capabilities of its conventional forces , russia has relied on nuclear forces as a deterrent to conventional or nuclear attack and as a means of response to attack .

russia has undertaken several largely piecemeal and halting efforts to revamp the armed forces it inherited from the soviet union .

in 2007 , near the end of then - president vladimir putin's second term in office , he appointed anatoliy serdyukov — the former head of the federal tax service — as defense minister as part of an effort to combat corruption in the military and carry out reforms .

after the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict revealed large - scale russian military operational failures , the leadership became more determined to boost military capabilities , and a new wave of reforms was launched in september - october 2008 .

according to most observers , the reforms launched by serdyukov have gone further than previous reforms in altering the force structure and operations of the armed forces inherited from the soviet union , although near - term and longer - range effects are subject to debate .

this report examines the character and status of these changes and debate , focusing mainly on those reforms that have impacted conventional armed forces capabilities .

the report provides basic information about the military's leadership and structure , the arms industry and efforts to modernize weaponry ( including through foreign arms technology transfers ) , power projection efforts , and the military budget .

a major question regarding the military reforms launched in 2008 is whether they are intended to recreate or approach the capabilities of a soviet - era "superpower" armed forces with global reach threatening u.s. interests or to create smaller , professional , armed forces for homeland security and counter - terrorist missions .

the intentions of russia's leaders are contradictory , according to some observers , with some "cold warriors" seeking to recreate a military with global reach to fight vast wars while others seek to tailor forces for modern missions .

elements of both goals appear to various degrees in russia's national security strategy , defense doctrine , and other documents and programs ( described directly below ) .

even in military reform efforts launched in late 2008 these contradictions are apparent , although the main thrust of reforms appears to support modern missions .

perhaps regardless of intentions , there are major economic , technological , demographic , and other impediments both to russia's ability to recreate "superpower" armed forces ready to carry out strategic land , sea , and air battles in the east and west and to its efforts to create modern armed forces , according to most observers .

on may 13 , 2009 , russian president dmitriy medvedev promulgated a national security strategy of russia through the year 2020 , which in principle provides the basis for russia's military doctrine and foreign policy .

the strategy outlines current threats facing russia and its security priorities .

the strategy praises former president putin ( without naming him ) for leading russia out of its "political and socio - economic systemic crisis" of the 1990s .

it proclaims the emergence of "multi - vector diplomacy" in the world ( implying that u.s. superpower status is eroding ) and "russia's resource potential" as ensuring that russia will "consolidate its influence in the world arena" as a leading political and economic power .

both the national security strategy and the military doctrine were drawn up by the russian security council , headed by nikolay patrushev , the former chief of the federal security service , and deputy head yuriy baluyevskiy , the former chief of the general staff of the armed forces .

both are considered by many observers to represent those within the leadership who advocate bolstering russia's international "great power" status .

the strategy states that globalization has led to new external and internal threats and challenges ranging from resource wars to rising social inequality and poverty within the country that could contribute to unrest .

nato is criticized as an obsolete regional security organization that should be superseded by a new regional security architecture .

nonetheless , the strategy urges a greater regional security role for the collective security treaty organization ( csto , a russia - led mutual security alliance ; other members include armenia , belarus , kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and uzbekistan ) , which it appears to view as potentially equivalent to nato .

it states that nato's enlargement to countries sharing borders with russia and nato's adoption of out - of - area missions are "unacceptable," although it also avers that russia is open to cooperation with nato .

an increasing global competition for resources could lead to military conflict , including near the borders of russia and its allies , the strategy warns .

the united states ( though not named ) appears to be criticized as threatening russia's military security by attempting to achieve "overwhelming supremacy in the military sphere. .

the strategy proclaimed that despite this u.s. effort , russia would "undertake all necessary efforts at the lowest level of expenditures to maintain parity with the united states in strategic offensive weapons. .

at the same time , the strategy calls for establishing a "strategic partnership" with the united states that appears to be envisaged as a global diarchy .

the strategy proclaims that national defense and internal control are the main national security priorities .

to ensure national defense , the strategy calls for preserving strategic nuclear capabilities , reorganizing the conventional armed forces , and revitalizing defense industries .

perhaps reflecting the 2008 russian - georgian conflict , the strategy stresses that the military has a responsibility to protect russian citizens in nearby states .

internal control is assured through enhanced counter - intelligence , counter - terrorism , anti - transnational crime and corruption , and border control efforts .

u.s. analyst stephen blank suggests that the u.s. - russia "reset" of relations being undertaken at the time of the release of the strategy led to the removal of explicit references to the united states as a threat .

he suggests , however , that the strategy remains a largely conservative document opposed to serdyukov's military reforms ( although serdyukov endorsed the threat assessment presented by the strategy ) , which was written by military officers and security officials who retained soviet - era views of threats .

german analyst henning schröder appears to take a different view , stating that the strategy seems to be "written by several authors whose threat perceptions diverge radically. .

he argues that the presentation of possible threats to national security — including the federal security service's fear of spies , the military's fear of nato , the economists' concern for economic development , and the elite's fear of social unrest — provides "no clues as to which of the competing ... risk perceptions will determine the future course of politics. .

in february 2007 , then - president putin appointed anatoly serdyukov as defense minister , a position that serdyukov retained after medvedev was elected president the next year .

many observers supposed that serdyukov was chosen to carry out an wide - ranging anti - corruption campaign in the armed forces , since he had a nonmilitary career in accounting .

in early to mid - 2008 , however , serdyukov began calling for reducing the size of the armed forces and other reforms .

these initiatives were opposed by army general yuriy baluyevskiy , then - chief of the general staff , who was relieved in july 2008 by president medvedev and replaced by army general nikolay makarov .

some of baluyevskiy's associates also resigned or were ousted , creating command uncertainties on the eve of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict ( as mentioned below , baluyevskiy remained somewhat influential in his new assignment as the deputy chairman of the security council ) .

the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict revealed a need to decisively revamp war - fighting capabilities .

according to analysts dale herspring and roger mcdermott , the conflict forced the russian government to realize that "the forces currently at the state's disposal were in no condition to fight a modern war. .

the u.s. think - tank stratfor has stated that "command , control and communications ; intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ; [and] joint planning and operations were either not evident during the [conflict] or were executed ineffectively," by russian invading forces .

stratfor suggests that the russian air force lacked basic intelligence necessary for targeting , including for the suppression of georgian air defenses , and that there was a general failure of secure tactical communications necessary for command and control .

the united kingdom - based international institute for strategic studies likewise has stated that the poorly executed russian invasion of georgia "increased doubt that the military could be seen as a reliable instrument to support russian foreign - and security policy objectives , and also reinforced the perception that the armed forces could not in the future guarantee reliable conventional defense capabilities. .

russian media reported that in september - october 2008 , president medvedev and defense minister serdyukov discussed a radical military reform plan with military officers and state duma deputies .

according to one account , in mid - september 2008 medvedev decreed the launching of these new military reforms .

on september 26 , 2008 , medvedev specified that the reform called for creating permanent combat - ready military units , improving command and control , bolstering personnel training , equipping the armed forces with new weapons , and increasing salaries and benefits , and he directed military officials to work out how to implement the plan by the end of the year .

a few days later , he also stated that the reforms would involve strengthening the strategic rocket forces and the navy , creating aerospace defense forces , and bolstering rapid reaction forces .

on october 14 , 2008 , serduyukov announced more details of the reform plan ( see directly below ) .

in his november 5 , 2008 , address to the legislature , medvedev announced that he had ordered a "new configuration for our country's armed forces," and a rearmament effort because of military shortcomings that were exposed by the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict and ongoing efforts by the united states to create global missile defenses , encircle russia with military bases , and expand nato .

according to some observers , russia's experiences in combating separatism and terrorism in the north caucasus also motivated the reform effort .

the promotion of lieutenant general vladimir shamanov — a veteran of combat in russia's breakaway chechnya region and in georgia during the 2008 russia - georgia conflict — as the commander of the russian airborne forces in 2009 exemplified these motivations , according to these observers .

in december 2008 , serdyukov openly stressed that the reforms were intended to switch from a mass mobilization army for vast land , sea , and air wars to "a performance - capable , mobile , and maximally armed army and navy ready to participate in three regional and local conflicts , at a minimum. .

some observers suggested that the reforms were patterned after the u.s. military force structure .

defense ministry civilian adviser vitaliy shlikov explicitly stated that the military education reforms were designed to "match the more effective american model. .

as set out by serdyukov and other officials in october 2008 , the reform plan called for reducing the total size of the armed forces from 1.2 million in 2008 to under 1 million by 2012 .

three major initiatives were launched: accelerating planned cuts in the officer corps to reduce their numbers from 355,000 to 150,000 .

serdyukov lamented that the current structure of the military was "like an egg , swollen in the middle , we have more colonels and lieutenant - colonels than junior officers," and that the ratio of officers to troops had dwindled in recent years .

the reform plan also included abolishing the noncommissioned officers' ranks of warrant officer and midshipman in the russian army and navy .

the bulk of these 140,000 ncos — many or most of which were conscripts who had received little specialized training — would be replaced by 78,000 newly trained sergeants .

among other personnel changes , the number of officials and officers at the defense ministry and general staff would be cut .

consolidating partially manned units and reducing the four - tier command system of military districts , armies , divisions , and regiments to a basic two - tier system of strategic commands and fully manned brigades that could be deployed for combat operations within a few hours ( termed "permanent readiness brigades" ) .

sharply reducing the number and revamping the system of higher military education and training .

during 2009 , the brigade system for ground forces was set up and other reforms were carried out .

the reforms fundamentally affected the ground forces , reducing them in size from about 400,000 to 270,000 troops , converting 203 partially staffed divisions to 85 brigades , and eliminating 20,000 of 22,000 tanks .

the air force and navy were somewhat less affected by restructuring .

except for the move of the navy headquarters to st. petersburg , there was not an emphasis on opening new naval bases , but rather on boosting the acquisition of ships and submarines .

on march 5 , 2010 , president medvedev claimed that the armed forces reorganization had been completed and that personnel had been successfully reduced to 1 million .

he stated that improving the combat readiness of combined - arms forces in their new organizational and staffing structure would be the focus in 2010 , as well as the development of a 10-year plan for weapons modernization .

however , authorities and observers highlighted many ongoing challenges , including problems with contract troops and the size of the officer corps , and with supplying the new brigades with adequate weaponry .

weapons modernization has been a fundamental aspect of recent reform efforts .

russia has attempted to maintain the soviet - era objective of manufacturing all the weapons used by its armed forces , although these efforts have faced extreme challenges .

the break - up of the soviet union resulted in many production facilities coming under the sovereignty of newly independent republics , but in many cases russia has endeavored to establish business relations with these firms or to reassume ownership over them for supply chain purposes .

the 2010 military doctrine calls for ensuring "the technological independence of [russia] in the sphere of production of strategic and other models of armaments and military and specialized equipment in accordance with the state arms program. .

nonetheless , some significant foreign weapons and components purchases have occurred ( see below , " foreign arms technology purchases " ) .

there are about 1,500 russian defense research institutes , design bureaus , and industries , all of which are either partly or wholly owned by the state .

according to some reports , defense industries employ up to 3 million workers ( about 4% of the labor force ) , and combined revenue of the top 20 firms or groups of firms was nearly $20 billion in 2009 .

the government has undertaken to consolidate defense industries by grouping them by product lines into holding companies .

among recent holding companies being set up are several dealing with the out - sourcing of functions that are deemed to be not an inherent part of military duties , such as growing crops for the military and other food services , laundry services , repairs of facilities and weapons , and housing .

most of the holding companies have revenues of less than $1 billion per year , making them unable to invest substantial sums to develop new technologies .

the holding companies have substantially raised the prices they charge the government , which has led the government to contest the mark - ups ( see below , " weapons production and procurement challenges " ) .

in an effort to consolidate many defense and nondefense high - technology firms , the rostekhnologii ( russian technologies ) state corporation was established under legislation approved in december 2007 .

then - president putin named former kgb associate sergey chemizov to head rostekhnologii .

in legal form , the state corporation is substantially under government control although its assets are technically private .

it is not subject to the bankruptcy law and has limited reporting requirements , but it does submit annual and auditors' statement to the government .

the former defense holding company headed by chemizov — rosboroneksport ( russian arms exports ) — became a major subsidiary of rostekhnogii .

by december 2010 , rostekhnologii had taken over 580 defense and nondefense firms and reportedly employed 780,000 workers .

in mid - 2011 , the law on the formation of rostekhnologii was changed to extend its period of formation until 2013 .

the goal in forming rostekhnologii is to boost the high - technological transformation of defense and nondefense industries , foster sales of high - technology goods in domestic and foreign markets , and attract investment .

rostekhnologii has stepped up foreign defense technology transfers , including joint ventures and the purchases of components and maintenance services .

after declining in the 1990s , defense industrial production increased somewhat in the 2000s , due to boosted military procurement orders and arms exports .

nonetheless , production remained far below that of the soviet period .

according to many analysts , russian state - controlled defense industries face dim prospects since they are producing arms largely based on soviet - era designs and technology , most of their employees are reaching retirement age , their production assets are aged , their management is inefficient , and up to one - third are effectively bankrupt .

also , they lack relationships with western defense firms that can provide technology exchanges .

the ongoing crisis of the defense industrial sector was illustrated at the end of 2008 , when prime minister putin announced an emergency $1.7 billion infusion of funds to stave off the bankruptcies of several defense firms .

a rostekhnologii official verified in december 2010 that a large number of the mainly defense firms it had taken over were effectively bankrupt because of mismanagement , corruption , "problems with the state defense order , the obsolescence of fixed production capital , [and] technological backwardness. .

for example , he stated that when the corporation had assumed ownership over the izhmash holding company ( manufacturer of the kalashnikov rifle and other weapons ) , which he described as the "flagship" of russia's defense industries , it discovered that "the general director , incompetently managing the business , … had reduced not only the parent plant but also a number of izhmash group enterprises to a state verging on bankruptcy. .

lieutenant general sergey karakayev , commander of strategic rocket forces , has stressed that serdyukov's reforms aim to protect russia's offensive nuclear weapons capabilities , and that procurement is prioritized to maintain and modernize these forces .

he has argued that nuclear forces will remain the most important deterring factor during the reform of the conventional armed forces .

german defense analyst margarete klein asserts that because russia continues to give priority to maintaining parity in strategic nuclear weapons with the united states , and to devote most budgetary resources to this effort , the modernization of conventional armed forces will continue to suffer from inadequate funding .

for many years , the defense industrial sector was heavily dependent on arms sales abroad , since these sales exceeded defense procurements by the russian armed forces .

however , while arms exports have been steady , ranging from about $2 billion to $6 billion over the period from 1993-2009 , they have not greatly increased and have declined in some areas of weaponry ( see below , " arms exports " ) .

in recent years , defense procurements have been increasing ( except for a dip in 2008-2009 as a result of the global economic downturn's effects on russia's budget ) , and are set to rise sharply as a result of putin's new arms acquisition plan for 2011-2020 ( see below , " state armaments procurement program for 2011-2020 " ) .

the russia - georgia conflict contributed to greater recognition by the russian leadership that some military equipment and technology needed to be purchased abroad to supplant problematic domestic military production .

nonetheless , there has remained much reluctance among some sectors of the leadership and the defense industrial sector to greatly enlarge such purchases and to close obsolete defense industries .

to increase the defense ministry's control over defense contracting , a federal agency on procurement of weapons systems , military , and specialized equipment and logistics was set up in 2008 .

this agency aims to restrict the ability of each branch of service to sign and manage defense contracts , a practice which had increased expenditures for large numbers of questionable weapons and expanded the scope of corruption and mismanagement .

reportedly , the new agency has been given responsibility over a small fraction of contracts placed under the 2011 state defense order , but will handle over one - half of contracts in 2012 and 100% in 2013 .

similarly , a scientific - technical council ( nts ) — the defense minister is the head , the chief of the general staff is the deputy head , and the head of the armed forces military - scientific committee is the executive secretary — was formed to decide on proposals for r&d for arms and special equipment received from the institutes and services .

the military - scientific committee ( shifted from subordination to the general staff to the defense ministry ) oversees the activities of 5 newly created military scientific research institutes , which had been formed following the consolidation of 19 military science committees and 38 scientific research organizations .

for the 2011 defense order , the nts decided to fund only about one - fifth of the proposals for r&d .

according to some observers , one of the main goals of serdyukov's reforms , as an extension of homeland security , is to maintain and enhance russia's power projection capabilities in the territories of soviet successor states .

leases for bases and other military facilities have been extended in several cases , and new troops have been sent to georgia's breakaway regions , indicating no plans to reduce such military expenditures for force deployments as part of the reforms .

on the other hand , the reforms have placed less priority on global power projection , although there is interest in asserting influence in the arctic and in holding demonstrative exercises elsewhere .

russia has bases or facilities in most of the soviet successor states , and recently has strengthened its presence through lengthy extensions of basing agreements with armenia and ukraine ( see text box below ) .

in georgia , where russia had reported that it had closed its bases by late 2007 , it reintroduced or buttressed substantial forces in south ossetia and abkhazia after the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , numbering some 7,000 military forces .

russia also has 1,500 troops in the moldovan separatist region of transnistria .

the russian military is also cooperating with international forces ( see text box below ) and participating in exercises such as twice - yearly search and rescue and anti - terrorism operations carried out by the black sea naval force ( blackseafor ; members include other littoral states turkey , bulgaria , romania , ukraine , and georgia ) .

a major element of russia's power projection has involved recent efforts to bolster the military power of the collective security treaty organization .

russia also participates in the shanghai cooperation organization ( sco ; other members include china and kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , tajikistan , and uzbekistan ) , a military and economic cooperation organization where it shares leadership responsibilities with china .

according to some observers , russian participation in the sco aims to enhance regional security as well as check chinese influence in the region .

in 2007 , then - president putin relaunched a policy of power projection beyond the borders , at the same time that he increased rhetoric against u.s. foreign policy and nato activities .

in august 2007 , for the first time since 1992 , russia resumed strategic long - range bomber patrols that approached u.s. and nato airspace .

in late 2007-early 2008 , up to 30 naval vessels including the aircraft carrier admiral kuznetsov conducted exercises in the north atlantic and mediterranean sea .

in november - december 2008 , the missile cruiser peter the great , the anti - submarine destroyer admiral chabanenko , and other ships visited venezuela to participate in naval exercises , and later visited cuba , the first major russian naval presence in the caribbean sea since the breakup of the soviet union .

these ship visits required substantial advance preparation .

in november 2008 , presidents medvedev and bush agreed to combat piracy in the gulf of aden and off the somali coastline , and russian ships subsequently began parallel operations with the combined task force 151 international coalition .

although russia has relaunched air and naval patrols , "show the flag" visits , and participation in exercises , it has not ramped up a global network of military bases , seemingly reflecting the lesser priority the military reform agenda places on stepping up military expenditures and deployments necessary for global power projection .

russia's admiral kuznetsov aircraft carrier is due at the end of 2012 for a lengthy refitting , and russian defense officials have stressed despite some opposition that there will be no funding to build new aircraft carriers .

the mistral warship purchase will provide some power projection capabilities .

the first two mistrals are planned for delivery in 2014-2015 .

earlier reforms attempted by former president putin , as well as the most recent reform effort , have contributed to rising defense budgets .

the improvement of russia's economy since 1999 , fueled in large part by the cash inflow from sharply rising world oil and gas prices , has enabled russia to reverse the budgetary starvation of the military during the 1990s .

defense spending increased substantially in most of the 2000s , and even continued to increase slightly after the global financial crisis of 2008 impacted russia's economy .

the increased defense spending in 2011 has been explained by the russian leadership as a means of boosting the russian economy as well as modernizing defense procurement .

virtually all observers agree that russian defense spending still lags far behind current u.s. or former soviet levels .

moreover , the efficacy of the recent large boosts in defense spending has been reduced by systemic corruption and mismanagement .

it is difficult to estimate russia's military spending .

during the 1990s and early 2000s , the defense budget presented by the government to the legislature contained up to 19 line items , and some items of expenditure were declassified at the request of the legislature , but during the 2000s the number of line items shrank , so that they "are so general that they provide no sense to duma members , or society , of how the armed forces is actually allocating its budget. .

in addition , much military spending is not reflected in the official defense budget .

the stockholm international peace research institute ( sipri ) and the international institute of strategic studies ( iiss ) have estimated that russia's military expenditures are now the fifth largest in the world , after the united states , china , france , and the united kingdom .

because of budget austerity plans by france and the united kingdom and russia's plans to boost defense spending , russia could soon surpass them to have the third - largest military expenditures in the world .

the cutbacks in military personnel have not resulted in near - term budgetary savings because of expenditures on pensions and mandated housing for retiring officers .

these costs have reduced the amounts available for boosting salaries and increasing the numbers of contract soldiers .

russia's data submission to the u.n. office of disarmament affairs for 2010 reported military expenditures of $33.9 billion , excluding a reported $4.5 billion for paramilitary forces .

of this amount , 36% was for the ground forces , 17% was for the navy , 15% was for the air force , and 17% was for other combat forces ( no data were provided for strategic rocket forces , a major gap in the report ) .

of the reported military expenditures , 56% was expended on personnel , 21% on operations and maintenance , 17% on arms procurement , 2% on construction of facilities and bases , and 5% on r&d .

in the area of procurement , the submission indicates that a large share was for acquisition of electronics , communications equipment , and warships ( about 7% of all procurement spending ) .

in december 2010 , president medvedev stated that in 2011-2020 defense spending would be maintained at the level of 2.8% of gdp , which would permit "equipping the troops with new technology and … resolving all the social issues that servicemen have," including carrying out the pledge to greatly increase pay and allowances beginning in 2012 and to contract out nonmilitary services .

however , the 2011-2020 state program of armaments calls for spending 1.5 trillion rubles ( $54 billion ) in 2011 , rising to 2 trillion rubles ( $72 billion ) annually in 2013 and thereafter , for a total of 19.4 trillion rubles ( $698.4 billion ) over the 10-year period .

these amounts would appear to boost defense spending as a percentage of gdp beyond what medvedev has claimed .

the state program of armaments 2011-2020 ostensibly includes the net proceeds from arms exports from state - owned defense firms , which are not included in the defense budget .

in july 2011 , prime minister putin unveiled draft budget guidelines for 2012-2014 , which call for boosting defense spending to 1.85 trillion rubles ( $66.6 billion ) in 2012 , 2.33 trillion rubles ( $83.9 billion ) in 2013 , and 2.75 trillion rubles ( $99 billion ) in 2014 .

weapons expenditures account for the largest portion of the increased funding , he indicated , but salaries for military personnel and military pensions also would be substantially boosted .

spending for a more substantial clothing kit and food rations also are envisaged .

at the same time , the guidelines call for reducing nondefense spending , which could squeeze social programs .

russian finance minister alexey kudrin reportedly stated in june 2011 that defense spending would be $70 billion in 2012 ( perhaps similar to putin's reported $66.6 billion ) .

however , he also revealed that costs for military pensions would be $28.5 billion , for a total of $98.5 billion .

putin's announced guidelines seemed to contradict his assertion two months previously that the planned military budget did not denote the "militarization" of the state budget .

he argued that the guidelines for defense spending were still "25 times less than the military expenditures of the united states," and urged adding 3 billion rubles ( $98 million ) to the 10-year plan for weapons procurement .

the military reforms launched in late 2008 have been partly successful in changing from mobilization divisions to what is proclaimed to be fully staffed brigades , and in setting up military districts with more modern joint command and control .

however , the reforms have faced myriad challenges , partial reversals , and other setbacks .

as discussed below , these include problems in carrying out the ambitious weapons modernization program , in conscripting enough quality troops , and in boosting the number of professional soldiers .

the reforms also may contribute to political instability and economic dislocations .

while some observers have argued that russia's military reforms do not pose a threat to u.s. interests , others maintain that the reforms do pose challenges , although they do not represent the reassertion of a soviet - style threat .

according to german defense analyst margarete klein , since russia's reforms do not involve greatly reducing the size of its military and greatly increasing defense budgets , the reforms will not result in the creation of fully modern armed forces .

further reductions in the size of the armed forces face strong resistance from military and political elites , and impulses for greatly boosted defense spending face competition from needed socio - economic modernization programs .

also , protecting parity in strategic nuclear capabilities vis - a - vis the united states remains the main priority of russian defense spending .

klein also argues that defense industries have struggled to produce new weapons .

she concludes that russia's threat posture will "have a more demonstrative and symbolic quality rather than constituting realistic scenarios... .

the gap between great power pretensions and reality in military affairs [will] continue to grow. .

however , the reforms may well boost russia's regional power projection capabilities , which should make europe more interested in the revival of conventional arms control efforts with russia , she suggests .

similarly , jane's has argued that u.s. - russian relations are likely to remain good regardless of russia's military reform efforts , because "russian military capabilities and interests are focused almost exclusively upon relations with former members of the soviet union and potential secessionist movements" within russia .

jane's also suggests that russia's economic growth is constrained by world market demand for its oil and gas , and that russia needs stable ties with these importers .

also , russia's ability to "compete with u.s. power and influence" may be constrained by its aging and declining population and "its low ability to project naval power owing to lack of warm water access," jane's argues .

some analysts suggest that discussions by russian officials about the threat from nato may even be code for concerns about the growing strategic threat posed by china's increased military and economic power .

in examining the 10-year procurement plans for the navy , gorenburg argues that planners no longer view the united states and nato as its primary potential opponents , but rather appear to focus on attempting to counter china and to combat piracy and instability along russia's southern flank .

the procurement plan emphasizes the construction of frigates , corvettes , and diesel submarines for the pacific fleet and the black sea fleet , he argues , rather than large surface combatants and nuclear attack submarines .

perhaps reflecting a view that russian military reforms bear greater implications for u.s. interests , u.s. analyst janusz bugajski argues that russia's strategic ambition is to be a eurasian regional if not global superpower , equal in status , if not power , to the united states and eu and dominant in power and status to most other nations .

the debilitation of euro - atlantic cooperation and the increase in influence over europe remain primary russian ambitions , in his view .

while russia has relied heavily on "soft power" ( diplomatic , economic , political , and informational ) tactics to advance its ambitions , it also endeavors to bolster its armed forces as an instrument to achieve its ambitions .

bugajski warns that such military pressure is "a serious threat to [russia's] weaker neighbors" and other western interests .

he urges "a realistic appraisal of russia's imperial [ambitions] and a thorough assessment of moscow's diverse capabilities," in order to develop countervailing defense policies .

seeming to support bugajski's concerns about russia's intentions , felganhauer argues that russian decision - makers continue to regard the united states and nato as the main threats to russia and that military reforms aim to counter these perceived threats .

he states ( as mentioned above ) that the creation of the aerospace defense forces in 2011 was dictated by views that the united states has the capability and intention to launch an "air - space attack" with cruise missiles and other means against russian leadership assets .

also , the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict convinced the russian leadership that conventional military capabilities needed improvement to counter u.s. and nato interference in possible future conflicts in georgia or elsewhere .

disagreeing with what he claims are the views of these decision - makers , he asserts that "it seems illogical" that russia is "spend[ing] hundreds of billions of rubles and turn[ing] aside resources from existing threats" — such as insurgency in the north caucasus and possible islamic extremist threats emanating from afghanistan — to develop capabilities against these supposed threats .

in actuality , he argues , the 2011 u.s. national military strategy indicates that "the pentagon ... is not interested in confronting russia," and that similar errant spending "bankrupted and destroyed the [soviet union]. .

perhaps representative of russian decision - makers' views mentioned by felganhauer , russian duma deputy and defense analyst aleksey arbatov asserts that cruise missiles and other conventional means being developed and fielded by the united states to decapitate enemy command and control as part of net - centric warfare could be used against russia .

mainly for this reason , arbatov claims , the state armaments program for 2011-2020 stresses the building of offensive and defensive means to counter u.s. net - centric warfare .

also to address this claimed threat , he calls for future u.s. - russia arms control talks to include conventional strike weapons and for a revival of the conventional arms control in europe treaty .

perhaps providing evidence of such leadership concerns , the shygys military exercise between russia and kazakhstan , held in late june 2011 , featured an attempt to intercept attacking enemy cruise missiles .

since the serdyukov reforms were launched in late 2008 , u.s. policymakers have provided varying assessments regarding their potential threat to u.s. interests .

in general , an ongoing policy of engagement with russia has been followed in recent years along with a hedging strategy against the emergence of a more aggressive russian military policy matched to capabilities .

in mid - 2008 , a bipartisan congressional strategic posture commission was formed as directed by the national defense authorization act for fy2008 ( h.r .

4986 ; p.l .

110-181 ) .

in its may 2009 report — issued early in the obama administration — it argued that the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , anti - western statements by russian officials , and other russian behaviors created "uncertainty about the future of russia's political relationships with the west and thus the security threat it poses. .

the commission observed that russia no longer threatens europe with a large land army and is not seeking nuclear supremacy , and that the overall risk of u.s. - russian military confrontation is greatly reduced .

however , it also warned that "these assessments might change for the worse at some future time , and the united states needs to hedge against that possibility... .

even as it works to engage russia and assure russia that it need not fear encirclement and containment , the united states needs to ensure that deterrence will be effective [and] continue to concern itself with stability in its strategic military relationship with russia. .

the commission claimed that "the sizing of u.s. forces remains overwhelmingly driven by russia .

this is ... because some of our allies see russia as a potential threat and also because it retains the ability to destroy the united states.... russia and the united states are certainly not enemies but neither are they allies... .

the two are strategic partners on some important international questions , but strategic competitors on others. .

to improve what were viewed as cooling u.s. - russia relations , the incoming obama administration launched what it termed a "reset" of bilateral ties in 2009 .

reflecting this "reset," the obama administration's national security strategy ( nss ) , released in may 2010 , asserts that the united states endeavors "to build a stable , substantive , multidimensional relationship with russia , based on mutual interests .

the united states has an interest in a strong , peaceful , and prosperous russia that respects international norms. .

the strategy calls for bilateral cooperation with russia — termed one of the 21 st century centers of influence in the world — in bolstering global nonproliferation ; confronting violent extremism , especially in afghanistan ; forging new trade and investment arrangements ; promoting the rule of law , accountable government , and universal values within russia ; and cooperating as a partner in europe and asia .

at the same time , the strategy stresses that the united states "will support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of russia's neighbors. .

similarly , the 2011 national military strategy , released by the joint chiefs of staff in february 2011 , stresses the national military objectives of countering violent extremism , deterring and defeating aggression , strengthening international and regional security , and shaping future military forces .

it may allude to russia in stating that "there are global and regional powers exhibiting nationalism and assertiveness that tests our partners' resilience and u.s .

leadership. .

specific references to russia call for increasing "dialogue and military - to - military relations with russia , building on our successful efforts in strategic arms reduction .

we seek to cooperate with russia on counter - terrorism , counter - proliferation , space , and ballistic missile defense , and welcome it playing a more active role in preserving security and stability in asia. .

in his 2011 threat assessment , director of national intelligence james clapper testified to congress on february 10 , 2011 , that serdyukov's defense reforms pose "both risks and opportunities for the united states and the west. .

he warned that "russian military programs are driven largely by moscow's perception that the united states and nato are russia's principal strategic challenges and greatest potential threat. .

in an apparent assessment of russia's performance during the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , he stated that the increase in russia's conventional military capabilities and "a strategy of asymmetric and rapid response raise the specter of a more aggressive russian reaction to crises perceived to impinge on moscow's vital interests. .

at the same time , he raised the possibility that "as the russian military continues its post - soviet recovery and moscow feels more comfortable asserting itself internationally , russian leaders may be more inclined to participate in international peacekeeping operations," an apparent opportunity for u.s. engagement with russia .

he appeared to de - emphasize russia's conventional military threat to europe when he stated that the country's "still - significant conventional military capabilities , oriented toward eastern europe , the caucasus , central asia , and the far east , are intended to defend russia's influence in these regions and serve as a 'safety belt' from where russian forces can stage a defense of russian territory. .

at the hearing , director clapper also stated that "russia's nuclear forces support deterrence and enhance moscow's geopolitical clout. .

he specified that russia still possesses "a very formidable nuclear arsenal [which] does pose ... potentially a mortal threat to us .

i don't think they have the intent to do that. .

he also stated that china's nuclear forces pose such a potentially mortal threat .

upon questioning about which country might have more of a potential intention to harm u.s. interests , he stated that since the united states has concluded new start with russia , "i would rank them a little lower [as a potential threat] because of that , and we don't have such a treaty with the chinese. .

however , he stressed that while the two countries "may potentially have the capability to strike a mortal blow to us .. .

i don't think either country today has the intent to mortally attack us. .

as part of the obama administration's "reset" in u.s. - russia relations , at the july 2009 u.s. - russia summit , the two sides agreed to the resumption of defense and military cooperation , which largely had been suspended since the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict .

admiral mullen and general makarov signed in moscow a military framework document for cooperation between the countries' armed forces in july 2009 .

under this framework , the united states has promoted cooperation in counter - terrorism , international peace - keeping , missile defense , search and rescue cooperation , crisis response exercises , and military education .

this includes eliciting russia's support for u.s. and isaf operations in afghanistan ( see below ) , to advocate democracy and respect for human rights within russian military , and also to assess russian military reforms and civil - military relations .

reportedly , 67 events , exchanges , exercises , and consultations between the armed forces are planned for 2011 .

bilateral military cooperation also has been evidenced by the signing of a memorandum of understanding on counter - terrorism cooperation in may 2011 by makarov and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , admiral mike mullen .

during minister serdyukov's visit to washington , dc , in september 2010 , he and then - secretary of defense gates signed an agreement establishing the defense relations working group to foster engagement between the russian ministry of defense and the defense department .

this working group meets annually at the ministerial level , while its eight sub - groups , which cover topics from logistics to strategy , meet more frequently and have permitted the two countries to compare policies and practices .

the public accounts of these meetings seem to indicate that russia seeks knowledge of best practices as part of its defense reform effort .

among russia's strategic cooperation with the united states , russia facilitates the trans - shipment of u.s. nonlethal and lethal military equipment through its land and air corridors in support of the northern distribution network to afghanistan , and has cooperated on other measures to enhance security in afghanistan , including through collaboration in the nato - russia council .

examination of the possible implications of russia's military reform efforts falls under the jurisdiction of several congressional committees dealing with foreign affairs and armed services , and has included hearings dealing with the annual threat assessment , as mentioned above .

in 2008-2009 , congress also formed a commission to examine and make recommendations with respect to the long - term strategic posture of the united states , as mentioned above , that as part of its deliberations also discussed the implications of russia's national security and defense policy and its military reform efforts .

other hearings and specific legislation have addressed concerns about russia's military operations in georgia and its continued military occupation of parts of georgia .

the latter concern also has included russia's continued unwanted military presence in moldova , and to the broader issue of russia's suspension of the conventional armed forces in europe treaty , as mentioned above .

other concerns addressed by congress have included the implications of the military reform plans on the sovereignty and security of other soviet successor states and on eastern european countries once occupied by soviet forces , many of which are now nato members and members of the osce .

congress will continue to pay close attention to russian policy statements of intentions and to the actual outcome of the military reforms over the next few years , and to assess them within the context of broader russian domestic and foreign policy and u.s. engagement with russia on international issues of u.s. national security interest .

