prior to the recent financial crisis , mortgage underwriting standards were relaxed to the point where many borrowers could only repay their loans if the favorable financial conditions that existed at the time of origination remained intact .

in other words , borrowers were able to obtain mortgage loans that relied upon interest rates not rising or the value of the underlying collateral ( house prices ) not declining .

when market conditions changed , however , many mortgage loans became delinquent and went into default .

the mortgage defaults often translated into large losses for both the borrowers and the financial industry .

"irrational exuberance," a term coined by then - federal reserve chairman alan greenspan , arguably captures the essence of the academic work of hyman minsky and has been used to illustrate the dynamics that contributed to the recent financial crisis .

according to minsky , when lenders grow excessively optimistic , they increase credit availability as if the ideal economic and financial market conditions will persist .

lender optimism during the height of a business cycle can translate into a substantial increase in debt accumulation or "leveraging" by the private sector .

moreover , leveraging in response to a particular asset market bubble can result in overinvestment into a particular sector ( such as housing ) as well as numerous financial portfolios lacking diversification outside of one broad asset class .

a "minsky moment" subsequently occurs when assets are unable to continue generating the level of revenues necessary to repay the loans that were used to purchase them .

in other words , the expected future value of the collateral used to secure the loan fails to increase and may even decline , and the borrower lacks the income stream or the ability to sell the asset to repay the outstanding loan balance .

recessions that occur after individuals have accumulated large levels of debt , therefore , are likely to be more severe than those characterized by lower debt levels .

an escalation of defaults is likely to occur after a proliferation of leveraged investments have gone sour , which debilitates the banking system and impedes any subsequent lending necessary to stimulate recovery .

rulemaking is now taking place to implement "ability to repay" and risk - retention standards as mandated by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) .

under the dodd - frank act , mortgage originators are required to make a good faith determination that a borrower has a reasonable ability to repay the loan regardless of the prevailing financial conditions .

in addition , parties involved in a securitization transaction must retain "skin - in - the - game" or a minimum percentage of the credit risk , which would further encourage greater due diligence given the sharing of any eventual losses .

hence , the ability to repay and risk - retention measures address some risky financial practices that arguably contributed to recent excessive mortgage debt accumulation and subsequent financial crisis .

the ability to repay and risk - retention standards would dampen any future periods of rapid mortgage debt accumulation by encouraging lenders to adopt qualification standards higher than those that existed prior to the financial crisis .

although some borrowers may qualify for loans when underwriting criteria are relaxed , which typically may occur at times when housing and macroeconomic conditions are more favorable for repayment , lenders may be reluctant to originate those that fail to comply with qualification standards that would reduce their exposures to legal risks .

hence , some creditworthy borrowers may be unable to obtain mortgage credit .

the 112 th congress is monitoring the rulemaking stemming from the dodd - frank act .

this report examines the developments associated with the implementation of mortgage lending reforms .

the report begins with a summary of proposed ability to repay and risk - retention standards .

next , the report describes risky underwriting and financing practices that occurred prior to the mortgage crisis , followed by a discussion of how access to mortgage credit might be affected .

this section provides an overview of the proposed rules having to do with the ability to repay and risk - retention standards .

regulatory reforms will require creditors to consider whether borrowers have the ability to repay loans , and loan originators will also have to adhere to stricter underwriting or borrower qualification standards if they choose to sell loans to securitizers .

ability to repay and risk - retention standards are designed to provide lenders and securitizers with legal protection when they refrain from lending practices that weaken overall financial stability as well as to protect borrowers from assuming mortgage obligations that are affordable only under certain circumstances .

the typical errors that occur in mortgage lending can be characterized using a standard statistical framework .

suppose a "type 1 error" occurs when borrowers who are likely to have repayment problems receive loans ; a "type 2 error" occurs when borrowers who are likely to repay their loans on time are denied credit .

in this context , extending credit to unqualified borrowers ( type 1 errors ) can translate into substantial costs to lenders and foster a rise in aggregate indebtedness that makes both borrowers and lenders vulnerable to a sudden weakening of economic conditions .

on the other hand , not extending credit to qualified borrowers ( type 2 errors ) may translate into forgone profit opportunities for lenders , although there would be no realized losses .

the consequences of making type 1 errors are considered worse for lenders ( and taxpayers , should numerous mortgage defaults result in federal interventions designed to stabilize financial markets ) than type 2 errors .

the consequences of type 2 errors , however , include less credit availability for qualified borrowers , which may impede overall economic recovery .

in short , the framework illustrates a trade - off that exists between curtailing risky lending practices and borrower access to mortgage credit .

various high - risk underwriting practices , such as collateral - dependent lending , low - or no - documentation loans , and failure to escrow for property taxes , were common prior to july 14 , 2008 .

borrowers were also qualified for adjustable rate mortgages ( arms ) based upon the initial interest rate , which does not take into consideration that the loan rate applicable at the time of origination could increase .

in addition , many mortgages were held in the portfolios of institutions that held little capital to buffer against a sudden multitude of defaults .

many participants involved in various stages of the securitized lending chain may have failed to perform the level of due diligence that could have revealed relaxed or inadequate underwriting standards .

the lending practices discussed in this section arguably are associated with an increase in type 1 errors prior to the financial crisis .

these practices or some variation thereof , which existed in prime and nonprime ( and subprime ) lending markets , allowed the balance sheets of many households and financial institutions to become highly leveraged with mortgage debt that could not be repaid under the economic and financial conditions that prevailed after loan origination .

the mortgage lending practices that occurred prior to the financial crisis resulted in excessive leveraging that many believe impedes the current economic recovery .

the qm rules would increase standards such that borrowers may experience fewer repayment problems after a sudden downturn in economic and financial conditions .

the qrm rules , which would require the sharing of any eventual losses associated with nonperforming mortgage loans , would encourage greater due diligence in the underwriting process .

the ability to repay and risk - retention measures , therefore , address the proliferation of risky financial practices that are associated with a rise in type 1 lending errors .

industry experts , however , fear that the qrm standards , which would provide an exemption from risk - retention requirements , might become widely adopted and translate into a sharp increase in type 2 lending errors .

comments on the proposed rules from mortgage industry representatives express a preference to hold loans that satisfy specific ( quantitative ) measures that can be documented at origination and are less likely to be contested in court or by a regulator .

furthermore , smaller community banks that typically serve as mortgage brokers and sell many of their mortgage originations may choose not to increase their required regulatory capital levels to retain non - qrms in their portfolios .

consequently , in light of the heighted legal risks , industry representatives also favor harmonization of both the qm and qrm rules into one definition , which may reduce possible incidents of inconsistent interpretations among participants in the securitization pipeline as well as the financial regulators .

the restrictions on points and fees along with the change in the definition of a high - cost mortgage loan would reduce the profitability of "risk - based" pricing or the practice of charging riskier borrowers more to offset their greater levels of default risk .

disadvantaged or weaker borrowers , therefore , would face additional difficulties obtaining mortgage credit .

first , the dodd - frank act amended the definition of a high - cost mortgage loan as well as the calculation of points and fees that apply to these loans .

a high - cost mortgage loan is defined as one that is greater than $20,000 and has points and fees that exceed 5% of the total loan amount for loans ( or exceeds $1000 for loans that are less than or equal to $20,000 ) .

second , the definition of points and fees would include all compensation paid to a loan originator ( i.e. , origination , underwriting , and broker's fees ) , prepayment penalties , and upfront mortgage insurance premiums in excess of the amount payable under fha provisions .

such definition changes increase the likelihood that some low - credit quality borrowers would not meet the qm or qrm standards or hit the trigger that makes high - cost mortgage loans less attractive to originate .

consequently , the proposed standards may result in legal protection provided to creditors when they originate loans to borrowers of lower - default risk as opposed to higher - risk borrowers .

legal protection , however , would arguably be more beneficial to creditors when lending to disadvantaged borrowers .

hence , while meeting the qrm standards may reduce the type 1 errors associated with allowing financially unqualified borrowers to accumulate large debt levels , the rejection of applicants able to repay non - qrms may rise .

the consequences of type 2 errors may include less credit availability for qualified borrowers , which can impede overall economic recovery .

type 2 errors or forgone lending opportunities are also likely to become more apparent during times when financial and macroeconomic conditions are more favorable toward loan repayment .

the ability to repay and risk - retention rules may lead to a shift of more mortgage credit risk from the financial markets to the federal government .

for example , the federal housing administration , which currently has a downpayment requirement of 3.5% , may become a more affordable option should higher downpayment requirements be adopted by the mortgage industry .

an increase in fha business would mean that the federal government would insure a larger share of mortgage originations in the united states .

on the other hand , while the gses , which securitize a significant share of u.s. mortgages , remain under conservatorship , the qrm downpayment requirements are unlikely to affect borrowers .

the qrm standards , therefore , may not necessarily translate into type 2 errors or significant reductions in credit availability as long as the federal government bears the default risk for low downpayment mortgage loans .

