corporate tax revenues have been declining for the last six decades .

this report discusses the three main factors for the decline .

first , the average effective corporate tax rate has decreased over time , mostly due to reductions in the statutory rate and changes affecting the tax treatment of investment and capital recovery ( depreciation ) .

second , an increasing fraction of business activity is being carried out by partnerships and s corporations , which are not subject to the corporate income tax .

this has led to an erosion of the corporate tax base .

and third , corporate sector profitability has fallen over time , leading to a further erosion of the corporate tax base .

as congress considers options for tax reform , background on the decline in corporate tax revenue could prove useful in preserving any tax reforms enacted , or structuring a reform to obtain a desired revenue effect , such as revenue neutrality or enhancement .

the house committee on ways and means and the senate committee on finance have held hearings on tax reform throughout the first session of the 112 th congress .

in his 2011 state of the union address the president called for corporate tax reform that did not add to the deficit .

generally , the corporate tax reform discussion has focused on reducing statutory rates and achieving revenue neutrality through broadening the tax base by eliminating various deductions , exemptions , and credits , among other things , such as shifting to a territorial tax system .

this report begins by documenting the decline in corporate tax revenue .

an analysis of the three main factors explaining this decline is then presented .

the data and calculations used in this report may be found in the appendix .

the analysis in this report focuses only on nonfinancial corporations for two reasons .

first , nonfinancial corporations are the firms primarily affected by investment - and depreciation - related tax changes since they account for the majority of physical capital investment .

second , the bulk of revenue that is generated from the corporate tax comes from taxing nonfinancial companies .

corporate tax revenues are low by historical standards .

in the post - world war ii era , corporate tax revenue as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) peaked in 1952 at 6.1% and generally declined since ( see figure 1 ) .

today , the corporate tax generates revenue equal to approximately 1.3% of gdp , although projections ( not shown here ) have the corporate tax raising revenue over 2.4% of gdp in several years as the economy recovers and temporary bonus depreciation provisions expire .

while corporate tax revenues have fallen , overall federal tax revenues have remained relatively stable , averaging around 17.7% of gdp since 1946 ( aside from business cycle fluctuations ) .

revenues generated from the individual tax have exhibited similar relative stability , averaging around 8.1% of economic output .

two other tax revenue sources , however , have not remained stable .

payroll tax revenue has increased from 1.4% of gdp in 1946 to 6.0% in 2010 , while at the same time excise tax revenue has decreased from 3.1% to 0.5% of gdp .

taken together , the corporate tax has also decreased in importance relative to other revenue sources .

at its post - wwii peak in 1952 , the corporate tax generated 32.1% of all federal tax revenue .

in that same year the individual tax accounted for 42.2% of federal revenue , and the payroll tax accounted for 9.7% of revenue .

today , the corporate tax accounts for 8.9% of federal tax revenue , whereas the individual and payroll taxes generate 41.5% and 40.0% , respectively , of federal revenue .

there are a number of possible explanations for the decline in corporate tax revenues .

the amount of revenue collected from any tax depends on the tax rate and the dollar size of what is being taxed , also known as the "tax base. .

if the corporate tax rate falls , all else equal , so too will revenue .

the same relationship holds between revenue and the corporate tax base .

a number of factors can impact the tax base , including the number of firms operating in the corporate form and corporate profitability .

so the decline in corporate tax revenues may be due to either a reduction in corporate tax rates , a reduction in the corporate tax base , or both .

the analysis presented below suggests that both factors have played a role in the decline in revenues generated by the corporate tax .

corporate tax revenues have been declining for the last six decades .

the analysis in this report points to three primary factors responsible for the decline .

first , the average effective corporate tax rate has decreased over time , mostly due to reductions in the statutory rate and changes affecting the tax treatment of investment and capital recovery ( depreciation ) .

second , an increasing fraction of business activity is being carried out by partnerships and s corporations rather than c corporations .

these pass - though business structures are not subject to the corporate income tax .

this has led to an erosion of the corporate tax base .

and third , corporate sector profitability has fallen over time , leading to a further erosion of the corporate tax base .

understanding why corporate tax revenues have fallen could be relevant as the tax reform debate continues .

generally , the corporate reform discussion has focused on reducing statutory rates and achieving revenue neutrality through broadening the tax base by eliminating various deductions , exemptions , and credits , among other things , such as shifting to a territorial tax system .

the fact that the effective tax rate is usually below the statutory tax rate ( see figure 2 ) suggests that a revenue - neutral reduction of the top statutory corporate tax rate may be possible .

how much rates could be reduced in a revenue - neutral manner , however , depends on how much room there is to broaden the base .

existing research indicates reducing the top corporate rate from 35% to 25% would require repeal of all corporate tax expenditures , changes to tax preferences available to noncorporate businesses , and other reforms to business taxation .

as the corporate rate is reduced , and tax reforms to the noncorporate sector are enacted , some business activity may return to the corporate sector , naturally broadening the base .

other business tax reforms may include changes to the taxation of american multinationals operating overseas .

to the degree that these reforms reduced profit shifting to low - tax countries , the domestic corporate tax base may expand .

this section provides a brief overview of the mathematics behind the calculation of the average effective tax rates .

table a - 1 presents the source of the data for each variable used in the calculation as well as a brief description .

superscripts used in the equation identify the level of government , f for federal and sl for state and local , and the subscript t is an index for the year .

the equation for the average effective tax corporate tax rate calculation ( aectr ) may be written as follows: where .

