the lacey act was enacted in 1900 to address game poaching and wildlife laundering , among other things .

the lacey act regulates the trade of wildlife and plants and creates penalties for a broad spectrum of violations .

violations addressed by the lacey act involve domestic and international illegal trade of plants and wildlife .

before the enactment of amendments in 2008 , the lacey act addressed these issues by making it unlawful for any person to: "import , export , transport , sell , receive , acquire , or purchase any fish or wildlife or plant taken , possessed , transported , or sold in violation of any law , treaty , or regulation of the united states or in violation of any indian tribal law" ; or to "import , export , transport , sell , receive , acquire , or purchase in interstate or foreign commerce any fish or wildlife taken , possessed , transported , or sold in violation of any law or regulation of any state , or in violation of any foreign law ; " and any plant taken , possessed , transported , or sold in violation of any state law or regulation .

in 2008 , the lacey act was amended to include nonindigenous plants and violations of foreign laws pertaining to certain conservation actions and other activities involving plants and plant products .

based in part on these amendments , the lacey act now makes it unlawful for any person to import , export , transport , sell , receive , acquire , or purchase in interstate or foreign commerce any plant taken , possessed , transported , or sold in violation of any law or regulation of any state , or any foreign law , that protects plants or that regulates taking or exporting plants and plant products in certain situations .

this includes plants taken , possessed , transported , or sold without the payment of appropriate royalties , taxes , or stumpage fees ; and plants exported in violation of state or foreign law .

further , in reference to plants , it is unlawful to import , export , transport , sell , receive , acquire , or purchase any plant or plant product taken , possessed , transported , or sold in violation of any law , treaty , or regulation of the united states or in violation of any indian tribal law .

in addition , the lacey act makes it unlawful to falsify or submit falsified documents related to any plant or plant product covered by the act , and to import certain plants and plant products without an import declaration .

the provisions related to fish , wildlife , and plants in reference to laws , treaties , and regulations of the united states and any indian tribal law were unchanged ( although the definition of plants was expanded to include nonindigenous plants ) .

the 2008 amendments to the lacey act ( 2008 amendments ) also expand the definition of a plant to include any plants ( including foreign plants ) , whereas before it referred only to plants indigenous to any state or associated commonwealths , territories , or possessions of the united states .

a plant is specifically defined as "any wild member of the plant kingdom , including roots , seeds , parts , or products thereof , and including trees from either natural or planted forest stands. .

there are certain exclusions to this definition of plants , including common cultivars ( except trees ) , common food crops , scientific specimens of plant genetic material to be used for laboratory or field research , and any plant that is to remain planted or be planted or replanted .

the 2008 amendments also require importers of all covered plants and plant products to submit an import declaration to u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) at the time of importation .

the law requires that the declaration contain certain information , such as identification of the species and genus of plants or plants used in a product , and country of origin of plants , among other things .

the declaration appears to apply to all plants and plant products , including those plants harvested or plant products made before the enactment of 2008 amendments .

the primary aims of the 2008 amendments were to reduce illegal logging and to increase the value of u.s. wood exports .

international illegal logging is a pervasive problem affecting several countries that produce , export , and import wood and wood products .

estimates of the extent of illegal logging vary and may not be completely accurate due to the clandestine nature of the activity .

some have estimated that 15% to 30% of the volume of all forestry is attributable to illegal logging .

in tropical countries , some estimate that between 50% and 90% of all logging is illegal .

illegal logging is a concern to many because of its economic implications as well as its environmental , social , and political impacts .

the economic value of global illegal logging is estimated to be between $50 billion and $100 billion of the global wood trade .

an analysis by the world bank estimates that illegal logging costs governments approximately $5 billion annually in lost royalties and an additional $10 billion in lost revenue .

some are concerned that high u.s. demand for tropical timber from countries in latin america and southeast asia may exacerbate illegal logging .

the united states is the world's largest wood products consumer and one of the top importers of tropical hardwoods .

for example , the united states is the largest importer of peruvian mahogany , which some estimate to be 80% illegally logged .

global illegal logging activities can devalue u.s. exports of timber .

illegally logged wood generally costs less to bring to market than legally logged wood due to nonpayment of fees or taxes , and avoidance of costs related to laws that govern harvesting .

this lowers the market price of wood , potentially harming timber operations that operate legally .

according to a 2004 report issued by the american forest and paper association , it is estimated that illegal logging of roundwood for wood products depresses world wood prices on average by 7% - 16% annually .

this affects u.s. producers of wood and their exports .

if there were no illegally logged wood in the global market , it has been projected that the value of u.s. exports of roundwood , sawnwood , and panels could increase by an average of approximately $460 million each year .

further , if increases in value for domestic wood production if illegal logging is halted are taken into account , then the increase in value of wood products in the united states each year could be approximately $1.0 billion , according to the study .

other countries and entities have adopted measures similar to the lacey act .

the european union ( eu ) , for example , has a regulation that prohibits the placement of illegally harvested timber and timber products on the eu market and requires entities to establish due diligence schemes .

australia passed a similar law that prohibits the import of wood or wood products that were illegally logged or contain illegally logged timber .

the requirements established in the lacey act are administered by the departments of the interior , commerce , and agriculture through their respective agencies .

these include the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , and animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) .

this report summarizes the implementation of the 2008 amendments to the lacey act and discusses policy issues related to the amendments .

a raid on gibson guitar corporation ( see box below ) brought to light several existing policy and legal issues related to the 2008 amendments to the lacey act .

in broad terms , some question why u.s. importers should be held responsible for violations of foreign law potentially committed by foreign entities ( i.e. , not u.s. importers ) .

they claim that it is difficult to monitor the harvesting and processing of plants and plant products in foreign countries to make sure that no foreign laws are being violated .

other concerns address specific provisions of the 2008 amendments such as the declaration requirements for plants and plant products imported into the united states .

several businesses have suggested that the declaration requirements for importing plants and plant products are cumbersome and in some cases , not possible to meet .

for example , some claim that identifying species for the declaration can be difficult for composite wood materials or some finished products where the wood has been modified from its natural state .

compliance with other requirements in the act is another issue .

some contend that plants and plant products imported before 2008 should be exempt from the law .

they note that getting declaration information about these products , sometimes years after importation , can be difficult .

to temper these criticisms of the 2008 amendments of the lacey act , some are reiterating the intended positive effects of the amendments , such as the potential economic benefits of reducing illegal logging and the potential environmental benefits of reducing deforestation and corruption associated with the illegal timber trade .

congressional interest in this issue stems in part from the wide - reaching applicability of the lacey act for u.s. industries and consumers and the environmental and economic benefits of reducing illegal logging .

the 2008 amendments to the lacey act affect all industries that import plant and plant products , including musical instrument makers , furniture manufacturers , flooring companies , toy manufacturers , the auto industry , and some textile manufacturers that use fabrics that contain plant fibers .

the 2008 amendments are expected to reduce illegal logging , which will reduce corrupt practices and increase biodiversity and conservation in timber - supplying countries , and increase revenues for foreign and domestic companies that sell and process wood .

the 113 th congress has addressed the 2008 amendments with proposed legislation .

h.r .

3324 would amend the lacey act so that importers would need to possess and make available certain information about the plant or plant products being imported .

currently , importers are required to file this information .

further , the bill would amend the rulemaking authority of the secretary to give more flexibility for specifying the applicability of declaration requirements .

h.r .

3280 would amend the lacey act to exempt plants and plant products imported before may 22 , 2008 , from the lacey act .

this section reviews the implementation of declaration requirements , enforcement , and funding under the 2008 amendments .

policy issues associated with implementation are discussed below in " issues and legislative options . .

several policy issues are associated with the 2008 amendments , ranging from questions about the overall purpose and function of the lacey act to issues about specific provisions in the act such as the declaration requirements .

several environmental , trade , and industry groups have formed coalitions to identify issues and suggest solutions .

some coalitions who primarily have issues with the declaration requirements have proposed solutions that they contend could be addressed by regulations .

others contend that the regulatory process has not worked and congressional action is needed .

this section discusses selected policy issues associated with the 2008 amendments and summarizes proposed and potential legislative and regulatory options .

some aspects of the 2008 lacey act amendments have been controversial , and several observers and stakeholders have suggested potential changes .

some contend that changes should be done through law ; others argue that changes should be done through regulations .

some contend that efforts to change the implementation of the lacey act through regulations have stalled and not produced results .

this is supported , in part , by the delay by aphis in producing a review report of implementing declaration requirements under the act .

based on this report , the secretary is authorized to make certain changes to the declaration requirements .

some take a broader look at the lacey act and contend that understanding and applying foreign laws to the processes of harvesting and producing plant and wildlife products is not feasible for the average person or corporation in the united states .

thus , some might consider removing violations of foreign laws from the lacey act .

proponents of making changes through regulations contend that amending the act could lead to additional changes in the law that are not contemplated or supported by various stakeholders .

they also contend that amending the law is subverting the intended process of making changes through regulations .

