although "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) has been a perennial policy issue , it was highlighted by the near - collapse of several large financial firms in 2008 .

bear stearns ( an investment bank ) , gmac ( a non - bank lender , later renamed ally financial ) , and aig ( an insurer ) avoided failure through government assistance .

lehman brothers ( an investment bank ) filed for bankruptcy after the government decided not to offer it financial assistance .

fannie mae and freddie mac ( government - sponsored enterprises ) entered government conservatorship and were kept solvent with government funds .

the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) arranged for wachovia ( a commercial bank ) and washington mutual ( a thrift ) to be acquired by other banks without government financial assistance .

citigroup and bank of america ( commercial banks ) were offered government guarantees on selected assets they owned .

in many of these cases , policymakers justified the use of government resources on the grounds that the firms were "systemically important," popularly called "too big to fail. .

tbtf is the concept that a firm's disorderly failure would cause widespread disruptions in financial markets that could not easily be contained .

although the government had no explicit policy to rescue tbtf firms , several were rescued on those grounds once the crisis struck .

tbtf subsequently became one of the systemic risk issues that policymakers grappled with in the wake of the recent crisis .

systemic risk mitigation , including eliminating the tbtf problem , was a major goal of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( hereinafter , the dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) , comprehensive financial regulatory reform enacted in 2010 .

different parts of this legislation jointly address the "too big to fail" problem through requirements for enhanced regulation for safety and soundness for "systemically important" ( also called "systemically significant" ) financial institutions ( sifis ) , limits on size and the types of activities a firm can engage in ( including proprietary trading and hedge fund sponsorship ) , and the creation of a new receivership regime for resolving failing non - banks that pose systemic risk .

in addition , basel iii , an international agreement , placed heightened requirements on the largest banks .

title iv of the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( p.l .

115-174 ) reduced the number of banks to which the dodd - frank act and basel iii provisions apply .

 ( there has not yet been legislation enacted to reform fannie mae and freddie mac , which remain in government receivership. ) .

some critics argue that the dodd - frank and basel iii policy reforms do not go far enough to solve the tbtf problem , and others argue they have had the perverse effect of exacerbating the tbtf problem .

ultimately , the failure of a large firm is the only test of whether the tbtf problem still exists .

this report discusses the economic issues raised by tbtf , broad policy options , and policy changes made by the relevant dodd - frank provisions , as amended .

this report organizes policy options for addressing tbtf into the following six broad categories: "bailouts" ; limiting firm size ; limiting scope of activities ; regulation ; minimizing spillovers ; and resolving a failing firm .

the dodd - frank act contained provisions in each of these categories , but its most significant changes were in the areas of regulation and resolution .

likewise , recent legislative proposals can be found in each of these areas .

policy options for tbtf can be categorized as preventive ( how to prevent tbtf firms from either emerging or posing systemic risk ) or reactive ( how to contain the fallout when a tbtf firm experiences a crisis ) .

a comprehensive policy is likely to incorporate more than one approach because different approaches are aimed at different parts of the problem .

a policy approach that would not solve the tbtf problem in isolation could be successful in conjunction with others .

some policy approaches are complementary — others could counteract each other .

when considering each policy option discussed in this section , an alternative perspective to consider is that problems at large firms during the crisis — such as overleveraging , a sudden loss of liquidity , concentrated or undiversified losses , and investor uncertainty caused by opacity — were not tbtf problems per se .

if , in fact , they were representative of problems that firms of all sizes were experiencing , policy should directly treat these problems in a systematic and uniform way for all firms , and not just for tbtf firms , in this view .

in other words , prudential regulation , a special resolution regime , and policies limiting spillover effects could be applied to all firms operating in a given area rather than just large firms , so arguments for and against these policy options do not apply only to their application to large firms .

if the causes of systemic risk are not tied to firm size or interconnectedness , then policies based on differential treatment of tbtf firms could result in systemic risk migrating to non - tbtf firms rather than being eliminated .

contagion stemming from problems at tbtf ( or too interconnected to fail ) firms is widely regarded to have been one of the primary sources of systemic risk during the acute phase of the recent financial crisis .

to avoid contagion , a series of ad hoc government interventions were undertaken that protected creditors and counterparties — and in a few cases , also managers and shareholders — of large and interconnected firms from losses .

economic theory predicts that these interventions exacerbated the moral hazard implications of tbtf , reducing the incentive for creditors and counterparties to safeguard against extreme outcomes , and increased the incentive to become larger and more interconnected going forward .

competing theories blame the lack of regulatory authority and failed regulation for the role of tbtf in the recent crisis .

the failures of both highly regulated banks and lightly regulated non - banks suggest that neither lack of regulation nor failed regulation were solely responsible for tbtf .

policy before the financial crisis could be characterized as an implicit market discipline approach with ambiguity about which firms policymakers considered to be tbtf and how the imminent failure of a systemically important firm might be addressed .

this ambiguity was defended on the grounds that it would result in less moral hazard than if tbtf firms were explicitly identified , since the ambiguity would promote market discipline .

as the crisis unfolded , policy quickly shifted to an expectation of government assistance , where bear stearns , fannie mae , freddie mac , and aig received direct government support and several emergency programs were instituted to ensure that other financial firms remained liquid and solvent .

not every large failing firm received assistance , however , with lehman brothers being the notable exception .

both before and during the crisis , policy could be characterized as ad hoc because arguably no general approach or principles were articulated that clearly signaled to firms or investors how a systemically important firm could expect to be treated in different scenarios .

some believe that this policy uncertainty made the crisis worse .

the rapid shift from market discipline to government assistance during the crisis undermines the future credibility of the pre - crisis policy approach .

if policymakers wanted to return to a market discipline approach , making that approach effective would arguably require statutory changes that "tie the hands" of policymakers to make assistance more difficult in the event of a future tbtf failure .

this could be accomplished by eliminating broad , open - ended authority that was invoked during the last crisis , such as section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act and the fdic's systemic risk exception to least cost resolution .

policymakers dispute whether dodd - frank act changes that narrow but preserve emergency authority have accomplished this goal .

a congress may not bind future congresses , however .

policymakers cannot be prevented from enacting future legislation allowing assistance , much as tarp was enacted expeditiously when the crisis worsened in september 2008 .

if investors do not believe that market discipline will be maintained because policymakers face short - term incentives to provide government assistance in times of crisis , then a "no bailouts" promise would not prevent moral hazard .

one view is that the genie cannot be put back in the bottle — market participants now believe that the government will provide assistance to tbtf firms based on the 2008 experience , in which case they face little incentive to monitor or respond to excessive risk - taking .

if so , the policy options to mitigate moral hazard are to regulate tbtf firms for safety and soundness or use government policy to reduce the systemic risk posed by tbtf firms .

in theory , a special regulatory regime for tbtf firms , such as the one created by the dodd - frank act , could set safety and soundness standards at a strict enough level to neutralize moral hazard effects .

the complexity and interconnectedness of large firms complicates their effective regulation , however .

moreover , a special regulatory regime for tbtf firms could backfire if regulatory capture occurs .

special regulation makes explicit which firms are tbtf , removing any ambiguity that might promote market discipline .

as market discipline wanes , the burden on regulators to mitigate moral hazard increases .

if regulators are unwilling or unable to apply regulatory standards strict enough to negate the benefits of being tbtf , then being subject to the special regulatory regime could give tbtf firms a competitive advantage over their industry rivals .

the experience of fannie mae and freddie mac points to the dangers of this approach .

those two firms were subject to their own regulatory regime prior to the crisis and were able to borrow at lower interest rates than other financial firms , presumably because of the implicit government guarantee of their obligations .

systemic risk stemming from tbtf can also be mitigated by reducing potential spillover and contagion effects .

examples of dodd - frank act provisions intended to reduce contagion effects include a special resolution regime for failing systemically important firms ( ola ) and placing limits on counterparty exposure to large firms .

events in 2008 , however , demonstrate the challenge in eliminating systemic risk posed by tbtf firms because it is unlikely that policymakers will correctly anticipate all of the channels of contagion in a crisis .

moreover , in determining whether to use government resources to limit losses to creditors , the receiver faces the same short - term incentives to spare creditors from losses that lead to moral hazard .

critics point to the open - ended assistance to fannie mae and freddie mac since 2008 as a cautionary tale , although this was through government conservatorship , rather than receivership .

some argue for eliminating tbtf directly by reducing the size or scope of the largest firms .

it is uncertain what size limit would eliminate tbtf — given that interconnectedness is a nebulous concept — and policymakers would only know if they had set the right size limit by observing what occurs after a firm fails .

weighed against the benefits of eliminating the tbtf problem by eliminating large firms , the benefits to the financial system that would be lost are also disputed .

in the case of reducing scope , some very large firms would remain , and they would be less diversified against risk .

fannie mae and freddie mac are examples of large , narrowly focused firms that many nonetheless viewed as tbtf .

a comprehensive policy is likely to incorporate more than one approach because different approaches are aimed at different parts of the problem .

some approaches focus on preventive measures ( keeping tbtf firms out of trouble ) , whereas others are reactive ( addressing what to do in the event of a tbtf failure ) .

some policy approaches are complementary — others could undermine each other .

a market discipline approach is arguably most likely to succeed if coupled with size limits — although size limits thwart market - based profit incentives and outcomes .

policies that involve identification of tbtf firms , such as a special regulatory regime , are less compatible with a market discipline approach .

efforts to minimize spillover effects could be more effective if the tbtf firms are regulated for safety and soundness , so that spillover effects can more easily be identified ahead of time .

policymakers have historically coped with the moral hazard associated with deposit insurance through a combination of safety and soundness regulation , a resolution regime , and limits on spillover effects ( eg , limits on counterparty exposure ) .

 ( market discipline's role is limited by deposit insurance , but it plays a role with uninsured depositors and other creditors. ) .

yet tbtf poses some additional challenges to the bank regulation model , such as the difficulties of imposing a strict least cost resolution requirement on a resolution regime and effectively regulating firms with complex and wide - ranging activities .

each of these policy approaches to coping with tbtf has strengths and weaknesses ; there is no silver - bullet solution to the problem because future policymakers face incentives to deviate from the approach to avoid crises , please interest groups , increase financial innovation and the availability of credit , and so on .

judging the relative merits of each policy approach depends in part on which approach future policymakers can best commit to and effectively carry out .

the dodd - frank act devised a strategy to end tbtf that , to varying degrees , incorporated each approach discussed in this report .

its attempts to limit the size and scope of firms were narrow and limited , however .

some take the fact that many of the largest financial firms have become larger since the crisis ( at least in dollar terms ) as a sign that the tbtf problem has not been solved .

the existence of very large firms is necessary but not sufficient evidence that a tbtf problem exists .

in principle , the tbtf problem can be eliminated even if large firms do not shrink , but it is difficult to verify success because ultimately , the only definitive test of whether the strategy succeeds is whether the failure of a large firm can be managed without a "bailout" and whether large firms stay healthy in a financial downturn — events that may not occur for years or even decades .

until then , perceptions of whether the tbtf problem still exists may develop ( and be observable in market data ) , which could subsequently be proven true or false .

although tbtf was one source of systemic risk in the recent crisis , it was not the only one .

arguably , tbtf did not "cause" the crisis — tbtf firms were as much victims as perpetrators of the housing bubble and the collapse of the mbs market — but it did exacerbate the crisis .

the dodd - frank act also attempted to address other sources of systemic risk .

although the broader issue of systemic risk is beyond the scope of this report , some policy options discussed in this report may be more effective at mitigating systemic risk if applied more broadly than to tbtf firms exclusively .

otherwise , some sources of systemic risk may migrate to firms not regulated for safety and soundness , without increasing the stability of the overall financial system .

if systemic risk mainly stems from certain activities , regardless of size , a policy focus on large institutions could risk creating a false sense of security .

risk is central to financial activity , so an optimal system is probably not one where large firms never fail .

an optimal system is one in which a large firm can fail without destabilizing the financial system .

the only system that can guarantee that large firms will not cause systemic risk is one without large firms , but a system without large firms may be less efficient and more prone to instability from other sources .

other approaches seek to limit systemic risk to acceptable levels .

creating a more stable financial system by mitigating the moral hazard associated with tbtf may result in credit becoming more expensive and less available in the short run , but the availability of credit could be less volatile over time .

at least partly offsetting the higher costs of capital for firms designated as systemically important would be relatively lower costs of capital for other firms .

some policymakers would consider a tradeoff of less credit for a more stable financial system to be a tradeoff worth taking , considering that the recent crisis resulted in the deepest and longest recession since the great depression .

arguably , part of the cause of the crisis was that credit became too readily available , at least in some sectors ( eg , the housing bubble ) .

title i of the dodd - frank act imposed a number of enhanced prudential regulatory requirements on bank holding companies and foreign banks operating in the united states with over $50 billion in assets , and non - banks designated as systemically important financial institutions ( described in the section above entitled " regulating tbtf " ) .

p.l .

115-174 raised these thresholds , primarily to $250 billion in assets , but also gave the fed the discretion to apply these requirements to banks in the $100 billion to $250 billion asset range on a case - by - case and bank - by - bank basis if necessary to promote financial stability or the bank's safety and soundness .

this discretionary authority is not provided for most of the requirements classified in table a - 1 as emergency powers .

the fed may also apply these provisions to foreign banks operating in the united states with over $100 billion in global assets , although some provisions are currently applied only to foreign banks with over $50 billion in u.s. assets .

table a - 1 divides these provisions into three broad categories: 1. requirements , implemented through rulemaking , that large institutions must adhere to on an ongoing basis ; 2. emergency powers that may be imposed only under certain conditions , such as if there is a finding that an institution poses a threat to financial stability ; and 3. assessments on large institutions to finance the administration of certain duties .

most of the ongoing requirements have already been implemented , whereas the emergency powers have never been invoked .

