the doe weatherization assistance program enables low - income families to permanently reduce their energy bills by making their households more energy efficient .

doe program guidelines specify that a variety of energy efficiency measures are eligible for support under the program .

the measures include insulation , space - heating equipment , energy - efficient windows , water heaters , and efficient air conditioners .

funding continuity has been elusive for this program .

over its history , wap program funding has followed an up - and - down pattern , framed by occasional funding spikes and proposals to eliminate program funding and operations .

under the obama administration , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act , p.l .

111-5 ) identified the program as one avenue to help address the recession and provided the program with a major one - time increase — $5 billion to weatherize an estimated 600,000 homes .

this objective aimed to help achieve the president's goal of weatherizing one million homes per year .

in addition to the funding increase , some amendments to the original authorizing law were enacted .

the amendments allowed more cost - effective measures to be installed in more homes .

one amendment raised the ceiling on cost per dwelling from $2,500 to $6,500 .

this part of the report reviews a selection of key studies that examined weatherization program management processes , performance , and economic ( energy and non - energy ) impacts .

performance assessments and evaluation studies are related activities within a family of research on performance measurement and program evaluation .

both activities support the government performance and results act ( gpra ) and the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) concerns for federal program management .

in general , a performance assessment employs anecdotal data that is collected over a shorter time - frame , with a focus on management responsibilities and budget processes .

in contrast , an evaluation study employs survey research methods to gather comprehensive data that is collected over a longer time - frame , with a focus on revealing the net impacts and cost - effectiveness of program operations .

three activities are underway to assess and evaluate doe's weatherization program: a doe ( deloitte ) strategic assessment , a doe ( apprise ) impact study for py2007 through py2008 , and a doe ( apprise ) impact evaluation for the recovery act period of py2009 through py2011 .

table 4 provides a brief overview of the goals and target dates for the three activities .

descriptions of the activities follow .

the omb inspector general has criticized doe for depending almost exclusively on "in - house" ornl staff to conduct evaluation studies .

the core issue is whether an "in - house" evaluation effort can be sufficiently objective or neutral in its conduct of research .

this issue is part of a quite spirited debate over federal program evaluation that goes far beyond the doe weatherization program .

a key assumption of the debate is that a separation of evaluation duties from program implementation duties would increase the "independence" of the evaluating organization .

in response to criticism regarding ornl , doe engaged a competitive process to retain an outside contractor to conduct the second national evaluation ( py2007-py2008 ) and the evaluation of the recovery act period ( py2009-py2011 ) .

as noted previously , the competition led to the selection of the apprise contracting firm .

a recent debate between professors charles metcalf and david reingold focused on the extent to which the use of "outside" contractors to conduct federal program evaluations can significantly improve research independence and objectivity .

in a separate study , professor jacob klerman continues the dialogue , adding further perspectives to the debate .

all three professors suggest ways to strengthen the independence of evaluations conducted with contractors .

charles metcalf speaks from experience as both a professor and an evaluation contractor .

he says the central issue for evaluation independence is control over research processes and reporting .

metcalf acknowledges that outside pressures can affect a contractor's objectivity .

in particular , he contends that client ( agency / program staff ) authority to accept or reject the evaluation findings and report — and to time its release — can give it significant control over evaluation content .

metcalf argues that the independence and objectivity of contractor evaluations are promoted by four main conditions: maturity of the contractor organization , contractor reputation and longevity , formal agency - contractor agreements , and research transparency .

first , he claims that , over the past 40 years , the methods and practices of federal program evaluation have matured to the point where major evaluation contractor organizations have become generally objective and independent: mathematica policy research ( mpr ) , and others such as abt associates , mdrc , and rand ... have established objectivity and independence as core values , and by and large have successfully defended these values in their conduct with funding organizations .

our track record establishes that government supported policy research can be and is independent , with proper safeguards .

second , metcalf claims that the ability of a contractor organization to establish a reputation for objectivity enables it to enjoy longevity .

in turn , this longevity helps the contractor to be independent from any single administration: if we define the client to be the current administration , the contractor and often the contract outlive the current client .

for contract research institutions that regard themselves as doing policy research for a sequence of clients with differing policy agendas , the institutions' reputation for objectivity ( as well as the quality of their work ) is their primary currency in maintaining their longevity .

third , metcalf argues that the agency's ability to influence content is largely constrained by the evaluation contract: for contract research , the researcher and his or her employing institution are collecting data and conducting research on an issue defined and paid for by a client .

in this environment , two questions must be answered: ( 1 ) who owns the research product ? .

and ( 2 ) who controls the content and the dissemination of the research product ? .

these questions are typically defined by the contract , and the rights no longer lie intrinsically with the institution nor , by extension , with the researchers it employs to conduct the research .

further , he claims that there is an increased tendency for researchers and clients to agree explicitly , in advance , on the research methodology and the scope of reports .

this process tends to protect the client ( agency ) from unexpected surprises , and protects the researcher ( contractor ) by allowing less "wiggle room" for the client to reinterpret results .

fourth , metcalf contends that research transparency is a key factor for contract evaluation independence .

in this regard , he draws a parallel to academic research: [t]he basic guardian of both quality and objectivity in the conventional world of scholarly research is the required openness to the examination of others .

if you don't adhere to this rule , your research is presumptively not credible .

metcalf argues that openness in the various phases of federal program evaluations is guaranteed by the government's competitive procurement process and by the freedom of information act ( foia ) .

in procurement , the agency makes the request for proposals ( rfp ) publicly available .

after the contract is awarded , the public can submit a foia request to obtain both the contract document ( including the statement of the work ) and the winning proposal: regardless of internal contract restrictions , the contractor has the implicit nonexclusive right to request its own report under the foia , and to release it freely without restriction .

thus , while the government owns the research products it purchases through contract , the foia protects the researcher's right to disseminate his or her results — and , indeed , the right of anyone else to disseminate the results .

metcalf further claims that , in practice , the right of evaluation contractors to disseminate research results through conference participation and publication parallels the rights of researchers in academic institutions .

also , in parallel to academic peer review , he notes that third parties often have a role in evaluations: first , we have already stressed the importance of the ultimate availability of research reports to the public , time delays notwithstanding .

second , most large - scale studies engage advisory panels and other forms of peer review at both the design and report stages .

thus , he observes that third party involvement is an integral aspect of transparency .

while acknowledging that threats to independence persist , metcalf contends that the contracting environment has had a positive effect on evaluation .

he concludes that the practice of using external evaluation contractors has shown an ability to enhance research credibility and independence .

professor reingold starts from the same assumptions as professor metcalf .

reingold says separation of the evaluation activity is assumed to establish evaluator independence which — along with quality research techniques — allows program evaluation to serve an accountability function: [u]nlike other services frequently contracted out by governmental and nongovernmental organizations , the rationale for contracting out program evaluation rests largely in its ability to establish independence by creating a clear division of labor between those conducting evaluations and those responsible for managing programs being evaluated .

he elaborates further that the process for selecting a contractor is vital to independence: [t]he perception of independence is typically established via the selection process used to identify and hire the person or organization responsible for designing and implementing the evaluation .

for many organizations that purchase evaluation services , independence is established by selecting someone who is external to the organization or program being evaluated and who is free from financial self - interest or ideology that may bias the evaluation to produce a desired outcome , and where the evaluator has control ( or ownership ) over the evaluation design and its intellectual property ( data and findings ) .

reingold argues that all of the "safeguards" to independence that metcalf identified are overwhelmed by three main factors: ( 1 ) agency funding control gives it influence over evaluation content , ( 2 ) contractor organizations have financial self - interests in accommodating agency wishes , and ( 3 ) their mutual self - interests undermine the competitiveness of the selection process .

first , reingold argues that an agency's control over evaluation funding allows it to retain a strong influence over evaluation content: [w]hen purchasing evaluation services via contracts , the purchasing agency has total control over all aspects of the services to be provided ... [thus] ... [i]t is inconsistent to argue that contracted program evaluation can be independent when the agency purchasing the evaluation owns ( or controls ) the research question and design , the method of data collection , the strategy of analysis , the data , the final report , and the rules governing the dissemination of results .

second , reingold contends that contractor organizations have a financial self - interest in accommodating agency wishes: [e]valuation contractors view their relationships with those responsible for running programs and funding evaluations as clients where satisfaction with the deliverable will influence the likelihood of securing additional business in the form of more evaluation contracts .

in other words , he argues , independence can be lost when experts that are expected to produce independent facts also have a substantial incentive to acquiesce to a client's interests .

third , reingold claims that self - interests may begin to erode the contractor selection process , which underpins the independence sought by separating evaluation activity from program management: when program staff are allowed to strongly influence the selection of a firm to conduct an evaluation of their program , they frequently select firms that will "work with them" to produce a "helpful" evaluation .

this is code for selecting a firm that will tailor and implement an evaluation design that will likely provide positive findings for the program under study .

over time , this threat to independence can deepen .

ultimately , he says , the complementary self - interests of agency and contractor may undermine the competitive foundation of the selection process: when a firm has established itself as a reliable partner that will cooperate with the demands of a particular client , the selection process has virtually eliminated any real competition that would allow for a truly independent evaluation .

in sum , reingold argues that threats to independence and objectivity can enter from both sides — a program's interest in self - protective control and a contractor's interest in preserving a business relationship .

he concludes that: unfortunately , there are signs this arrangement [the effort to achieve greater independence through external contracting] is not working .

to address the problem , reingold suggests two policy options to improve the independence of evaluation contracting .

one option is to substitute grants for contracts , as the grants confer greater independence to the recipient .

however , grants typically allow less oversight than contacts , which means that quality could suffer .

another option is to expand third party involvement .

this option is described in the last section of the report .

since the metcalf - reingold debate , there has continued to be a focus on means to reduce threats to evaluation independence .

for example , professor jacob klerman echoes some points from both metcalf and reingold in describing his view of the challenges to contractor evaluation independence .

klerman stresses two key threats to independence: the mutually reinforcing self - interests of funder and contractor and the self - interests of third parties .

also , he offers two ways to improve independence by modifying formal contract agreements .

first , klerman characterizes the main threat to independence as an "inherent tension" between funder and contractor .

beyond stated goals for quality and objectivity , he claims that both parties bring "unstated goals" involving pre - set policy opinions and organizational survival interests that can color an evaluation project's process and findings .

he echoes reingold's argument that self - interests pose a key threat to independence: [e]valuation is sometimes politics ( or business ) by other means .

for the funder , showing that the current administration's programs "work" ( and those of the previous administration did not "work" ) yields political benefits .

sometimes the concerns are quite direct .

a negative evaluation result might cause shrinking of a program , loss of budget for the funder's organization , in the extreme even loss of jobs for the funder's lead evaluation staff .

for the contractor , this is a business .

the "right answer" — that is , the answer that the funder "wants to hear" — now is likely to lead to more evaluation business in the future ; the "wrong answer" now is likely to lead to less evaluation business in the future .

second , klerman proposes that when seeking a balance point between funder and contractor over evaluation content , one option is to involve a third party .

however , "[e]ven nominating some third party leaves open the question of the third party's policy and organizational goals. .

from his perspective , all three parties to an evaluation — funder , contractor , and third party — are propelled by self - interests that pose threats to independence .

however , klerman raises the question of whether there may be an "appropriate balance" of these interests that could actually reinforce independence .

in conclusion , klerman — like metcalf — claims that independence may be improved by augmenting , or otherwise improving , formal contract agreements .

he describes one strategy for improvement: the challenge is to devise contractual mechanisms that assure satisfaction of the stated goal — a high - quality and independent evaluation .

ideally , a contract would give the funder enough authority to handle standard contractual issues while preventing either side from deviating from the stated goals to further policy or organizational goals .

as a starting point for this strategy , klerman suggests that a clear separation be established between an official evaluation report and a contractor's own publication of analysis from the underlying evaluation .

he recommends that: the funder would retain almost unfettered rights to the official contract report .

those rights would include the right never to officially release the document but not the right to change the contractor's text while continuing to list the contractor and its individual staff members as authors .

the contractor would retain clearly defined rights to publish any findings from the evaluation .

klerman's main strategy for improving independence encompasses 19 approaches to modify evaluation contracts , which are grouped into three categories: ( 1 ) approaches applied when a funder retains the right to specify the final report text , specify the report release , and control discussion of the process ; ( 2 ) approaches that limit the funder's right to specify the final text , and ( 3 ) approaches that limit the funder's right to specify report release .

table 5 summarizes the main points of the metcalf - reingold debate , including the points contributed by klerman .

agencies of other national governments are also concerned about program evaluation independence .

an example is the united kingdom's department for international development ( dfid ) .

an assessment of dfid's evaluation function addressed many of the same issues of control over the research process and findings that were the focus of the metcalf - reingold debate .

the study observed that independence is important , a critical aspect of evaluation credibility and reliability: to be sure , independence on its own does not guarantee quality ( relevant skills , sound methods , adequate resources and transparency are also required ) but there is no necessary trade - off between independence , quality or credibility .

indeed , evaluation quality without independence does not assure credibility .

furthermore , in open and accountable working environments , evaluation independence induces credibility , protects the learning process and induces program managers and stakeholders to focus on results .

thus , evaluation independence , quality and credibility are complementary characteristics that together contribute to evaluation excellence .

the dfid assessment of evaluation function suggests that the quest for independence — if taken too far — could lead to dysfunction .

the report suggests that there may be limits to evaluation independence: optimum independence is not maximum independence .

accurate and fair evaluations combine intellectual detachment with empathy and understanding .

the ability to engage with diverse stakeholders and secure their trust while maintaining the integrity of the evaluation process is the acid test of evaluation professionalism .

this is why diminishing returns set in when evaluation independence assumes extreme forms of disengagement and distance .

independence combined with disengagement increases information asymmetry , ruptures contacts with decision makers and restricts access to relevant sources of information .

it leads to isolation , a lack of leverage over operational decision making and a chilling effect on learning .

thus , the basic challenge of evaluation governance design consists in sustaining full independence without incurring isolation .

that finding appears to be a more elaborate expression of a key conclusion that klerman makes in regard to achieving an "appropriate balance" of the three potential parties to a contract evaluation: [n]o single party — not the funder , not the contractor , and not some third parties — will always be without bias .

different approaches shift the relative power of the three groups .

furthermore , different approaches have different costs — in dollars , in the formality of the funder – contractor relationship , and in time to complete the study .

the appropriate balance will vary with the particular situation , and , in particular , with the prevalence of problematic behaviors on all sides — funder , contractor , and third parties .

as noted previously , klerman proposes several means to modify the client - contractor relationship to address the inherent tension and reduce — but not eliminate — the threats to objectivity and independence .

doe is aware of the concern about contractor independence for impact evaluations .

it has published guidance for program staff that addresses the issue: evaluation should be conducted by outside independent experts .

this means that , even if staff commission a study ( fund an evaluation contractor ) that contractor should have some degree of independence from the program office that is being evaluated .

also , the contractor should have no real or perceived conflict of interest .

although the program staff person may work with the contractor during the consultation phase to clarify information needs and discuss potential evaluation criteria and questions , the staff should establish some line of separation from the contractor for much of the remainder of the evaluation study — i.e. , put up a firewall after the initial consultation period is concluded .

also , in order to address remaining concerns about outside contractor independence , doe guidance further recommends the establishment of a third party group of experts to critique the contractor's work: it is further highly recommended that a panel of external evaluation experts who are not part of the contractor's team be assembled to serve as reviewers of the contractor's work .

this would include the evaluation plan , and the draft and final reports .

having the work of the contractor's team itself evaluated helps ensure the evaluation methodology is sound and the study is carried out efficiently .

it also sets up a second firewall that raises the credibility of the study to even a higher level ( important for those who remain skeptical of evaluation studies commissioned by the program being evaluated ) .

doe has addressed the first point of the independence debate .

it separated the evaluation activity from the program activity by choosing outside contractors to perform a strategic assessment and two major evaluation studies .

additional comments and questions may focus on the other three points of the independence debate: •    contractor selection .

all three debaters stressed that the selection process is critical to evaluation independence .

was the selection of deloitte and apprise competitive ? .

what objective indicators should be used to gauge the competitiveness of the selection process ? .

is there an optimum degree of selection process competitiveness ? .

•    transparency .

metcalf argued that transparency helps guarantee evaluation independence .

will this dimension be fulfilled by the public release of the three final reports ? .

otherwise , what objective indicators should be used to gauge transparency for each evaluation ? .

is there an optimum degree of transparency ? .

•    third party involvement .

klerman described the possibility of an "appropriate balance" that included a third party .

related to the ongoing evaluation of the recovery act period ( 2009-2011 ) , the doe ig issued a progress report and gao has contributed a major performance audit .

is that sufficient third party involvement ? .

otherwise , what objective indicators should be used to gauge the sufficiency of third party involvement for each evaluation ? .

is there an optimum degree of third party involvement ? .

the debate between metcalf and reingold produced some other ideas for establishing independence of the evaluation function .

one notable strategy suggests using other ( third party ) organizations to play a more central role in managing the program evaluation process .

reingold suggests: ideally , congress , the gao , and perhaps the national academy of sciences [national research council] could play a more active role in screening and selecting evaluation plans and firms .

three variations on this strategy , in increasing order of dependence on the outside agency are: ( 1 ) have the doe office of the inspector general ( doe ig ) or gao or congressional budget office ( cbo ) ensure that the third party contractor evaluation work is performed in an independent manner .

 ( 2 ) move the contractor ( evaluator ) selection process from the agency to the office of the inspector general , gao , cbo , or the national research council ( nrc ) .

 ( 3 ) transfer full responsibility for conduct of the evaluation to the doe ig , gao , cbo , or nrc .

appendix a. doe weatherization program: historical data appendix b. doe weatherization funding chart figure b - 1 , below , shows the entire history of annual requests and appropriations for the doe weatherization assistance program ( wap ) .

requested amounts for fy1977 , fy1978 , and fy1979 were not available .

a final fy2012 appropriation figure had not yet been determined at the time this report was prepared .

