on september 22 , 2011 , a group of members from the house and the senate introduced the regulatory accountability act of 2011 ( raa , h.r .

3010 and s. 1606 ) .

the house passed h.r .

3010 on december 2 , 2011 , by a vote of 253-167 .

if enacted , the raa would make broad changes to the federal rulemaking process .

federal agencies currently issue regulations in accordance with requirements in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , as well as other statutes and executive orders that apply to rulemaking .

the raa would make the most significant legislative changes to the apa since its enactment in 1946 .

the raa would modify and enact into law numerous new general procedures for rulemaking that appear in narrower form in existing law , executive orders , and office of management and budget ( omb ) documents .

on one hand , the raa has been praised by industry and trade associations as legislation that would "update the 65 year old regulatory process" by making "the regulatory process more transparent , agencies more accountable , and regulations more cost effective. .

on the other hand , the raa has been criticized by government watchdog and environmental groups , such as omb watch , as legislation that would result in a "radical overhaul" of the rulemaking process , compromising "public health , worker safety , and environmental quality goals. .

the white house has issued a statement of administration policy ( sap ) on h.r .

3010 , which announced that the president's "senior advisors would recommend that he veto the bill. .

the sap states that "the [raa] would impose unprecedented procedural requirements on agencies that would prevent them from performing their statutory responsibilities. .

the sap also asserts that the raa's new procedures are "unnecessary" and would "invite frivolous litigation. .

a comparison of the raa to requirements in existing law , executive orders , and omb documents indicates that although the raa has many characteristics in common with existing statutes and executive orders , it would add many requirements to the rulemaking process .

for example , the raa would allow for judicial review of considerations for which it is not presently available .

the raa would impose new requirements on independent regulatory agencies , such as consultation with the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) and cost - benefit analysis .

the raa would extend many rulemaking requirements in executive order 12866 that currently only apply to "significant" rules , such as oira review and cost - benefit analysis , to all rules .

the raa would require agencies to provide specific information on statutory and legal considerations , costs and benefits , and alternatives to rules .

the raa would change the procedures for the issuance of agency guidance and require agencies to identify costs and benefits for major or "novel legal or policy issue" guidance .

additionally , the raa would require the publication of advance notices of proposed rulemaking for "major" rules , "high - impact" rules , and rules involving "novel legal or policy issue[s] arising out of statutory mandates" and add a mandatory 90-day waiting period before publication of a notice of proposed rulemaking for such rules .

the bill would set minimum time periods for notice and comment of 120 days for major and high - impact rules , and 60 days for other rules .

potential effects the raa may have on the rulemaking process include an increased level of influence for oira and , by extension , the president ; the potential for rulemaking to take longer than it currently does , particularly for major , high - impact , and novel legal or policy issue rules ; a re - establishment of the standards for the selection of regulatory options that is based on minimizing costs rather than maximizing net benefits ; the potential need for additional agency resources ; a potential increase in agency use of adjudication ; and the potential for increased and / or lengthier litigation .

these issues are discussed below in the " potential issues for congress " section of the report .

the house and senate versions of the raa contain some minor structural differences , as well as major substantive differences in the judicial review provisions with regard to major and high - impact rules and judicial review of an agency's consideration of costs or benefits .

additionally , the house version of the raa adds requirements for rules involving "novel legal or policy issue[s] arising out of statutory mandates," and the senate version does not contain additional requirements for such rules .

under the version of the raa that passed the house , there would be a more explicit requirement that agencies consider "an estimate of the net gain or loss in domestic jobs. .

the version of the bill discussed in this report is the version that was passed by the house on december 2 , 2011 .

this report begins by providing a brief overview of the major requirements of the rulemaking process currently found in statutes , executive orders , and omb documents , many of which would be changed or enacted into law by the proposed raa .

the report then discusses the raa's proposed changes to these existing rulemaking requirements , providing a side - by - side comparison of the requirements of the raa to these existing provisions .

the " potential issues for congress " section provides some general conclusions and analysis , and it discusses some of the potential implications of the proposed bill .

appendix a lists each provision of the raa in order , alongside any current related requirements .

finally , appendix b lists the acronyms used in the report .

the most significant piece of rulemaking legislation from the past century was the administrative procedure act of 1946 .

the apa established standards for the issuance of rules using formal rulemaking and informal rulemaking procedures .

informal rulemaking , also known as "notice and comment" rulemaking or "section 553" rulemaking , is the most common type of rulemaking .

for informal rulemaking under the apa , agencies are required to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) in the federal register , take comments on the nprm , publish a final rule in the federal register , and provide for a 30-day waiting period before the rule can become effective .

the apa specifically authorizes federal agencies to dispense with its requirements for notice and comment if the agency for good cause finds that the use of traditional procedures would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. .

the apa also provides a good cause exception for the 30-day waiting period between the publication of a final rule and its effective date .

while the notice - and - comment procedures in the apa provide the general structure of the rulemaking process , a number of other requirements have been added to the process in the decades since the apa .

the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) established a process under which agencies have to consider the paperwork burden associated with regulatory and other actions .

the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) requires regulatory impact analyses for rules that will have a "significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities" and establishes other requirements .

title ii of the unfunded mandates reform act ( umra ) added requirements for agencies to analyze and reduce costs associated with federal mandates upon state , local , and tribal governments and the private sector .

the congressional review act ( cra ) established a mechanism through which congress could overturn federal regulations and required that agencies submit their rules to both houses of congress and the government accountability office ( gao ) before the rules can take effect .

the information quality act ( iqa ) required omb to create guidance for agencies "for ensuring and maximizing the quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity of information" disseminated by agencies and required agencies to establish their own guidelines on information quality .

in addition to the current statutory requirements for the rulemaking process , presidents also have issued executive orders and omb has produced documents providing requirements and guidelines for agencies to follow when issuing rules .

executive order 12866 , issued by president clinton in 1993 , calls for oira to review "significant" regulatory actions at both the proposed and final rule stage .

furthermore , agencies are required to assess potential costs and benefits for "significant" rules , and , for those deemed as "economically significant" regulatory actions , agencies are required to perform a cost - benefit analysis and assess the costs and benefits of "reasonably feasible alternatives" to the planned rule .

under e.o .

12866 , agencies generally must "propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits" of the rule "justify its costs. .

to provide guidance to agencies on what to include and consider in their cost - benefit analyses of rules , omb issued omb circular a - 4 , a document that describes "best practices" of agencies' economic analyses .

omb , under president george w. bush , also provided guidelines for agencies to follow when issuing guidance documents .

the combination of statutory requirements , executive orders , and omb directives comprises the bulk of the current , generally applicable requirements agencies must follow when issuing regulations .

the raa would change or enact into law a number of the requirements mentioned here .

additionally , particular agency statutes may add requirements specific to that agency , and there is a substantial body of case law interpreting existing rulemaking requirements that would be affected by the raa .

the remainder of this report will examine the main provisions of the bill and compare the changes the bill proposes with the current , generally applicable requirements and case law , where appropriate .

this report examines each section of the bill in the order that they are included in the bill .

when possible , numbers and letters are included in each section of the report to help clarify what part of the bill coincides with each section of the report .

the raa contains a number of definitions , some of which do not currently exist in statute .

these definitions are significant since they may trigger various requirements in the rulemaking process , as it would be amended by the raa's proposals , if enacted .

if enacted , the raa would require agencies to follow several new steps in the preliminary stages of the rulemaking process ( including determinations with regard to legal authorities and statutory considerations ) , perform various cost - benefit analyses , and examine regulatory alternatives .

it would also add other requirements , such as hearings for high - impact rules and a requirement for oira to issue guidelines for agency compliance with rulemaking procedures .

the following sections discuss the requirements in section 3 of the raa , which would essentially replace the typical "notice - and - comment" rulemaking procedures under the apa .

the raa would explicitly incorporate guidance documents into the apa and also create specific statutory requirements that "major guidance" and guidance "involving a novel legal or policy issue arising out of statutory mandates" would be required to follow prior to issuance , including the identification of costs and benefits and a consultation with the oira administrator .

the following sections discuss the requirements in section 4 of the raa .

if enacted , the raa would institute various changes in the hearing process to allow for greater public access to transcripts and requests filed in a hearing proceeding , to incorporate information that is part of the rulemaking proceedings into the record for iqa hearings and high - impact rule hearings , and exempt rules on monetary policy from the bill's provision on petitions for hearings for rules .

the following sections discuss the requirements in section 5 of the raa .

as a general matter , there is a "strong presumption that congress intends judicial review of administrative action. .

the apa provides that "final agency action for which there is no other adequate remedy in a court [is] subject to judicial review. .

as mentioned above , with regard to judicial review under the iqa , the iqa's statutory language does not explicitly provide for judicial review and courts have examined the issue in cases brought under the iqa or apa .

h.r .

3010 and s. 1606 differ significantly in their modifications to the apa's provision on judicial review of agency actions .

h.r .

3010 would keep the current apa provision on actions reviewable under the apa's judicial review provisions , and add a new provision on what constitutes a "final agency action" with regard to the iqa .

h.r .

3010 would provide that the following agency actions are "final agency actions" subject to judicial review: ( 1 ) denials of correction requests , ( 2 ) denials of appeals under an administrative mechanism that each agency is required to establish pursuant to the iqa , and ( 3 ) an agency's failure to grant or deny a request or appeal within 90 days .

s. 1606 does not contain this provision on what constitutes a "final agency action" with regard to the iqa .

h.r .

3010 and s. 1606 also would provide for immediate judicial review of interim rules published by the agency "without compliance with" h.r .

3010 's requirements for anprms , nprms , hearings for high - impact rules , or requirements to render final determinations in the agency's final rule .

h.r .

3010 and s. 1606 's provision of judicial review essentially allows a person with standing to challenge the agency's finding of good cause ( that compliance with such procedures is "impracticable or contrary to the public interest" ) for "abuse of discretion," which is one of the apa's scope of review provisions .

h.r .

3010 and s. 1606 codify judicial review of such agency good cause determinations in both the " ( g ) exceptions from notice and hearing requirements " discussed above , and in the apa's judicial review provisions .

under h.r .

3010 and s. 1606 , agency determinations of good cause made in the issuance of an interim rule that are based on "interests of national security" are not judicially reviewable .

s. 1606 would prohibit judicial review of compliance with certain sections of s. 1606 for rules other than major or high impact rules under what would be the new 5 u.s.c .

section 706 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) .

this provision addresses the scope of review under which a reviewing court must "hold unlawful and set aside agency action , findings , and conclusions found to be — ( a ) arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with the law. .

s. 1606 would prohibit judicial review for rules other than major and high - impact rules for compliance with provisions on rulemaking considerations of the potential costs and benefits associated with potential alternative rules , "the means to increase the cost - effectiveness of any federal response," and "incentives for innovation , consistency , predictability , lower costs of enforcement and compliance ( to government entities , regulated entities , and the public ) , and flexibility. .

s. 1606 also would prohibit judicial review for rules other than major and high - impact rules for compliance with provisions that a "reasoned preliminary determination that the benefits of the proposed rule meet the relevant statutory objectives and justify the costs of the proposed rule" and "a discussion of the alternatives to the proposed rule," "the costs and benefits of those alternatives," "whether those alternatives meet relevant statutory objectives," and "why the agency did not propose any of those alternatives," should be included in an nprm .

additionally , s. 1606 would prohibit judicial review for rules other than major or high - impact rules of an agency's adoption of the least costly rule and the agency's reasoned final determinations , including that the rule's benefits "meet the relevant statutory objectives and justify the rule's costs," and that "no alternative considered achieved the relevant statutory objectives with lower costs. .

however , s. 1606 explicitly provides for judicial review of determinations of whether a rule is a not a high - impact rule or a major rule "within the meaning of 551 ( 19 ) ( a ) ," which is a rule that the oira administrator "determines is likely to impose — ( a ) an annual cost on the economy of $100,000,000 or more , adjusted annually for inflation. .

the apa currently contains no definition for "substantial evidence. .

the supreme court has "defined substantial evidence as 'such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.' .

the raa would use similar language in its definition of "substantial evidence," which , under the raa , would mean "such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of the record considered as a whole , taking into account whatever in the record fairly detracts from the weight of the evidence relied upon by the agency to support its decision. .

the raa would add its definition of "substantial evidence" in chapter 7 of title 5 , united states code , which delineates apa standards for judicial review .

the raa's definition would impact 5 u.s.c .

section 706 , scope of review , which states: to the extent necessary to decision and when presented , the reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law , interpret constitutional and statutory provisions , and determine the meaning or applicability of the terms of an agency action .

the reviewing court shall — … ( 2 ) hold unlawful and set aside agency action , findings , and conclusions found to be — ( e ) unsupported by substantial evidence in a case subject to [5 u.s.c .

§§556 and 557] or otherwise reviewed on the record of an agency hearing provided by statute ; … in making the foregoing determinations , the court shall review the whole record or those parts of it cited by a party , and due account shall be taken of the rule of prejudicial error .

the raa's definition of substantial evidence would be used to evaluate adjudications and formal rulemakings conducted under 5 u.s.c .

sections 556 and 557 .

under one reading of the raa's amendments , a court also may review a high - impact rule hearing if such hearing is considered to be "an agency hearing provided by statute. .

the raa would restrict its application to pending or completed rulemakings .

the following raa amendments would not apply to pending or completed rulemakings on the date of the raa's enactment: the raa's amendments to the informal and formal rulemaking sections of the apa ; the raa's definition of "substantial evidence" ; the raa's new provisions that a court shall not defer to an agency's cost / benefit determinations and economic and risk assessments if the agency failed to conform to oira - established guidelines and that a court shall not defer to agency determinations made in the adoption of an interim rule ; the raa's addition of court reviews ( for abuse of discretion ) of agency denials of petitions during high - impact rule hearings "by an interested person who has participated in the rulemaking" related to "other issues relevant to the rulemaking," due to an agency "determin[ation] that consideration of the issues at the hearing would not advance consideration of the rule or would , in light of the nature of the need for agency action , unreasonably delay completion of the rulemaking" ; and the raa's addition of court reviews ( for abuse of discretion ) of agency denials of petitions for hearings under the apa's formal rulemaking provisions , 5 u.s.c .

sections 556 and 557 .

this section first provides a list of the most significant changes to the apa that the raa would make .

this section then discusses some potential broad implications of the raa's changes to the rulemaking process .

 appendix a lists the provisions of the raa and provides a side - by - side comparison of those provisions with provisions from relevant statutes , executive orders , and omb documents .

generally , the provisions of the table are listed in the order that they are included in the house version of the raa .

unless otherwise specified in the table or indicated by quotation marks , the text is pulled directly from the sources mentioned .

some components of the raa , such as those that define certain government entities ( i.e. , oira ) and those that define certain statutes ( i.e. , the iqa ) are excluded from the table .

in addition , the statutes included in the table are those that have broadly applicable , cross - cutting rulemaking requirements .

rulemaking statutes that apply to specific agencies are excluded .

similarly , when the table indicates that no broad requirement exists , there may be specific requirements for particular agencies in other statutes .

appendix a .

comparison of current rulemaking requirements and the proposed regulatory accountability act of 2011 appendix b .

list of abbreviations used in this repor .

