the federal government has a number of policy tools available to encourage the development and deployment of innovative clean energy technologies ( see text box below ) .

some of these policy tools include ( 1 ) clean energy mandates , ( 2 ) carbon taxes , ( 3 ) carbon cap and trade , ( 4 ) environmental regulations , ( 5 ) loan guarantees , ( 6 ) grants , and ( 7 ) tax expenditures .

in 2005 , congress passed legislation that provided loan guarantee authority to the department of energy ( doe ) for innovative clean energy technologies .

in 2009 , congress passed legislation that modified doe's loan guarantee authority and created a temporary loan guarantee program for the deployment of clean energy technologies and the development of clean energy projects .

in 2011 , the high - profile bankruptcy , and subsequent loan default , of solyndra resulted in a congressional investigation and subjected doe's loan guarantee program to a high degree of scrutiny .

this report provides analysis of goals for and concerns about the use of loan guarantees as a mechanism to support the deployment of innovative clean energy technologies .

a discussion of several policy options for congress to consider is also provided , should congress decide to debate the future of clean energy loan guarantee programs .

a loan guarantee might be defined as "a loan or security on which the federal government has removed or reduced a lender's risk by pledging to repay principal and interest in case of default by the borrower. .

historically , loan guarantees have been used as a policy tool for many different purposes , including home ownership , university education , small business growth , international development , and others .

today , 14 federal government agencies manage approximately 68 loan guarantee accounts that include approximately $1.9 trillion of primary guaranteed loans outstanding in 2010 ( see figure 1 ) .

primary guaranteed loan amounts include the total face value of the loans and not just the federally guaranteed portion of those loans .

the first large - scale use of federal loan guarantees occurred during the 1930s great depression , when loan guarantees were used as a mechanism to assist families with purchasing homes .

home purchase loan guarantees are designed to be actuarially sound by charging borrowers insurance fees , which are pooled and used to pay for program operating costs and probable losses associated with loan defaults .

loan guarantees have also been used for higher risk borrowers such as students or low - income families .

these borrowers might be considered higher risk because of a greater likelihood of default or inadequate collateral to support a loan .

as a result , the government bears a portion of the default risk when lending to these types of borrowers ; therefore these loans generally include some degree of government subsidy .

concerns about budgetary reporting of loan guarantees resulted in the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( fcra ) , which was included in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) .

prior to the enactment of fcra , fiscal year cash flow accounting was used to report the budgetary costs of loan guarantees , and this approach did not accurately take into account the expected losses associated with loan guarantee programs .

therefore , the total cost of long - term loan guarantees was not adequately accounted for , and reported , in the short - term congressional budget window .

fcra mandated an accrual accounting approach for budget reporting and required that budgetary costs of loan guarantees be reported as the net present value of subsidy costs associated with long - term loan guarantees .

the office of management and budget provides guidance for calculating the credit subsidy cost to agencies that administer loan guarantee programs .

loan guarantees have also been used to finance relatively large ( from $10 million to over $1 billion ) energy and infrastructure projects .

programs for such projects typically consist of a small number of projects with large capital requirements .

as a result , it is difficult for loan guarantee programs for these types of projects to be actuarially sound because there is not a large enough project pool to spread the risk .

while federal credit guidelines require credit subsidy costs ( much like a loan loss reserve ) for loan guarantee projects be collected , these costs are typically paid for through federally appropriated funds .

congress has two primary mechanisms for controlling federal loan guarantee programs .

first , congress can appropriate funds to pay for credit subsidy costs , and this approach can limit the amount of federally supported loan guarantees once the credit subsidy appropriation has been exhausted .

second , congress can stipulate volume limits for loan guarantee programs .

for example , congress could limit the total value of loans supported by a certain program to $20 billion .

federal loan guarantee authorizations for demonstrating alternative energy technologies date back to the 1970s , when the geothermal energy research , development , and demonstration act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-410 ) authorized loan guarantees for geothermal demonstration facilities .

the department of energy act — civilian applications ( p.l .

95-238 ) , which became law in 1978 , authorized the secretary of energy to guarantee loans for alternative fuel demonstration facilities .

in response to an energy price shock in 1979 , congress passed the energy security act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-294 ) that authorized $20 billion to create a domestic synthetic fuels industry through the use of loans , loan guarantees , price guarantees , joint ventures , and fuel purchase agreements .

to execute this endeavor , the law established the quasi - public u.s .

synthetic fuels corporation ( sfc ) , although the department of energy was authorized to fund projects prior to the official start - up of sfc .

five projects were supported by the sfc , only one of which utilized a loan guarantee .

the great plains coal gasification project ( located in beulah , nd ) , which converts lignite coal into pipeline - quality methane ( the primary component of natural gas ) , received a $2.02 billion federal loan guarantee ( approximately $1.5 billion of the loan guarantee was actually used ) to construct the plant .

due to energy price declines in the mid - 1980s , along with a denied request to restructure debt and institute price support mechanisms , the great plains project was not able to meet debt service requirements and subsequently defaulted on its loan obligations in august 1985 .

after paying off the defaulted loan , doe proceeded to sell the great plains facility , which was purchased by basin electric for an initial price of $85 million .

basin electric assumed ownership of the plant on october 31 , 1988 .

today , the great plains facility is operated by the dakota gasification company , a subsidiary of basin electric .

the energy security act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-294 ) also resulted in the creation of the office of alcohol fuels ( oaf ) within the department of energy .

oaf was given the authority to guarantee loans for alcohol fuel projects and eventually guaranteed loans totaling approximately $265 million for three alcohol fuel projects .

of the three projects that received doe loan guarantees , one had to refinance its loan , one experienced technology performance complications , and one ceased operations .

most recently , loan guarantees have been used as a mechanism to encourage development and deployment of innovative clean energy technologies .

the energy policy act of 2005 and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 resulted in the creation of doe's loan programs office ( lpo ) , which was chartered to administer clean energy loan guarantee initiatives .

loan guarantees for innovative clean energy technologies constitute a small but growing portion of federal direct loans and loan guarantees ( see figure 2 ) .

to execute and administer federal credit programs for innovative energy technologies , the department of energy created its loan programs office ( lpo ) .

lpo administers three loan programs: 1 .

section 1703: loan guarantees for innovative clean energy technologies with high degrees of technology risk .

2 .

section 1705: loan guarantees for certain renewable energy systems , electric power transmission , and innovative biofuel projects that may have varying degrees ( high or low ) of technology risk .

3 .

advanced technology vehicle manufacturing ( atvm ) : direct loans to support advanced technology vehicles and associated components .

as of december 2011 , all finalized loan guarantee commitments have been for 27 projects within lpo's section 1705 program , which equal approximately $16.15 billion of federal loan guarantee commitments .

lpo's section 1703 program has issued conditional loan guarantee commitments to four projects with a total loan guarantee value of approximately $10.6 billion .

figure 3 illustrates how section 1705 loan guarantee commitments were distributed by technology types .

one primary objective for providing federal loan guarantees for clean energy technologies and projects is to provide access to low cost financial capital that might not otherwise be available due to certain technology and market risks .

access to such capital may result in achieving certain policy objectives , assuming loan guarantee projects are successful and realize anticipated outcomes .

using loan guarantees as a mechanism for supporting u.s. clean energy technology deployment , project development , and system manufacturing can help meet various policy goals .

some of those goals are discussed below .

while there are a number of goals and potential benefits associated with federal loan guarantees for innovative clean energy technologies and projects , there are also multiple concerns about loan guarantees as an incentive mechanism for clean energy .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) released a background paper in 1978 regarding concerns about loan guarantees for new energy technologies .

a brief overview of cbo's paper is provided in the text box at the end of this section .

should congress decide to debate the use of loan guarantees , or other government financial tools , as a clean energy deployment support mechanism , several policy options might be explored as a means to achieve clean energy policy objectives .

as discussed earlier , a primary goal for loan guarantee programs is to provide a source of capital to projects that may not be able to secure low cost financing in the commercial market .

should this continue to be the fundamental objective of this type of incentive mechanism , the following discussion explores some policy options that congress may also choose to consider .

in the 112 th congress , the clean energy financing act of 2011 ( s. 1510 ) proposes to create a clean energy deployment administration ( ceda ) within the department of energy .

as proposed in s. 1510 , ceda would be able to use financial tools such as direct loans , loan guarantees , and insurance products to support clean energy technology manufacturing and deployment .

the bill allows for a portfolio management approach as a way to manage financial risk .

s. 1510 also allows the use of "alternative fee arrangements" such as profit participation , stock warrants , and others as a way to potentially reduce the amount of upfront cash fees .

