the same group of air pollutant emissions from outer continental shelf ( ocs ) operations are subject to different regulatory programs , depending on the location of the operation .

the department of the interior ( doi ) has jurisdiction over ocs sources in federal waters in the western gulf of mexico and most of the central gulf .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , transferred air emission authority in the ocs off alaska's north coast from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to doi .

epa has jurisdiction over sources in all other federal waters .

congress established the programs through different statutes , and the two agencies implement the programs through separate regulations .

pursuant to the underlying statutes , the regulations have different scopes , emission thresholds for eligibility , and compliance obligations .

therefore , two identical operations , located in separate jurisdictions , could face considerably different requirements and procedural time frames .

some may criticize this arrangement for its inconsistent treatment of air emissions .

others may point out that the differences create inconsistent opportunities for oil and gas development .

for much of the past 30 years , these differences received little attention , primarily because most of the federal oil and gas resources in epa's jurisdiction have been subject to moratoria .

moreover , the level of activities in the regions open to development has varied dramatically .

according to doi data from 2010 , there were 3,409 production wells in the gulf of mexico and 23 in the pacific .

figure 1 illustrates the divided jurisdiction in the gulf of mexico .

although active leases are located in epa's jurisdiction , none of the gulf of mexico platforms are in epa's jurisdiction .

in 2008 , moratoria provisions expired , allowing many of the areas in epa's jurisdiction to potentially open for oil and gas leasing activity .

in addition , estimates of oil and gas resources have spurred interest in areas other than the gulf ( table 1 ) .

for example , ocs areas off the atlantic coast have also received attention in recent years .

in 2007 , the minerals management service ( mms ) proposed a lease sale in an area offshore of virginia .

the lease sale was set to take place in 2011 .

in the aftermath of the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill , the obama administration canceled the sale ( may 27 , 2010 ) .

in addition , in doi's most recent five - year plan for ocs leasing , doi decided not to include the mid - and south atlantic planning areas .

many members of the 112 th congress have sought to expand ocs oil and gas development .

the house has passed several bills that would direct doi to hold lease sales in particular areas , including the formerly proposed virginia lease sale and areas of southern california .

in addition , areas of the u.s. arctic region , which were not subject to the moratoria , have generated recent congressional interest as industry has sought to establish a greater presence in the area .

a primary driver for the activity in this region is the shrinking arctic ice cap , or conversely , the growing amount of ice - free ocean in the summertime .

as interest in developing ocs resources in epa's jurisdiction has increased , the epa ocs air program has received increased scrutiny from some members .

in particular , members have focused on the permit activity of shell in the chukchi sea , part of the federal waters off alaska's north coast .

this interest led to the enactment of the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) on december 23 , 2011 , which transferred air emission authority in the ocs off alaska's north coast from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to doi .

this report will provide an overview and brief history of the separate regulatory programs , examine and compare the requirements of the programs , and highlight potential implications of the differences .

although ocs sources can involve other industry sectors ( eg , deepwater ports or offshore wind projects ) , the focus of this report is air emissions from the ocs oil and gas exploration , development , and production operations .

ocs sources of air emissions can vary considerably , depending on the specifics of the operation .

offshore oil and gas sector operations , in particular , may include evolving technologies and take place in different settings , making it difficult to generalize air emission potentials .

for example , mobile offshore drilling units involved in deepwater drilling in the gulf of mexico may emit considerably more emissions than a rig anchored to the sea floor in shallow water .

operations in the arctic region may involve icebreaker vessels , which may generate considerably more emissions than other support vessels .

a senate report from the 1990 clean air act ( caa ) amendments stated: "the construction and operation of ocs facilities emit a significant amount of air pollution which adversely impacts coastal air quality in the united states .

operational emissions from an ocs platform and associated marine vessels can routinely exceed 500 tons of nitrogen ( no x ) and one hundred tons of reactive hydrocarbons annually. .

based on a review of epa ocs permit documents , the 1990 senate report estimate is still valid , particularly for nitrogen oxide ( no x ) emissions .

table 2 identifies emission ranges of selected air pollutants from seven ocs oil / gas operations seeking , or recently receiving , air permits in epa's jurisdiction .

in some cases , the ranges cover a wide spectrum .

for each source , no x emissions account for the majority of the operations' regulated pollutants .

four of the pollutants in table 2 are considered "criteria" pollutants and have a national ambient air quality standard ( naaqs ) .

both no x and volatile organic carbon ( voc ) emissions lead to ozone ( o 3 ) formation ( sometimes described as smog ) , which is also a criteria pollutant .

according to congressional testimony from epa administrator jackson , "a single exploratory drilling operation could emit approximately as much air pollution on a daily basis as a large state - of - the - art oil refinery. .

caa section 328 provides the underlying authority for epa's ocs program .

pursuant to this section , epa established two regulatory regimes: one for ocs sources located within 25 miles of a state's seaward boundary ( "inner ocs sources" ) ; another for ocs sources located beyond 25 miles of a state's water boundary and extending to the boundary of the eez ( "outer ocs sources" ) .

epa created the separate regimes based on the text of section 328 .

this section directs epa to develop regulations requiring all ocs sources "to attain and maintain federal and state ambient air quality standards and to comply with the provisions of [the prevention of significant deterioration ( psd ) program]. .

in addition , section 328 creates a more comprehensive program for inner sources , stating: " such requirements shall be the same as would be applicable if the source were located in the corresponding onshore area , and shall include , but not be limited to , state and local requirements for emission controls , emission limitations , offsets , permitting , monitoring , testing , and reporting [emphasis added]. .

epa promulgated regulations — 40 c.f.r .

part 55 — in 1992 for ocs source air emissions .

selected elements of these regulations are discussed below .

in several instances , part 55 directs ocs sources to air emission regulations in other caa regulations , codified in separate parts of the code of federal regulations .

in general , these cross - references include the most substantive requirements for ocs sources .

the doi authority to address ocs air emissions comes from the 1978 ocsla , which directs the doi secretary to promulgate regulations "for compliance with the national ambient air quality standards pursuant to the clean air act ( 42 u.s.c .

7401 et seq .

 ) , to the extent that activities authorized under this subchapter significantly affect the air quality of any state. .

to satisfy this directive , doi ( acting through the u.s. geological survey ) promulgated regulations in 1980 .

the regulations were redesignated ( i.e. , renumbered ) in 1998 , but the 1980 provisions generally remain the same in 2011 .

the recent administrative changes ( described in the earlier "reader's note" ) have led to a further restructuring of the regulations .

an october 2011 direct final rule separated boem and bsee regulations , creating 30 c.f.r .

part 550 for boem provisions ( bsee regulations were retained in their original location ) .

the rule did not add or remove ocs requirements , but makes organizational changes needed to accommodate the doi administrative changes .

in addition , doi or its agencies ( eg , mms , boem ) have periodically issued notices to lessees and operators ( ntls ) , which "clarify , supplement , or provide more detail about certain requirements. .

 table 6 compares selected elements of the epa and doi air emission programs .

the table examines the requirements applicable to outer ocs sources in epa's jurisdiction .

inner ocs sources must follow the requirements that would apply to an onshore source in the corresponding onshore area .

as discussed above , these provisions vary by state and whether the area is an attainment or nonattainment area .

regardless , inner ocs source requirements would be at least as stringent as outer source requirements in all situations , and potentially more stringent in some locations ( eg , california ) .

the primary difference between the epa and doi programs is rooted in the different statutory authorities: the 1990 caa and the 1978 ocsla .

the primary objectives of these statutes are different — air quality versus offshore energy development .

the two regulatory programs reflect these underlying differences .

ocs sources in epa's jurisdiction must comply with the psd program ( eg , bact ) , among other requirements .

sources subject to doi's regime must comply with similar standards ( eg , bact ) , only if their emissions would "significantly affect" a state's air quality .

this key difference translates into a considerably different scope of applicability between the two programs .

for example , doi's two - step significance determination is a potentially much less stringent threshold than epa's 250 tpy threshold for its psd program .

moreover , the federal threshold for title v permits is 100 tpy .

for sources within 25 miles of a state's shores , the psd and title v thresholds may be even lower .

another substantial difference is the time frame allotted to the agencies for reviewing a potential source's permit ( epa ) or activity - specific plan ( doi ) .

in addition , the epa permit process allows greater opportunity for input from the public .

in particular , epa's eab offers parties a powerful tool to compel agency review .

some stakeholders would likely argue that the additional opportunities for public involvement in epa's permit process help create a balance between resource development and environmental concerns .

others would likely contend these steps present unnecessary burdens and timing uncertainty in the process .

if more ocs areas in epa's jurisdiction are open for oil and gas leasing , policymakers interest in these differences will likely increase .

