"risk adjustment is the process of adjusting payments to organizations ( usually health insurance plans ) based on differences in the risk characteristics of people enrolled in each plan. .

in the simplest case , assume that on average the costs of providing a package of health care benefits to women are $100 more than the cost of providing the same set of benefits to men .

in this hypothetical situation , if a payer , such as medicare , paid the same amount to insurers for covering both men and women , insurers would have a strong financial incentive to enroll men and avoid enrolling women .

one mechanism for leveling the playing field , could be to risk adjust the payment to insurers by paying them $100 more for women than for men .

conversely , a risk - adjusted payment for men would be $100 less than that for women to reflect their relatively lower level of expected health expenditures .

in either of these situations , all other things being the same , insurers should be indifferent between enrolling men or women into their plan .

health care costs vary by more than just gender , and sophisticated risk adjustment models are designed to take into account additional factors that can include age , geography , health status , tobacco use , family size , and other factors .

but even the most sophisticated risk adjustment models do not explain a substantial proportion of the differences in expected health care spending .

immediately below , this report describes how the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) pays private health plans under medicare advantage ( ma or medicare part c ) and how these payments are risk adjusted .

subsequent sections describe how risk scores for ma enrollees are initially generated and change over time .

the report concludes with a discussion of how cms audits risk - adjusted ma payments and some potential issues associated with risk adjustment and the audits .

medicare advantage provides private plan options , such as managed care , for medicare beneficiaries who are enrolled in both medicare parts a and b .

by contract with cms , a health plan agrees to provide all required medicare benefits ( except hospice ) to a group of medicare beneficiaries enrolled in the plan in return for a capitated monthly payment adjusted for the demographics and health status of the beneficiaries who actually enroll in the plan .

the same monthly payment is made regardless of how many or few services a beneficiary actually uses .

the plan is at - risk if costs , in the aggregate , exceed program payments ; conversely , the plan can retain savings if costs are less than payments .

payments to ma plans are based on a comparison of each plan's estimated cost of providing medicare covered benefits ( a bid ) relative to the maximum amount the federal government will pay for providing those benefits in the plan's service area ( a benchmark ) .

bids reflect each plan's estimate of how much it requires to cover an average , or standard , beneficiary .

"the bid includes plan administrative costs and profit .

cms also sets a benchmark , or bidding target , and if a plan's standard bid is above the benchmark , the plan receives a base rate equal to the benchmark ; if the plan's bid is below the benchmark , the plan receives a base rate equal to its bid. .

in addition , cms adjusts the payment to private plans , in part , on the characteristics of the medicare beneficiaries actually enrolled in each plan .

for instance , a plan may , on average , enroll healthier or sicker medicare beneficiaries than the average or standard beneficiary .

part of cms's payment to plans , as described below , reflects the age , gender , and other characteristics of plan enrollees .

the current ma risk adjustment methodology relies on demographic , health history , and other factors to adjust payments to plans .

these factors are identified in a base year , and used to adjust payments to plans in the following year .

in other words , since ma payments are based on a prospective payment system , cms is attempting to estimate next year's health care expenditures as a function of beneficiary demographic , health , and other factors identifiable in the current year .

this section describes how cms determines the risk adjustment to be applied to ma plan payments .

the above discussion describes how cms estimates adjustments to payments for each medicare beneficiary enrolled in a medicare advantage plan .

this section describes how risk scores are attributed to ma enrollees for purposes of payment .

since there can be error in the information that plans provide to cms to justify risk - adjusted payments as well as error in the updating process , cms audits medicare advantage plans to ensure that the risk - adjusted payments plans are claiming and being paid for are in fact supported by the medical record ( referred to as radv audits ) .

while audits have been conducted for several years , previously cms only sought to recover the error in payments associated with sampled enrollees .

in february 2011 , the president's fy2011 budget proposed to extrapolate the radv error rate to the entire plan contract for the year , resulting in estimated savings of $2.27 billion over the five - year budget window .

in december 2010 , cms released for comment its proposed methodology for auditing the data submitted by medicare advantage plans and extrapolating a contract level error in payments .

in february 2012 , cms released the final notice of payment error calculation methodology , which states that for payment year 2011 audits , cms will extrapolate audit findings to derive the payment error estimate for the entire contract .

going forward , as cms seeks to potentially recover larger dollar amounts from plans , the plans are likely to push back more aggressively .

these audits , and the potential recoveries , are likely to be problematic for some part c plans .

audits are conducted at the contract level , and several plans can be under a single contract .

having selected a contract to audit , cms engages in a three - step process: sampling , medical record review , and error rate calculation / payment adjustment ( see figure 3 ) .

cms uses samples , rather than an audit of all eligible enrollees , so as to reduce the burden on plans to provide data .

cms has determined that 201 enrollees is a sufficient sample size .

each of these steps is discussed below .

risk adjustment is intended to compensate ma plans for the higher ( or lower ) cost of enrolling sicker ( or healthier ) medicare beneficiaries , yet , as described in this report , plans that disproportionately enroll sicker ( or to the extent possible , healthier ) beneficiaries may be systematically under ( or over ) compensated .

others have raised concerns about using medicare fee - for - services data — which have not been audited for accuracy — to generate the risk adjustment coefficients for medicare advantage plans .

some plans have expressed concern that recoveries from radv audits may place them at substantial financial risk .

it remains to be seen how the secretary will account for methodological concerns as she implements risk adjustment .

appendix a .

history of part c risk adjustment payments to private plans under medicare are risk adjusted to account for the variation in the cost of providing health care among medicare beneficiaries .

several different models have been used to calculate risk adjustment , each successive model gaining in complexity and explanatory power .

this appendix briefly describes the risk adjustment models that are not otherwise discussed in the text of this report .

below , table a - 1 shows the risk adjustment models that have been used to adjust medicare private plan payments , the year each model was in use , and the percentage of variation in individual expenditures predicted by each model ( r 2 ) .

the r 2 is one measure of how well a model explains why a specified outcome varies — in this case beneficiary expenditures .

the range of spending by individual medicare beneficiaries can be from $0 per year for a very healthy beneficiary who did not use any medical care , items , or medications , to hundreds of thousands of dollars , or more , for a very ill beneficiary .

the models attempt to predict beneficiary spending based on beneficiary characteristics .

sicker beneficiaries may have higher expenditures — but how much more ? .

the r 2 quantifies that measure for the model as a whole — from 0 ( which means the model does not explain any of the variation ) to 1 , which means the model perfectly predicts expenditures .

looking at the first model listed in table a - 1 , the average adjusted per capita cost ( aapcc ) model has an r 2 of 0.0077 , which means that the model explains 0.77% of the variation in beneficiary expenditures .

each subsequent model used by cms has increased the percent of variation in beneficiary expenditures explained .

the most recent ( proposed ) model is able to explain approximately 12.5% of the variation in expenditures .

adjusted average per capita cost ( aapcc ) prior to payment year 2000 , private plan payments under the medicare+choice ( m+c ) and tefra risk programs — both predecessors to the medicare advantage program — were risk adjusted to account for the effect of certain demographic characteristics .

the demographic variables in the aapcc model were age , sex , medicaid enrollment , institutionalized status for nursing home residents , and working aged status representing those medicare beneficiaries 65 years of age and over with employer sponsored insurance as their primary source of coverage .

taken together , these demographic data explain less than 1% of the variation in medicare beneficiary expenditures ( see table a - 1 ) .

this model did not account for the costs associated with beneficiary health .

payments to individual plans were not adjusted for enrolling very ill beneficiaries .

however , in the aggregate , private plan enrollees were healthier than enrollees in original medicare , leading to higher payments than if beneficiary health had been taken into account .

principal in - patient diagnostic cost group ( pip - dcg ) the balanced budget act of 1997 required cms to implement a risk adjustment methodology that took into account beneficiary health status by no later than january 1 , 2000 .

from payment year 2000 through 2003 , cms used the principal inpatient diagnostic cost group ( pip - dcg ) model .

in addition to demographic variables , this model took into account , "the worst principal inpatient diagnosis ( principal reason for inpatient stay ) associated with any hospital admission. .

though , as shown in table a - 1 , the pip - dcg model explained more of the variation in medicare expenditures than the aapcc ( demographic only ) model , it had several limitations .

first , illnesses that resulted in higher expenditures but did not result in a hospital admission were not counted in the model .

second , any attempt to reduce hospital admissions through , for example , better management of chronic disease , could potentially result in lower risk - adjusted payments .

though the pip - dcg model was to be phased - in , subsequent legislation held the phase - in schedule at 90% demographic - only method / 10% pip - dcg method through 2003 , in part to "soften the financial impact of risk adjustment on m+c organizations. .

cms – hierarchical condition category ( cms - hcc ) starting in 2004 , medicare plan payments were adjusted by the cms - hcc model — a model that includes information from hospital inpatient and outpatient settings , physicians visits , and visits with clinically trained non - physicians such as psychologists and podiatrists .

the cms - hcc takes into account the severity of a beneficiary's illness ( and only compensating for the most severe manifestation reported ) , the accumulated effect of multiple ( unrelated ) diseases , as well as interactive effects — instances where having two or more specified diseases or characteristics results in expected health care expenditures that are larger than the simple sum of the effects .

the cms - hcc model explains nearly 10% of the variation in beneficiary expenditures and is described in detail in the "risk adjustment under medicare advantage" section of this report .

updates to the cms - hcc retain the basic structure of the model .

version 12 cms - hcc each year the model is updated to account for changes in the icd - 9-cm diagnosis codes .

in addition , version 12 was recalibrated with more recent diagnosis and expenditure data .

the update increased the percentage of the variation in medicare expenditures which were explained by the model from just under 10% to nearly 11% .

version 21 cms - hcc version 21 includes updates to the icd - 9cm diagnosis codes , and recalibration with more recent diagnosis and expenditure data .

in addition , version 21 "underwent a major clinical revision in 2009 to adjust for changes in disease patterns , treatment methods , and coding practices , as well as compositional changes within the medicare population. .

these updates again increased the predictive power of the model to approximately 12.5% .

version 21 is slated to be implemented in 2012 for pace plans .

appendix b. cms - hcc risk adjustment mode .

