leadership transition .

north korea's power centers appear to be consolidating around kim jong - un , at least as the country's nominal leader .

the most tangible sign of this occurred on december 30 , when a key organ of the communist party ( officially the workers' party of korea , or wpk ) met and selected kim as "supreme commander" of the north korean military ( officially , the korean people's army , or kpa ) .

although north korean propaganda outlets have been routinely referring to kim jong - un as "supreme leader" since kim jong - il died , this move by the wpk was the first actual position to be bestowed upon the younger kim since .

for the future , an indicator north korea experts are watching is whether kim jong - un is named to other key positions , particularly chairman of the national defense commission and / or general secretary of the wpk secretariat .

kim jong - il held both titles , and used the national defense commission as his institutional base of power .

north korea's diplomacy .

in the weeks since kim jong - il's death , north korean government organs and propaganda outlets have issued harsh rhetorical volleys at south korea , which have been based upon the south korean government's allegedly disrespectful reaction to kim jong - il's death .

south korean president lee myung - bak's government issued a statement expressing its "its sympathy to the people of north korea," but neither sent an official delegation to pyongyang nor conveyed official condolences to the kim family .

also , the north korean government objected to lee's prohibition on virtually all south koreans from traveling to pyongyang to pay their respects .

on this pretext , the north korean agency for handling relations with seoul declared that in the future , "there is nothing to expect from the inter - korean relations" and "there is no reason for us to say anything" to the lee government during the remaining thirteen months of lee's term .

north korea has issued similar statements in the past , only to re - engage in inter - korean talks later .

in statements regarding the united states , north korea has appeared to take a rhetorically more confrontational stance than in the weeks before kim jong - il's death .

for instance , the annual new year's message of january 1 , 2012 , for the first time in four years emphasized the government's demand that u.s. troops withdraw from south korea .

also , on january 11 , the north korean official media criticized the united states for "politicizing" bilateral negotiations over food aid by allegedly insisting that food be given only if north korea agrees to concessions on its nuclear program .

regional diplomacy .

in a sign of the dialogue occurring among the various powers in northeast asia , u.s. assistant secretary of state for east asia kurt campbell visited beijing , seoul , and tokyo in from january 3-7 .

he told reporters in tokyo that he had made clear the u.s. position "that north korea must refrain from any acts that could create a disturbance on the korean pensinsula. .

he added that , "we've particularly passed that message directly to our senior chinese interlocutors. .

south korean president lee myung - bak traveled to beijing for a january 9-11 state visit .

at the end of the south korean leader's visit to china , the two sides issues a joint press communique in which they pledged their commitment to maintaining peace and stability on the korean peninsula , and to working with the international community to create conditions for resumption of the six - party talks .

one notable feature of official u.s. and south korean reactions to kim jong - il's death is the extent to which both governments have publicly stated their desire for north korea to remain stable .

instability in north korea would pose a number of challenges and possibly threats to the united states , south korea , and the region .

perhaps the most worrisome are the possibilities that controls over north korea's nuclear materials might loosen , that a weak leadership in pyongyang could lash out militarily , and that a power vacuum could suck u.s. , south korean , and chinese military forces into north korea .

in the coming months , both stabilizing and destabilizing dynamics will be operating simultaneously inside north korea .

it is likely that that cohesive tendencies will predominate in the short run , as members of the ruling elite rally around kim jong - un , as has been seen by members of the ruling elite paying their respects to the new ruler in the days since his father's death .

in particular , most analysts expect that the regime collective will strive to maintain unity at least until april 2012 , when the country is planning to celebrate the 100 th anniversary of the birth of founder kim il - sung .

however , over time , few would be surprised if tensions were to mount among the power centers of the north korean system .

traditionally , the united states has had a number of goals with respect to north korea , including limiting if not curtailing north korea's ability to sell its nuclear and long - range missile technology , rolling back or containing its nuclear and missile programs , detering an attack on south korea , and improving the lives of the average north korean people .

kim jong - il's death can be viewed as something of a rorschach test for one's opinion of north korea policy .

many who were inclined to favor negotiating with north korea will likely argue that recent developments present an opportunity for engagement , while those seeking a harder - line approach will strongly disagree .

the united states faces a range of options , many of which are not necessarily mutually exclusive , but all of which entail risks .

crs report r41259 , north korea: u.s. relations , nuclear diplomacy , and internal situation , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41481 , u.s. - south korea relations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r40095 , foreign assistance to north korea , by [author name scrubbed] and mary beth nikitin crs report rl34256 , north korea's nuclear weapons: technical issues , by mary beth nikitin crs report r41438 , north korea: legislative basis for u.s. economic sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41843 , imports from north korea: existing rules , implications of the korus fta , and the kaesong industrial complex , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl30613 , north korea: back on the terrorism list ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32493 , north korea: economic leverage and policy analysis , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22973 , congress and u.s. policy on north korean human rights and refugees: recent legislation and implementation , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41043 , china - north korea relations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rs21473 , north korean ballistic missile threat to the united states , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41749 , non - governmental organizations activities in north korea , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

the united states the state department the passing of national defense commission chairman kim jong il press statement hillary rodham clinton secretary of state washington , dc december 19 , 2011 with the passing of national defense commission chairman kim jong il , the democratic people's republic of korea is now in a period of national mourning .

we are deeply concerned with the well being of the north korean people and our thoughts and prayers are with them during these difficult times .

it is our hope that the new leadership of the dprk will choose to guide their nation onto the path of peace by honoring north korea's commitments , improving relations with its neighbors , and respecting the rights of its people .

the united states stands ready to help the north korean people and urges the new leadership to work with the international community to usher in a new era of peace , prosperity and lasting security on the korean peninsula .

prn: 2011 / 2174 south korea the blue house december 20 , 2011 minister of unification yu woo - ik announced the following government statement agreed at a ministerial meeting on foreign affairs and security today .

fellow citizens , the government is thoroughly monitoring the current situation while working closely with allies and neighbors so that peace on the korean peninsula will not be shaken by the sudden death of the north korean national defense commission chairman kim jong il .

our armed forces are now maintaining high alert and bracing for any possible contingency .

no unusual signs have yet been detected in the north .

it is hoped that all citizens will go about their daily routines as usual without anxiety so that economic activities will not contract .

concerning the death of chairman kim jong il , the south korean government expresses its sympathy to the people of north korea .

the government hopes north korea will soon restore stability so that both koreas will be able to work together for the sake of peace and prosperity on the korean peninsula .

considering that north korea is in a mourning period , the government decided to advise the religious community not to proceed with the lighting of christmas trees in front - line areas this year , which was scheduled for december 23 .

we ask our fellow koreans to cope with the situation in north korea in a calm and resolute manner , while cooperating with the government's policies .

statement by the ministry of unification on visits to north korea for paying condolence calls .

concerning the dispatch of delegations to the north's funeral services , the government has decided not to send an official delegation .

however , the government will allow family members of the late president kim dae - jung and chairman chung mong - hun of the hyundai group to attend the funeral services in return for the north's dispatch of delegations to their funerals held in the south .

china as appeared in xinhua domestic service in chinese , translated from by the open source center , cpp20111219004011 , beijing 1310 gmt , 19 dec 2011 .

beijing , 19 dec ( xinhua ) - the cpc central committee , the national people's congress [npc] standing committee , the state council , and the central military commission [cmc] sent a message of condolences to the central committee of the workers party of korea [wpk] , the wpk central military commission , the democratic people's republic of korea [dprk] national defense commission , the presidium of the supreme people's assembly of the dprk , and the dprk cabinet on 19 december to express deep condolences over the death of comrade kim jong il , general secretary of the wpk , chairman of the dprk national defense commission , and supreme commander of the korean people's army [kpa] .

chinese foreign minister yang jiechi summoned pak myong ho , charge d'affaires of the dprk embassy in beijing and handed to him the message of condolences .

the message reads in full as follows: pyongyang the wpk central committee the wpk central military commission the dprk national defense commission the presidium of the dprk supreme people's assembly the dprk cabinet: we were was shocked to learn of the unfortunate demise of comrade kim jong il , general secretary of the wpk , chairman of the dprk national defense commission and supreme commander of the kpa .

with incomparable sorrow , we hereby extend our most profound condolences and our most sincere sympathy to the dprk people on his demise .

comrade kim jong il was a great leader of the wpk and the dprk people who dedicated the whole of his life and rendered immortal service to the great cause of the dprk people in building a dprk - style powerful and prosperous socialist country .

comrade kim jong il , a close friend of the chinese people , had carried on and further developed with utmost enthusiasm the traditional friendship between china and the dprk , which was established and cultivated by the revolutionaries of the older generation of the two countries .

he had established profound friendship with chinese leaders and had strongly pushed forward the development of the china - dprk good - neighborly friendly and cooperative relationship .

the chinese party , government , and people were deeply saddened by the passing away of comrade kim jong il , who will be remembered forever by the chinese people .

even though comrade kim jong il has passed away , he will live forever in the hearts of the dprk people .

we believe that the dprk people will carry forward his unfulfilled wishes , rally closely around the wpk , and under the leadership of comrade kim cho'ng - u'n" [kim jong un] , turn their sorrow into strength , continuously advance toward the goal of building a strong and prosperous socialist nation and achieving sustained peace on the korean peninsula .

china and the dprk are good neighbors linked by mountains and waters and stand together , sharing weal and woe .

it is the consistent policy of the chinese party and government to make constant efforts to consolidate and develop the traditional friendly and cooperative relations between china and the dprk .

we firmly believe that through joint efforts , friendship between the chinese and dprk parties , states , and peoples will continuously consolidate and develop .

the chinese people will stand together with the dprk people forever ! .

eternal glory to comrade kim jong il ! .

[by] the cpc central committee the npc standing committee of the prc the state council of the prc the central military commission of the prc [dated] 19 december 2011 in beijin .

