the political unrest and transitions that have swept through several countries in the middle east and north africa ( mena ) since early 2011 — often referred to as the "arab spring" or "arab awakening" — have prompted the united states , along with the broader international community , to discuss approaches and take actions to support democratic political transitions in the region .

a key focus is the role that economic growth can play in solidifying and supporting political transitions in the region .

calls for greater u.s. trade and investment with the region in support of economic growth have come from policymakers in the administration and congress .

in may 2011 , president obama announced the mena "trade and investment partnership initiative" ( mena - tip ) to facilitate trade and investment with the region .

the initiative has a primary focus on egypt , jordan , morocco , and tunisia .

within congress , some members have called for new free trade agreements ( ftas ) with egypt and tunisia , and deeper economic ties with libya .

presently , u.s. trade and investment policy in the region is focused on using trade and investment to foster economic growth , promote greater economic reforms , provide support for successful and stable democratic transitions , and generally support u.s. foreign policy objectives .

the u.s. government is pursuing such efforts both as part of the mena - tip initiative and through broader or long - standing u.s. trade policy measures .

measures to bolster trade and investment ties are often long - term in nature , and could build on other shorter - term measures to support transitioning countries .

however , continued political uncertainty and changing security environments in the region could prompt greater scrutiny of u.s. engagement , as policymakers grapple with questions of timing , feasibility , and political support for such efforts .

congress has oversight , authorization , and appropriation responsibilities related to u.s. trade and investment policy .

new u.s. trade and investment initiatives with the mena region could require congressional involvement .

for example , legislative action would be needed to implement new free trade agreements .

congress also may want to exercise oversight over any changes to government programs that promote u.s. trade and investment .

the structure of this report is as follows: the report begins with background and analysis for policymakers considering a re - evaluation of u.s. trade and investment in the mena in light of political change in the region .

in particular , the report examines the economic challenges facing many countries in the region and the area's limited economic integration — both in the world economy , including relatively weak economic ties with the united states , and in the mena regional economy .

the report then analyzes current u.s. trade and investment policy efforts in the region and various policy options for increasing trade and investment with mena countries .

the report concludes by discussing ( 1 ) the premise of the policy agenda , specifically whether increased trade and investment can support or lead to successful democratic transitions and political stability ; and ( 2 ) if such a policy agenda is pursued , possible implementation questions that policymakers may face .

with some exceptions , mena countries face serious economic challenges despite some countries' large oil and gas production .

weak integration in the global economy , including weak integration within the region , is frequently cited by economists as a factor impeding economic development in the region .

given the economic and governance challenges , recent political upheaval , and the mena region's limited integration into world markets , policymakers , both domestically and internationally , have discussed how trade and investment could foster support for successful and stable democratic transitions .

for example , president obama said in his may 2011 speech on the region that , "just as democratic revolutions can be triggered by a lack of individual opportunity , successful democratic transitions depend upon an expansion of growth and broad - based prosperity. .

u.s. trade policy in the region is focused on using trade and investment to foster economic growth , promote greater economic reforms , provide support for successful and stable democratic transitions , and generally support u.s. foreign policy objectives .

such goals also fit into long - standing and overall u.s. trade policy goals of creating and sustaining u.s. jobs by opening international markets and through rules - based trade , as well as by monitoring and enforcing u.s. rights under trade agreements .

important exceptions to overall u.s. trade policy objectives in the region are iran and syria .

there is broad international support , including from the united states , to support progressively strict economic sanctions on iran to try to compel it to verifiably confine its nuclear program to purely peaceful uses .

likewise , the state department has designated syria as a state sponsor of terrorism , making syria subject to a number of legislatively mandated penalties , including export sanctions and ineligibility to receive most forms of u.s. aid or to purchase u.s. military equipment .

should fundamental political change occur in syria , congress may revisit long - standing restrictions in consultation with the administration .

government initiatives that foster u.s. private sector trade and investment in mena countries may be attractive policy options compared to others under discussion , such as debt relief and foreign aid , in a time of tight u.s. budget constraints .

they also may provide new opportunities for u.s. businesses overseas and generate stronger economic growth .

however , the effects of trade and investment initiatives may be borne out over the long term , and they may not provide immediate economic relief .

a range of potential options — at the unilateral , bilateral / regional , and multilateral levels — are available to congress , as well as the executive branch , for increasing u.s. trade and investment ties with countries in the mena region , should there be interest in doing so .

this section analyzes policy options for increasing u.s. trade with and investment in mena economies .

congress may face a number of issues if it addresses policy options to facilitate greater u.s. trade and investment with the mena region .

first , some analysts question whether increased trade and investment can support democratic political transitions .

current discussions for increasing trade and investment with the mena region are rooted in the belief that these policy tools will bolster economic growth and help support the democratic political transitions occurring in the region .

however , the link between trade and investment , on the one hand , and democracy , on the other , is contentious .

some experts argue that trade and investment promote governance ; increase the size of the middle class ; facilitate the flow of ideas ; and develop institutions related to protection of property and rule of law , which in turn , it is argued , create popular pressure for democracy .

additionally , some analysts argue that pursuing ftas and bits in particular with various mena countries could help anchor reforms , such as related transparency , governance , and rule of law , that can provide foundations for democratic political transitions and institutions .

others argue that the links between trade , investment , and democracy are not straightforward .

they argue that governments can gain legitimacy by opening their economies and securing economic growth , without reforming or opening politically .

they cite a number of economies that have opened to the world economically while sustaining governments that are not fully democratic ; china is often cited as an example in this context .

this raises questions about whether trade and investment could be effective in helping arab countries transition to more democratic political systems .

additionally , some analysts question whether protestors in various mena countries want greater trade and investment ties .

in egypt , for example , public opinion indicates that many believe that the economic liberalization pursued under the old regime enabled corruption and exacerbated economic inequality .

second , questions abound about whether u.s. trade policy tools could be effective in overcoming the obstacles to greater u.s. trade and investment in the mena region .

some analysts question whether trade and / or investment liberalizing agreements will result in increased u.s. trade and investment to the mena region .

according to the u.s. commercial service , some of the greatest obstacles to u.s. firms hoping to do business in mena countries relate to corruption , transparency , governance , rule of law , and bureaucratic red tape , among others .

some argue that completing ftas or bits , or encouraging countries to join the wto , could help mena governments push through reforms that address many of these impediments .

others express concern that even if such reforms are pursued in the context of fta , bit , or wto negotiations , there could be implementation problems , and that u.s. trade and investment with mena countries and the region could remain limited .

additionally , a number of factors affect investment and trade flows beyond government policies , including market size , economic growth , labor force , endowment of natural resources , political stability , and infrastructure , among others , which raise questions about how effective policy options could be at dramatically increasing trade and investment flows .

in addition , the capacity of federal export finance and other promotion agencies to support u.s. trade and investment in the mena may be limited .

for instance , while ex - im bank and opic could work to incentivize exports to the mena region , u.s. firms' interest in doing business in the mena region will drive their demand for ex - im bank and opic financing .

third , if an agenda of increased trade and investment is further pursued , a host of questions arise that may be considered in implementing this policy agenda .

for example: timing: the political situation in some mena countries is highly uncertain .

should the united states wait to enhance its trade and investment ties in the region until the political situation stabilizes ? .

or should the united states continue to enhance trade and investment ties sooner , in order to facilitate political outcomes it views as favorable ? .

if the united states delays engagement , will others — such as eu countries , turkey , and china — take advantage of business opportunities in the region sooner , depressing opportunities for u.s. businesses ? .

region - wide policies vs. country - specific policies: current u.s. trade and investment policy is quite diverse across countries in the mena region , and the mena economies themselves are quite heterogeneous .

should the united states pursue a region - wide agenda of increasing trade and investment , while tailoring policies to fit the individual needs of specific countries ? .

for example , some argue that egypt and tunisia are better positioned than , say , libya , to enter fta negotiations with the united states , because they are members of the wto and have bits with the united states , while libya only has wto observer status and is experiencing political upheaval .

while wto accession is not explicitly required for the united states to negotiate bits or ftas with a country , u.s. trade agreements generally build on wto commitments , and wto membership is viewed as a stepping stone to a fta .

cooperation with the eu: in his may 2011 speech on mena , president obama suggested that u.s. efforts to increase trade and investment in the region would be pursued cooperatively with the eu .

such cooperation efforts are underway , and questions arise about the scope and depth of the cooperation .

in the past , the united states and the eu have adopted different approaches in the mena .

for example , under the mefta effort during the bush administration , the united states negotiated comprehensive ftas with individual countries with the goal that such efforts would expand into a region - wide free trade area agreement .

in contrast , the eu adopted a more regional approach to economic integration from the start .

other factors may complicate cooperation .

for example , the united states and the eu have differing views on regulatory policy and standards , and some view u.s. and eu businesses as competitors in the mena region .

finally , some of these countries already have strong economic ties with the eu and want to develop closer economies ties with the united states , as was the case with the u.s. - morocco fta .

u.s. - eu cooperation on the mena region could expand should the united states and the eu launch negotiations on a transatlantic trade and investment partnership .

as an example of the potential for future collaboration , the "joint principles for international investment" and the "joint principles for information and communication technology ( ict ) services" — agreed to bilaterally by the united states with morocco and jordan — were modeled after u.s. - eu agreements .

congressional interest: in october 2011 , congress approved the implementing legislation for ftas with colombia , south korea , and panama , years after the agreements were formally negotiated .

will their approval provide momentum for further fta negotiations , or does their lengthy approval point to the polarization in congress regarding future ftas ? .

how should congress prioritize ftas in the mena region with ongoing trade negotiations , including with regards to the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) and a potential transatlantic trade and investment partnership ? .

how should congress prioritize countries within the mena region for ftas ? .

trade promotion authority ( tpa ) likely will play a major role in any future fta negotiation with mena countries .

u.s. trade policy responses to political change in the mena can be characterized as incremental and long - term — focused on creating "building blocks" that could potentially lead to larger - scale trade and investment agreements in the future .

for example , present ustr engagement with egypt is centered on making the country's business environment more conducive to trade and investment .

such efforts could pave the way for fta negotiations in the future , though this is not necessarily a current goal for the administration .

going forward , any trade policy agenda pursued by u.s. policymakers in the region could be affected by a host of external factors , including the following: u.s. trade and investment relationships in the region are diverse , resulting in different "starting points" for engagement .

at one end of the spectrum , libya is not yet a member of the wto , which many view as a starting point for further u.s. engagement .

at the other end of the spectrum , the united states has well - established trade relationships with morocco and jordan — which include a bilateral fta with each country — that serve as a foundation for the recent bilateral agreements on principles on investment and ict services under the mena - tip .

countries in the region have markedly diverse economic situations and priorities .

some countries , such as egypt , are more focused on maintaining macroeconomic stability over the short term , delaying longer - term initiatives , including trade and investment liberalization .

other countries with more stable economic conditions may be able to engage more effectively with the united states on trade policy issues .

ongoing political uncertainty in some countries can make it challenging to negotiate on trade policy — or even , more fundamentally , know with whom to negotiate .

for instance , despite the long - standing u.s. - egyptian bilateral relationship , it is difficult for u.s. trade negotiators to know with whom to negotiate on the egyptian side , given the fluid nature of egypt's political situation .

as another example , political uncertainty also can make it more difficult for foreign commercial service staff to operate in the region .

in contrast , tunisia's relatively "smoother" transition has facilitated u.s. engagement with tunisia under the re - invigorated tifa process .

u.s. trade policy responses are affected by the demand of u.s. companies for doing business in certain areas of the world .

while agencies such as opic , ex - im bank , and tda can choose to make supporting u.s. commercial activity in the region a top priority and make resources available for this purpose , u.s. businesses will take advantage of the financing and funding only if they have sufficient commercial incentives to do so .

depending on the type of trade policy responses pursued in the region , questions may arise about the effectiveness of policy tools used to promote increased trade and investment , as well as their impact on political transitions , and how quickly their benefits would be borne out .

additionally , how these policies are designed could have substantial implications for u.s. interests .

however , in a constrained budgetary environment , trade and investment may be attractive policy tools compared to other options , such as foreign aid , for supporting economic development in mena countries — as well as encouraging transparency , governance , and other reforms in the region — while also potentially creating new economic opportunities for u.s. businesses .

