the klamath river basin , a region along the california - oregon border , has become a focal point for local and national discussions on water and species management .

water management issues were brought to the forefront when severe drought conditions in 2001 exacerbated competition for scarce water resources and generated conflict among several interests — farmers , anglers ( commercial and sport ) , other recreationists , federal wildlife refuge managers , environmental organizations , and state , local , and tribal governments .

subsequent issues with klamath basin fisheries , including events in 2002 and 2006 , exacerbated these conflicts .

as is true in many regions in the west , the federal government plays a prominent role in the klamath basin's water management .

this role stems from ( 1 ) operation and management of the bureau of reclamation's klamath water project ; ( 2 ) management of federal lands in the basin , including several national wildlife refuges managed by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) ; and ( 3 ) implementation of federal laws , such as the endangered species act ( esa ) , clean water act ( cwa ) , and national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .

the klamath basin restoration agreement ( kbra ) and the klamath hydroelectric settlement agreement ( khsa ) , collectively referred to as the "klamath agreements" in this report , aim to settle many of the outstanding issues in the basin .

the agreements were signed in 2010 by more than 40 groups , including state and non - federal interests .

the kbra defines limits to water allocations for irrigators and wildlife refuges under a range of conditions , and lays out restoration actions , monitoring and other actions that aim to recover fish species and provide economic stability for basin tribes .

the khsa lays out a process that could lead to removal of four non - federal hydroelectric dams currently owned and operated by a private entity .

under the khsa , the secretary of the interior determines whether removal of these dams is in the public interest .

congress has oversight over federal activities in the klamath and has held hearings and appropriated funding to address issues in the klamath basin .

in the past , congressional debate has focused on the role of the esa in water management , the operation of the klamath project , and other topics , such as supplemental support for parties impacted by federal policies .

current congressional consideration is likely to focus on the agreements themselves .

the agreements require congressional authorization to move forward on some of their most important components , which may result in congress revisiting previous questions , as well as new ones .

the klamath river basin ( also referred to in this report as the klamath basin ) drains approximately 16,000 square miles in oregon and california .

it drains into the klamath river , which originates in southern oregon and travels 253 miles before emptying into the pacific ocean near crescent city , california .

combined with the trinity river , the system is the largest in the western united states other than the sacramento and columbia rivers in terms of flow and salmon production .

however , the basin is also a sparsely populated area with some of the lowest per - capita incomes in either state .

the total population is approximately 287,000 , and total economic output in the basin was approximately $10 billion as of the late 1990s .

native american tribes account for 6% ( 15,000 ) of the basin's total population .

for water management purposes , the klamath basin is divided into two distinct subbasins .

the upper basin lies upriver and east of iron gate dam on the klamath river , and contains oregon's largest lake , upper klamath lake .

the lower basin includes nearly 200 miles of the klamath river between iron gate dam and the pacific ocean .

both basins contain smaller lakes , tributaries , and wildlife refuges that also play an important role in water allocation .

while water and species management issues have been prevalent throughout the history of the klamath project , seminal events in 2001 , 2002 , and 2006 brought the region into the national spotlight .

these events resulted in a number of legal conflicts , studies , and negotiations that frame the recent history of the klamath basin .

first in 2001 , as a result of previous biological opinions by the fws and nmfs , reclamation severely curtailed water deliveries to the klamath project to provide more water for endangered fish in the basin .

later , in 2002 , thousands of fish ( mainly chinook salmon ) died largely due to poor water conditions and fish health in the lower klamath .

finally , in 2006 noaa severely restricted ocean fishing for salmon due to low numbers of naturally spawning adults in the region ( due in part to residual effects of the 2002 fish kill ) , resulting in a large decrease in that year's salmon catch compared to previous years .

the federal government provided emergency funding in response to these and other events in the klamath .

the funding included at least $170 million in addition to regular programmatic expenditures over the last decade .

for instance , for the 2001 and 2006 events , the federal government provided approximately $35 million and $60 million in emergency aid , respectively .

aid in addition to regular agency programs and appropriations was also provided in other years .

between 2002 and 2007 , reclamation spent $14 million on a pilot water bank for the klamath to alleviate water shortages .

due to drought events in 2010 , an additional $10 million in supplemental appropriations was provided to the klamath basin in that year , and $2 million was provided for a klamath drought initiative by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the 2002 farm bill provided $50 million was provided to the klamath basin , and usda funding was also provided under other general authorities and programs authorized in the 2002 and 2008 farm bills .

these events are discussed in appendix b to this report .

the remainder of this report focuses on the settlement agreements that resulted from these events , which are currently under consideration by congress .

in response to the earlier conflicts and other issues in the klamath basin , the federal government led talks among multiple groups between 2002 and 2010 , with a goal of achieving long - term solution to the water and endangered species issues in the klamath basin .

this included a solution to previous problems with irrigation deliveries and instream flows for fish , as well as potential ongoing issues associated with the klamath basin water rights adjudication .

participants included state governments , tribes , counties , irrigators , fishermen , and conservation groups .

on february 18 , 2010 , two agreements were announced and signed by many of the participants in the settlement process .

the first agreement , known as the klamath basin restoration agreement ( kbra ) , lays out numerous actions by local , state , and federal parties that would restore river and ocean fish populations , establish water and power supplies for certain agricultural , municipal , and environmental users , and provide for various other actions .

the second agreement , known as the klamath hydroelectric settlement agreement ( khsa ) , lays out the process for removing four dams owned by pacificorp , as well as other related actions .

before many of the agreements' provisions can be implemented , numerous actions must take place , including several notable congressional requirements: ( 1 ) congressional authorization of both agreements ; ( 2 ) a secretarial determination on dam removal ( which itself must be authorized by congress ) ; and ( 3 ) funding ( via federal appropriations ) for federal components of both agreements by congress .

many other contingencies do not involve congress directly , but are required for full implementation of the agreements .

the two agreements were negotiated separately , but are officially linked .

their signatories have agreed to support their simultaneous enactment .

beyond this legislative linkage , some provisions of the agreements are linked ( i.e. , they assume other actions will take place ) .

the below sections summarize the agreements and selected provisions that may be of interest to congress .

they are not an exhaustive summary of either agreement .

stakeholder views on the klamath agreements can broadly be divided into those supporting the agreements and those opposed to one or both of the agreements .

however , such a simple characterization may not do justice to the motivation and preferences of many groups .

while a majority of interest groups involved in initial settlement negotiations endorsed both agreements , reasons for support among these groups are varied , and in some cases are likely to be contingent on specific parts of one agreement or another ( eg , water certainty , dam removal ) going forward .

among those opposed to the agreements , reasons for opposition also vary widely , and include perceptions of economic damages resulting from the agreements , overall lack of environmental protections and / or subversion of existing federal or state laws .

as previously discussed , both klamath agreements require congressional authorization to move forward , and companion bills to authorize the klamath agreements have been introduced in the 112 th congress in both the house and senate ( h.r .

3398 and s. 1851 , respectively ) .

the bills authorize the agreements by reference , and reinforce other provisions in the agreements , seemingly without significant changes to the contents of the agreements .

if it chooses to consider these bills , congress might focus on a number of issues , including whether it endorses the strategies and specific actions ( eg , dam removal , water allocations , restoration actions , and aid for tribal and local interests ) in the agreements .

in addition to deciding whether it agrees with the strategies / actions themselves , congress might also consider the broader obligation of the federal government to act on the agreements , and whether federal expenditures on these actions are justified ( and if so , how much ) .

to many , the klamath agreements represent a potential solution to a series of conflicts between a complex array of interest groups with a history of conflicting values and perspectives .

to others , they represent an unfair and unnecessary resolution to contentious issues that should be solved in other venues .

the ability of the two interrelated agreements to solve long - term issues in the klamath basin will depend on a number of factors , including complex ecological and hydrological processes that are not fully understood .

in considering the preferred course of action in the klamath basin , congress may weigh these factors along with the potential costs and benefits of implementing the agreements , and how they compare to other potential scenarios .

appendix a. klamath basin fish species appendix b .

summary of previous events the 2001 "water crisis" recent controversies in the klamath basin have resulted from the interaction of reclamation's annual operation of the klamath project for irrigation with other purposes and legal considerations — specifically , the appropriate levels of and releases from upper klamath lake — and the effect of that operation on threatened and endangered species in the basins .

the most well known of these controversies occurred under drought conditions in april 2001 , when the fws and nmfs each issued biological opinions concluding that reclamation's proposed operation of the project for 2001 would jeopardize the continued existence of the two species of suckers and the population of coho salmon .

as a result , on april 6 , 2001 , reclamation announced that "no water [would] be available" for farms normally receiving water from upper klamath lake to avoid jeopardizing the listed species in question .

the projected effect of this decision would be to curtail irrigation water deliveries to approximately 200,000 acres of farm and pasture lands within the roughly 235,000-acre klamath project service area .

in the face of having no water for the coming growing season in much of the project area , farmers threatened to open reclamation head gates by force , and federal officials were reportedly threatened .

the crisis made national news and created a virtual stand - off between federal officials and farmer activists .

subsequently , in late july 2001 , well into the growing season , secretary of the interior gale norton announced that additional water would be released from upper klamath lake .

coupled with other water supplies , klamath project irrigators eventually had access to approximately 30% of their typical water supply in 2001 ; however , much of this water came from groundwater supplies at added cost .

while lower klamath national wildlife refuge received no water from upper klamath lake in 2001 , the refuge subsequently received water from clear lake and a number of other sources ( including additional rainfall ) .

regional economic losses resulting from the 2001 reclamation plan were partially mitigated by measures , including more than $30 million in federal disaster payments ( as well as additional state payments ) , additional water allocations after the initial shutoff , and water from water banks and groundwater pumping .

a 2002 study estimated that the regional economy "fared better than most observers expected in 2001" due to federal crop insurance and other disaster assistance programs .

however , the report also noted that regional economic effects of the curtailed deliveries varied widely for individual irrigators , depending on whether they owned or leased land , and other factors .

also , as noted above , not all project water users were affected by the april 6 cut - off decision .

thus , while some farmers faced severe water shortages for several months , others in the surrounding area did not .

because of the controversy surrounding the 2001 biological opinions , the secretary of the interior sought and secured review of the scientific decisions by the national research council ( nrc ) , an arm of the national academy of sciences .

the committee concluded that scientific data were insufficient to support any of the upper klamath lake level management regimes proposed by federal agencies for the 2001 growing season , although it did find support for other measures included in the nmfs and fws biological opinions .

the "fish crisis" of 2002 while klamath fisheries have declined significantly from historical levels , a dramatic event in 2002 renewed water management concerns throughout the lower and upper basins .

in september 2002 , thousands of adult salmon died in the lowermost 40 miles of the klamath river mainstem .

while fall - run chinook salmon were the primary species affected , coho salmon , steelhead trout , and other species were also lost .

this loss , reportedly one of the largest recorded in u.s. history , prompted renewed focus on klamath project operations .

some believe klamath project water management decisions — made in the spring of 2002 — were responsible for the 2002 fish kill ; others dispute this view .

on march 29 , 2002 , reclamation began water deliveries to farms for the 2002 growing season based on two - month ( april and may ) "letters of concurrence" issued by the nmfs and the fws .

by late april 2002 , reclamation had reduced mainstem flow below iron gate dam to 1,350 cubic feet per second ( cfs ) , despite significantly increased rainfall in the klamath basin .

this flow was 350 cfs less than the amount identified by nmfs's 2001 biological opinion as the minimum flow necessary to prevent coho salmon extinction .

the pacific coast federation of fishermen's associations ( pcffa ) and others filed suit to enjoin these reduced flows , in a suit in which many counties and tribes intervened .

although the court determined the 2002 biological opinion and resulting agency action to be arbitrary and capricious , it allowed their continued implementation as to short - term flows .

on april 25 , 2002 , the fws released its draft biological opinion on the impact of the klamath water project on upper klamath basin species , indicating that reclamation's proposed 10-year ( june 1 , 2002 , through march 31 , 2012 ) plan would jeopardize the continued existence of sucker species , and noting a number of actions needed to mitigate impacts .

higher lake levels were not required except in dry and critically dry years .

on may 16 , 2002 , nmfs released its draft biological opinion , also concluding that reclamation's 10-year plan would likely jeopardize the downriver coho salmon .

the pcffa lawsuit was the first challenge to reclamation's 10- year plan , although the plan was criticized by fishermen and the california department of fish and game as reducing the chances for successful fish restoration and having devastating impacts on down - river salmon fisheries .

the final biological opinions from both fws and nmfs were released on may 31 , 2002 .

both final opinions found reclamation's 10-year plan likely to jeopardize the continued existence of esa - listed species .

the nmfs jeopardy determination focused on incremental depletions of iron gate dam flows over the 10-year plan , increasing risk to coho salmon .

the fws jeopardy determination focused on ( 1 ) sucker "entrainment" losses at project dams and diversions in upper klamath lake ; ( 2 ) adverse project effects on water quality and sucker health in upper klamath lake ; and ( 3 ) sucker habitat loss in upper klamath lake .

fws and nmfs each developed "reasonable and prudent" alternatives to avoid the jeopardizing effects of project operations .

on june 3 , 2002 , however , reclamation formally rejected both final biological opinions for the 10-year plan , and opted instead to operate under a one - year plan that it asserted complied with the opinions .

although reclamation asserted that its plan complied with the nmfs and fws biological opinions , more than 33,000 adult salmon died in september 2002 .

most of the salmon killed , however , were chinook salmon , not the esa - listed coho ( which enter the klamath at a different time ) .

coming on the heels of reclamation's controversial decision to curtail flows from upper klamath lake in 2001 and then to resume irrigation flows , many believed water management decisions in the upper basin contributed to the 2002 fish kill ; others believed flows similar to 2001 would not have prevented the fish kill .

regardless , the direct cause of this fish kill was an epizootic disease .

several factors contributed to stressful conditions for fish , which ultimately led to the epizootic disease — ( 1 ) an above average number of chinook salmon entered the klamath river from the ocean between the last week in august and the first week in september 2002 ; ( 2 ) river flow and volume of water in the fish - kill area were atypically low ( due in part to drought ) ; and ( 3 ) water temperatures were very warm .

these three factors resulted in high fish densities which may have been further exacerbated by impeded fish passage upstream due to low water depths of certain riffles , perhaps caused by higher trinity water flows several years earlier that may have changed the stream bed .

the warm water temperatures and high fish density created ideal conditions for pathogens to infect salmon and spread quickly ; however , neither the flows nor the temperatures that occurred were unprecedented .

it is not clear to what degree reclamation's spring 2002 decisions contributed to these factors , but the nrc postulated that the flows in the trinity river "could be most effective in lowering temperatures," presumably in the future .

2006 klamath fishery disaster determination chinook salmon stocks that spawn in california and oregon rivers intermingle in the ocean and are harvested together in the commercial salmon troll fishery off the coasts of these states .

klamath river fall chinook salmon is a key stock with respect to both landings and regulation of the fishery .

when klamath returns are projected to fall below 35,000 naturally spawning adults , the pacific fishery management council ( pfmc ) is required to recommend a closure of the salmon fisheries between cape falcon , oregon and point sur , california ( the klamath impact area ) .

although other salmon stocks may be in good condition , a weak klamath chinook salmon stock may constrain a large portion of the west coast ocean salmon fishery .

in 2006 , the number of naturally spawning adults was below the minimum conservation objective of 35,000 naturally spawning adults .

according to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , the low number of fish returning to the klamath river likely resulted from a combination of factors including poor ocean conditions , dry water years , and diseases resulting from poor in - river conditions .

pfmc recommended , and noaa issued regulations to restrict catch by closing most areas off oregon and california from may 1 , 2006 , to august 31 , 2006 .

although a complete closure of the fishery was avoided , landings decreased in 2006 by 81% when compared to the average of the preceding five years .

the governors of oregon and california requested a fishery disaster determination from the secretary of commerce based on the 2006 forecast of klamath river fall chinook salmon returns and the actions taken in the spring of 2006 by the pfmc and nmfs .

on july 6 , 2006 , the secretary of commerce declared a commercial fishery failure under section 308 ( b ) of the interjurisdictional fisheries act , and on august 10 , 2006 , under section 312 ( a ) of the magnuson stevens fishery conservation and management act .

in may 2007 , the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 , ( p.l .

110-28 ) allocated $60.4 million to noaa for eligible recipients affected by the commercial fishery failure .

assistance was distributed by the pacific states marine fisheries commission to oregon and california fishermen and indian tribes that rely on salmon .

salmon troll fishery landings and revenue improved during the 2007 season , but in 2008 the ocean fishery was limited by low fall chinook salmon returns to the sacramento river .

