it is widely believed that good teachers are critical to student learning .

a large body of academic research has produced strong evidence that teacher quality is positively related to student performance .

however , the strength of this research finding depends on the measure used to indicate "quality. .

studies that use credentials such as degree attainment or teacher certification show weaker impacts on student performance than studies that use direct measures of teachers' pedagogical and subject - matter knowledge .

nevertheless , credentials are more readily available to local school administrators that hire teachers and more easily incorporated into state and federal policy .

in recent years , education policy governing the attainment of teaching credentials has evolved to incorporate pedagogy and subject expertise .

general state certification exams have been replaced or enhanced with testing for knowledge of subject matter .

some states have developed multi - tiered , knowledge - based certification systems .

teacher preparation programs in some states have begun requiring that candidates obtain a major or minor in a subject as a prerequisite for or in conjunction with an education degree .

federal education policies have also aimed to enhance teaching credentials by placing added emphasis on subject expertise .

most recently , the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ) ( p.l .

107-110 ) , requires that all public school teachers , in states participating in the esea title i - a program , be highly qualified by demonstrating subject knowledge for their teaching level .

elementary school teachers must show knowledge of basic elementary school curricular areas .

middle and secondary school teachers must demonstrate a high level of competency in all subject areas taught .

subject - matter knowledge and competency may be demonstrated by passing a state certification exam or licensing test in the relevant subject ( s ) .

one of the major goals of nclb is to raise the achievement of students who currently fail to meet grade - level proficiency standards .

since student achievement has been shown to be largely dependent on teacher quality , the law seeks to improve achievement by setting higher minimum teacher quality requirements .

in complying with the law , schools are prevented from hiring teachers with emergency or provisional certification , those without a baccalaureate degree , or those with limited subject knowledge .

for some time , it was thought that schools hired teachers lacking full credentials because a shortage existed in the overall supply of qualified teachers .

that idea has been challenged in recent years by research that revealed the shortage is in fact a distribution problem .

some so - called "hard - to - staff" schools find it difficult to maintain a staff of qualified teachers , while other schools have an adequate supply ( and in some cases an oversupply ) of quality teachers .

the reasons for the uneven distribution in the teacher supply are still a matter of debate .

some argue that rules providing priority in reassignment options to teachers with seniority and the late decision deadline given to resigning teachers relegates the least - qualified teachers to less desirable schools .

others point to working conditions and other factors that make these schools less desirable to quality teachers in the first place .

whatever the reasons for the uneven distribution of quality teachers , the persistence of hard - to - staff schools may undermine the impact of nclb teacher quality standards in reducing the student achievement gap .

to address this issue , congress included in nclb a requirement that poor and minority students have equal access to quality instruction .

this report examines implementation of the nclb requirement of a highly qualified teacher in every public school classroom .

the first section of the report describes the highly qualified teacher ( hqt ) requirement and how it was specified through regulation , guidance , and policy statements issued by the education department ( ed ) .

in the second section , the report analyzes data from a national survey of schools to assess teacher quality prior to enactment of nclb and examines state reporting data to track how teacher quality may have improved throughout the law's implementation .

finally , the report discusses teacher quality issues that congress may consider as the esea reauthorization process unfolds .

with regard to teacher quality , nclb made three major amendments to the esea: ( 1 ) the law required that all teachers of core academic subjects be "highly qualified," ( 2 ) it mandated that the distribution of teacher quality be equal across poor and minority schools , and ( 3 ) it established accountability provisions to ensure that annual improvements in teacher quality are achieved .

following passage of nclb , ed further specified the hqt definition through regulation , nonregulatory guidance , and other means .

in general , these policy statements addressed concerns about the scope and application of the hqt requirements .

among a wide variety of implementation issues , ed sought to clarify what constitutes "core" subject matter , how states should develop and apply a housse , how the hqt requirements may be differentially applied to different types of teachers and in different types of educational settings , and when various aspects of the requirement must be completed .

this section examines progress made toward meeting the nclb goal of placing a highly qualified teacher in every classroom .

data gathered prior to the law's passage will be compared to the most recent data available to see whether the nation's schools witnessed a measurable increase in the proportion of highly qualified teachers .

the only nationally representative source of pre - nclb information on teacher quality is the schools and staffing survey ( sass ) , which collects data on teachers' assignments , education , and certification .

the sass survey fielded during the 1999-2000 school year provides a snapshot of the teaching force prior to passage of nclb .

the only national source of post - nclb data on teacher quality comes from the law's reporting requirements .

each year , states must submit to ed , as part of their cspr , "the percentage of classes being taught by highly qualified teachers in the state. .

it is important to note that the units of analysis for these two data sources are different .

in the sass data , the "objects" being measured in the survey are teachers ; thus , these data are designed to address such questions as , "how many teachers are highly qualified ? .

conversely , in the cspr data the units of analysis are classes ; thus , these data are designed to address such questions as , "how many classes are taught by highly qualified teachers ? .

although the pre - and post - nclb data come from different sources and use different units of analysis , these data do appear to show improvement in teacher quality over the years in which the law was implemented .

the current funding authority for the esea expired after fy2007 .

legislative action to reauthorize and amend the esea , along with the hqt requirements , has been previously undertaken by congress .

legislative proposals have been forwarded and important action has taken place in the committees of jurisdiction in both chambers .

several reauthorization proposals would amend the hqt requirement to make accommodations for certain teachers or schools .

proposals address issues including multiple subject matter teachers , the definition of subject matter , middle school teachers , and rural , urban , and poor schools .

in addition to legislative action , congress is concerned with issues raised by the secretary's recent offer to waive certain nclb requirements , including some associated with teacher quality .

in exchange for these waivers , state and local educational agencies must commit to reforming their teacher evaluation systems , among other reforms .

this may result in additional focus being placed on teacher performance as opposed to teacher qualifications .

the remainder of this report will discuss issues raised by these waivers as well as other issues of interest to congress as it considers reauthorizing the esea .

although the analysis in this report indicates that less than one in five teachers cover more than one subject , those who did teach more than one subject were much less likely to be hqt .

among multiple subject teachers in this analysis , half did not meet the hqt standard .

this small group — fewer than 6% of all teachers — may present a large problem for schools and states attempting to meet the 100% hqt requirement .

solutions have been proposed for certain kinds of schools ( such as rural and hard - to - staff schools , discussed below ) ; however , some proposals seek to address the problem for teachers in all schools generally .

these amendments would allow teachers teaching multiple subjects to demonstrate knowledge in one subject area using the existing methods and provide a second method for other subject ( s ) taught .

for example , multiple subject teachers who are hqt in one of their subjects could be given a certain amount of time to accumulate coursework equivalent to an academic minor in the subject ( s ) for which they lack sufficient knowledge .

the issue of multiple subject teachers is in part created by the definition of subject matter in nclb .

specifically , section 9101 ( 11 ) of the statute states that , "the term 'core academic subjects' means , english , reading and language arts , mathematics , science , foreign languages , civics and government , economics , arts , history , and geography. .

as mentioned earlier , ed addressed issues related to science and social studies teachers in its nonregulatory guidance .

states were given the authority to determine whether teachers qualified to teach in one field of science or social studies were qualified in other fields in those areas .

some have proposed legislative solutions that would recognize "generalist" certificates in these and other areas as proof of subject - matter knowledge .

many of the teachers found not to meet the hqt standard are teaching middle school students .

the problem posed by this group of teachers is that some have duties similar to elementary teachers , while others are more like secondary school teachers .

that is , some middle school teachers work in so - called "self - contained" classroom settings where they are responsible for teaching multiple subjects to the same group of students .

meanwhile , other middle school teachers work in "departmental" settings , in which they teach the same subject to different groups of students over the course of a single day .

according to nclb , middle school teachers are to be treated like secondary school teachers with regard to demonstration of subject - matter expertise .

thus , those teaching multiple subjects in self - contained classrooms must be certified to teach in several subjects — or prove subject knowledge in each area by the other permitted means .

the proposals to recognize "generalist" certification mentioned above would remedy this problem .

other proposals include expanding the allowable types of experience and forms of evaluation permitted in state housse methods for veteran middle school teachers .

the multi - subject issue just discussed is compounded in small , rural schools , which appear to have an especially difficult time meeting the 100% hqt requirement .

this analysis revealed that only a small fraction ( 0.4% ) of teachers benefit from the srsa waiver .

srsa schools are largely defined as those located in areas classified as "rural" according to the u.s. census bureau locale codes .

ed analysis has found the census locale code classifications of rural areas to be at best crude and in some cases grossly inaccurate .

some proponents suggest that rural schools get extended time to meet the hqt deadline ; however , others would provide this option only to srsa schools .

still others propose giving the secretary the authority to waive the hqt requirement for any rural school that could demonstrate that the requirement would impose an undue hardship on the school because of population and geographic constraints .

the data in table 2 revealing higher hqt rates in non - poor schools compared to poor schools supports research that has shown that schools in poor neighborhoods and central city locations have higher rates of underqualified teachers .

although no legislative amendments have been proposed to address issues regarding urban or poor schools , some of the proposals presented here that concern "hard - to - staff" schools could be adopted to relieve the burden imposed by the hqt requirement .

however , given the high turnover rates at these schools , short - term waivers and deadline extensions may not provide sufficient relief .

at the same time , such flexibility would weaken nclb's emphasis on securing highly qualified teachers in hopes of improving instructional quality — especially for disadvantaged students attending schools in high poverty areas .

on september 23 , 2011 , the administration announced that states would have the opportunity to request , on behalf of school districts , flexibility regarding specific nclb requirements , including elements of hqt .

under this flexibility , an lea that does not meet its hqt targets would no longer have to develop an improvement plan and would retain flexibility in how it uses its title i and title ii funds .

additionally , a state granted this flexibility would be exempt from the requirements regarding its role in the implementation of lea improvement plans , including the requirement that the sea enter into agreements with leas on the uses of funds and the requirement that it provide technical assistance to leas on their plans .

states would not be exempt from the requirement that they ensure that poor and minority children are not taught at higher rates than other children by inexperienced , unqualified , or out - of - field teachers .

this flexibility appears to extend the "good faith effort" waiver provided by the previous administration .

as with the accommodations made above , such actions would weaken minimal qualification requirements that teachers are now expected to meet .

although , waiver requirements pertaining to teacher evaluation systems are another approach toward promoting quality instruction .

