presidential elections are among the most iconic events in american politics .

particularly before the television era , campaigns for the presidency and vice presidency were relatively brief events , involving a small band of supporters and occupying only a few months of the election - year calendar .

today , presidential campaigns last months or years , involve thousands of professional employees and volunteers , and are the preeminent political event of a four - year cycle .

since the mid - 19 th century , certain elements of the role of political parties , money , and nomination procedures have remained constant , but many have evolved with time .

this report considers contemporary developments in presidential elections .

it emphasizes three topics chosen for their recurring importance and notable recent developments: ( 1 ) nominating procedures ; ( 2 ) campaign finance ; and ( 3 ) the electoral college .

the report highlights significant developments in these areas , particularly as they relate to the 2008 and 2012 elections .

these topics have obvious political implications that affect the race for the presidency .

they are also modern manifestations of the democratic process in the united states .

key issues include how the party nominees are selected , which are financially able to compete in elections and how , and whether electors or voters should ultimately be responsible for electing the nation's chief executive .

all these concerns may be of interest to congress as members continue to follow and be involved in presidential campaigns , participate as delegates to the national conventions , and potentially consider their own presidential candidacies , but also as the house and senate oversee federal elections and consider various reform proposals .

the report proceeds by discussing the nomination process , which starts the presidential contest .

it then considers campaign finance , the raising and spending of funds that are vital throughout the nomination and general election process .

the final section addresses proposed changes affecting the electoral college , the final step in electing the president .

a preview of major points appears below .

the presidential primary season is often shaped by events in the previous election cycle .

that was especially true for 2012 .

after years of negotiations , the national democratic and republican parties reached agreement on a plan to organize the schedule of primaries and caucuses and reduce front - loading .

in recent election cycles , the iowa and new hampshire contests had been pushed from february into january , under pressure from other states that sought a place at the beginning of the process .

democratic party rules usually kept these states from jumping ahead of iowa and new hampshire , but did not prevent a rush to schedule early events within the rules .

inter - party cooperation averted a similar result for 2012 , which featured a significantly less front - loaded calendar .

another development that shaped the nominating contest was a change to the republican rules for awarding delegates according to the presidential vote .

the winner - take - all method that had been widely used was replaced with a proportional system for contests before april 1 , although strict proportional allocation was not mandated .

with an open race for the republican nomination , the pace of primaries and caucuses and the new allocation rule had an important effect by extending the contest in comparison to past nominating seasons .

significant changes in campaign finance law are expected to shape campaign finance in the 2012 election cycle .

most prominently , this includes developments resulting from the supreme court's 2010 decision in citizens united v. federal election commission .

in that case , the court invalidated long - standing prohibitions on corporations and unions using their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures calling for election or defeat of specific candidates .

 ( direct contributions from corporate and union treasuries remain prohibited. ) .

these changes apply to both presidential elections and other campaigns .

in the aftermath of citizens united , presidential candidates face additional pressure to raise funds to be able to compete against their opponents and outside groups , particularly new organizations called "super pacs. .

in addition to citizens united , the future of the presidential public financing program is in doubt , as candidates increasingly opt instead for private funds .

the electoral college method of presidential elections has long been the subject of discussion .

to critics , it is archaic , anti - democratic , and has , on four occasions , elected presidents who received fewer popular votes than their opponents .

to defenders , it is a pillar of federalism , promoting inclusive candidacies and a moderate two - party system .

between 1948 and 1979 , congress considered numerous constitutional amendments to reform the system or replace it with direct election , but no single proposal ever gained the constitutionally required two - thirds majority of both chambers needed to submit an amendment for state ratification .

after decades of inactivity , the issue is enjoying a revival , as various states consider reform on the sub - federal level .

moreover , a nongovernmental organization , the national popular vote ( npv ) campaign , has proposed an interstate compact that would achieve direct election without a constitutional amendment .

the compact would bind signatory states to award their electoral votes to the nationwide popular vote winner , notwithstanding results within the state , and would take effect after states controlling more than half ( 270 ) of electoral votes agree .

by late 2011 , eight states and the district of columbia , possessing a total of 132 electoral votes , had joined the compact .

to summarize , the three major areas discussed in this report — the nominating process , campaign finance , and the electoral college — have been central elements of presidential elections for over a century and a half .

each of those areas has experienced transition in recent decades , but each is also facing changes particularly relevant for the 2012 election cycle .

both democrats and republicans amended their nomination processes to reduce front - loading and bring more order to the nomination process .

for the first time , the two parties agreed on a window during which primaries are permitted — from march to june — except for the exempt states of iowa , new hampshire , nevada , and south carolina .

those contests were held in january , as was the florida primary , in violation of the rules that had mandated a starting date of february 1 or after for the exempt states .

penalties were imposed by the national republican party on states that held january and february events , including florida , new hampshire , south carolina , arizona , and michigan , but not on the caucus states of iowa , nevada , colorado , minnesota , and maine where the results were non - binding .

for the first time in modern history , corporations and unions are now free to make unlimited expenditures from their general treasuries calling for defeat of specific candidates .

in addition to adapting to this new environment , presidential candidates and outside groups must consider the decline of the presidential public financing system .

in 2008 , barack obama became the first person elected president , since public funds were first offered in 1976 , who declined to accept any public funds .

it is possible that 2012 will make the first occasion in which neither major - party nominee will accept any public funds .

debate over the current relevance of the electoral college has been a recurring theme for decades — a topic that has reemerged ahead of the 2012 election cycle .

despite relative inactivity on the issue in recent years , several states have proposed moving to direct election of the president .

the 2012 cycle and related developments may suggest renewed interest in reconsidering presidential selection in the future .

additional discussion appears throughout this report .

for the first time in nearly 25 years , the primary and caucus calendar did not feature a crowded series of events in early february or march .

as the result of a coordinated effort between democrats and republicans at the national level , both parties are expected to enforce a sanctioned "window" for delegate selection events .

democrats first adopted a window in 1980 ( and effectively exempted iowa and new hampshire ) , but republicans were unable to garner support for the concept until 2010 .

previous attempts by republicans to do so for the 2004 and 2008 elections were unsuccessful , partly because the party had to approve such changes at the quadrennial national convention , for the following election cycle .

in both cases , the plans failed to receive the necessary support within the party to be referred to the national conventions .

however , the 2008 national convention did approve a committee — the temporary delegate selection committee — to review delegate selection procedures and make recommendations to the republican national committee ( rnc ) , a first for a party that had traditionally deferred to the state parties on most delegate selection matters .

the temporary delegate selection committee made several recommendations , of which two were adopted as important amendments to party rules and which have been significant in shaping the 2012 primary cycle ( see the section entitled " the outlook for 2012 " for a longer discussion of these changes ) .

the first concerned the calendar , and specifically the imposition of a "window" during which primary and caucus events may be held , such as the democrats have had since 1980 .

republicans had never before imposed a timing rule .

the change stipulated that no delegate selection event could be held before the first tuesday in march ( march 6 , 2012 ) , with exceptions for iowa , new hampshire , south carolina , and nevada , which can begin the delegate selection process on or after february 1 .

the window would not apply if democrats fail to adhere to similar timing .

the second change , also unprecedented for republicans , required states to use proportional allocation of national convention delegates for any contest held before april 1 .

democrats have long mandated proportional allocation of delegates , based on primary and caucus results .

the intent was for states that want to retain the preferred winner - take - all system to move the primary or caucus to a date after april 1 to comply , presumably resulting in a less front - loaded calendar as a result .

that goal was largely achieved .

the contest began on the same date as in 2008 ( january 3 ) , but the slower pace of primaries and caucuses and the use of proportional allocation affected the ability of any of the candidates to close out the race early .

by the end of february in 2008 , republican events had already been held in 36 states and the race was announced over shortly thereafter on march 4 .

in 2012 , only 10 such events had been held by the same date .

furthermore , the widespread use of the winner - take - all system for awarding delegates in the past helped the front - runner accumulate a majority of delegates and end the race early .

the mandate to use proportional allocation before april 1 ( there was a loophole that allowed states to award delegates on a winner - take - all basis if the candidate surpassed 50% in the preference vote ) contributed to prolonging the contest , resulting in more primary spending and party infighting .

the penalty for violating the proportional allocation rule was not specified in the republican rules , but guidance provided to the state parties by the rnc stated that "the definition of 'proportional allocation' is left to each state's individual discretion , subject to a final determination in accordance with the rules ," but departing from the requirement for proportional allocation "carries significant risk that not all delegates will be seated. .

the party did penalize the five states that held binding primaries before march 6 , thereby violating the new the timing rule: new hampshire ( january 3 ) , south carolina ( january 21 ) , florida ( january 31 ) , arizona , and michigan ( february 28 ) .

the party reduced each state's national convention delegation by 50% .

iowa and other caucus states that held events ahead of the march 6 start date were not penalized because the results were not binding .

similarly , missouri's february 7 primary was not binding as well .

finally , the calendar and rule changes also led to speculation that no candidate would accumulate a majority of delegates by the end of the primary season , resulting in a brokered convention .

others suggested that only one of the candidates could prevail by the end of the primary season .

while there were mixed views about how long the contest would go on and how it would end , many party leaders decried the changes brought about by the new rules and argued that they would damage the nominee in the general election .

at the 2012 convention , the party adopted two rules changes that will potentially affect the contest in 2016 .

the first change will bind delegates to primary and caucus outcomes and was strenuously opposed by supporters of representative ron paul , while the second allows the party to change rules between elections , rather than only at the quadrennial conventions .

campaigning for the presidency requires more money today than ever before .

raising funds increasingly requires highly professional campaign staffs , typically supplemented with fundraising consultants and assistance — where permissible — from national party committees .

the money raised is spent on every facet of the campaign , particularly political advertising , which is typically a national campaign's largest budget item .

purchasing broadcast airtime to run political ads is especially expensive in major media markets .

even without high airtime costs , the advertising must be produced ( usually through the services of professional media consultants ) , polls must be commissioned to track the campaign's popularity and messages , and all sorts of everyday operational costs must be met .

federal election law and regulation , discussed below , set the boundaries for how presidential campaigns and other "political committees" ( which include candidate committees , party committees , and political action committees [pacs] ) raise and spend money .

although public financing dominated presidential campaigns between the 1970s and early 2000s , a combination of legal and strategic developments has increased the emphasis on private money in recent election cycles .

the 2012 cycle marked the first since the public financing program's inception in the 1970s that no major candidate accepted public funds .

in addition to the amounts raised and spent by candidate campaigns , other entities — especially parties , pacs , and interest groups ( eg , tax - exempt 501 ( c ) and 527 organizations ) — are major sources of political funds .

as table 4 shows , for the 2012 election cycle , an individual could contribute up to $5,000 to a presidential campaign .

of that amount , $2,500 could be contributed during the primary election .

another $2,500 could be contributed during the general election .

also as the table shows , pacs and parties can contribute to campaigns , just as a presidential campaign could choose to contribute funds to one of those entities .

importantly , and as discussed below , publicly financed candidates may not accept private contributions in the general election .

the limits below also do not necessarily apply to contributions to groups making only independent expenditures — messages that explicitly call for election or defeat of a candidate but which are not coordinated with the campaign .

campaign finance in presidential elections has been the subject of extensive research and is governed by complex requirements specified in the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , the internal revenue code ( irc ) , and federal election commission ( fec ) regulations .

in - depth treatment of these subjects is beyond the scope of this report , which is designed to provide an overview of major issues .

the following pages discuss some of the most notable contemporary issues affecting campaign finance in presidential elections .

in particular , the discussion includes recent changes in the legal and regulatory environment per the 2010 supreme court ruling in citizens united v. federal election commission ; the public financing program ; and fundraising and spending by campaigns and groups in 2008 and beyond .

among others , key points include the following: major legal changes resulted from the supreme court's 2010 citizens united ruling .

although corporations and unions remain prohibited from using their treasury funds to contribute to candidates , the 2012 election cycle was the first in which they could directly ( but independently ) spend treasury funds to advocate election or defeat of a presidential candidate .

in 2012 , presidential campaigns ( like all other federal candidate campaigns ) could raise no more than $5,000 from individual contributors ( $2,500 for the primary election ; $2,500 for the general election ) .

presidential campaigns are on pace to raise record amounts in 2012 , in addition to substantial financial activity from parties , political action committees ( pacs ) , and outside groups .

although candidates from both parties widely participated in public financing before 2000 , the program's popularity has declined in the past decade .

in 2008 barack obama accepted no public funds .

he was the first candidate elected president solely with private funds since public financing was first offered in 1976 .

the decline of public financing is perhaps the greatest change in presidential campaign finance in the past 20 years .

no major candidate accepted public funds in 2012 .

democratic and republican convention committees received base public financing grants of approximately $18.2 million each .

one of the many compromises incorporated into the u.s. constitution , the electoral college represented an effort by the philadelphia convention of 1787 to provide for a presidential election that would be free of undue influence by congress , thus insuring greater independence in the executive ; provide a fundamental role for the states by establishing the election as a federal , rather than national , process ; allocate electors by a formula that provided some advantage to less populous states ; give the states wide - ranging authority over the means by which they would choose their electors: democratically , by popular vote , by the legislature itself , or by another body altogether ; and , ultimately ; temper popular enthusiasms and partisan and sectional attachments by giving the actual vote to the electors , who , it was hoped , would be prominent citizens of their states and communities , well - informed and educated persons who would make a balanced and measured selection .

whatever the founders' intentions , from the very beginning , the electoral college began to change almost immediately , through constitutional amendment , state laws , and political party practices .

the growth of political parties and the spread of voting rights and democratic principles overtook the founders' vision within two decades , and the electoral college system evolved into the compound system that continues to govern u.s presidential elections two centuries later .

the issues discussed in this report are not the only ones affecting contemporary presidential elections .

as the report and the sources cited herein suggest , presidential elections are the subject of substantial scholarly study , media and public interest , and governmental activity .

the three major topics discussed here — the nominating process , campaign finance , and the electoral college — are , however , among the most enduring issues in presidential elections .

all three remain highly relevant for 2012 .

in each case , major changes to presidential selection have occurred since 2008 or are under consideration .

many of the developments discussed above will require additional time to fully understand , perhaps even beyond completion of the 2012 election cycle ( especially for proposed changes to the electoral college ) .

nonetheless , history suggests that each of these areas will continue to be pillars of the presidential election process .

with these potentially major developments in mind , this report provides congress with background about how and why contemporary presidential elections occur as they do .

the process for selecting presidents has remained more or less unchanged since the 19 th century .

generally speaking , that trend is likely to continue .

the topics discussed here could nonetheless set the boundaries for how today's citizens , candidates , political parties , and outside groups participate in presidential elections .

members of congress can and do participate in the politics and elections surrounding presidential selection .

congress also has unique responsibilities for overseeing federal roles in that process , which requires an understanding of how presidential elections evolved .

this report provides a resource for doing so .

