congress is currently questioning whether existing policies are leading to the expanded use of domestic advanced biofuels — including algae - based biofuels ( abb ) , among other options .

in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) , congress expanded the renewable fuel standard ( rfs2 ) by mandating that increasing volumes of renewable biofuels be used in the nation's transportation fuel supply .

the rfs2 identified four specific biofuel categories and established time - specific mandates for quantities of fuels , the fastest - growing and largest of which is the cellulosic biofuels category .

algae is not identified as a cellulosic biofuel feedstock type to meet the rfs2 .

according to rfs compliance data monitored by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , a steady production of small amounts of cellulosic biofuel began in mid - 2013 .

as a result of the small amounts produced , epa was compelled to lower the cellulosic biofuel mandate for the fourth successive year and has proposed to do so for a fifth year in 2014 .

moreover , the long - term certainty of the tax incentives for which abb is eligible is debatable .

there is considerable concern about how the u.s. cellulosic biofuels industry will develop to meet the mandates in the absence of federal support and which , if any , other types of biomass could be used as a primary feedstock to meet the mandate .

thus far , legislation pertaining to algae - based biofuels has not been introduced in the 113 th congress .

congress held hearings and members introduced legislation during the 112 th congress that supported the use of multiple biomass feedstocks as energy sources to meet transportation needs .

of particular interest are feedstocks that are sustainable and domestic in origin , could spur job creation , and would have few adverse environmental impacts .

some argue that algae — generally defined as simple photosynthetic organisms that live in water — is one biomass feedstock that could meet these criteria .

algae can be used to produce a variety of biofuels , but most production to date has focused on biodiesel and jet fuel , and it is unclear whether production of other biofuels would be feasible given resource requirements and other concerns .

if successfully commercialized , abb would have potential advantages and disadvantages compared to other biofuels .

among its advantages , algae has higher biomass yields per acre of cultivation than other feedstocks , leading to larger oil yields .

it also may use water that is undesirable for other uses ( eg , wastewater or saline sources ) .

in addition , abb production could potentially use carbon dioxide from the flue gas of stationary sources ( eg , power plants ) , if abb facilities are co - located with such facilities .

some abb drawbacks concern the cost of running a commercial - scale facility , the volume and availability of resource inputs ( eg , water , land , and nutrients ) , the immaturity of technology to convert algae into biofuels , and the sensitivity of algae to minor changes in its environment .

substantial abb research and development ( r&d ) has taken place since the 1950s , but for various reasons abb has yet to gain a foothold in the transportation fuel market .

the main reason is that abb is not currently economical to produce at commercial scale .

also , it is not a major component of energy and agricultural statutes ; as a result there is likely more inherent investment risk .

the relevance of abb to the u.s. transportation sector could potentially rise if technological advances are achieved , if oil prices rise , if certain fuels ( eg , cellulosic biofuels ) prove incapable of meeting annual rfs2 mandates , or as federal agencies and corporations announce ventures involving abb for both vehicle and aircraft use .

this report discusses the status of abb research and development , federal funding , and legislative concerns .

while this report focuses on the use of algae as a biomass feedstock for transportation fuel , there are other applications for algae ( eg , nutraceuticals , cosmetics ) .

however , congressional and public interest are currently focused on algae use for transportation .

many abb discussions involve its limited eligibility for the rfs2 — a mandate requiring that the national fuel supply contain a minimum amount of fuel produced from renewable biomass — compared to other biomass feedstocks .

although abb is eligible to participate in the rfs2 , it does not qualify as an eligible feedstock under the cellulosic biofuel subcategory because it is not defined as cellulosic in the rfs2 regulations .

the rfs2 is composed of two biofuel categories: unspecified biofuel and advanced biofuels ( or non - corn starch ethanol ; see figure 1 ) .

the advanced biofuel portion includes three subcategories: cellulosic and agricultural waste - based biofuels , biomass - based diesel , and "other" ( see figure 2 ) .

each advanced biofuel subcategory has a specific volume mandate for each year of the rfs2 ( currently 2006-2022 ) and must meet lifecycle greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions reduction thresholds .

the cellulosic biofuels subcategory is ultimately the largest component of the rfs2 .

its carve - out is set at 0.5 billion gallons for 2012 ( roughly 3% of the rfs2 ) and ramps up to 16 billion gallons in 2022 ( roughly 44% of the rfs2 ) .

the biomass - based diesel carve - out of the advanced biofuel category ( the portion that algae - based biofuels do qualify for ) had a 2013 mandate of 1.28 billion gallons , and epa proposes a 2014 and 2015 mandate for the same amount .

the biomass - based diesel volume for 2016 to 2022 has not been set and will be determined by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) in future rulemaking , but is to be no less than 1 billion gallons .

in february 2013 , epa clarified that the rfs biomass - based diesel subcategory includes jet fuel .

assuming algae is converted to a diesel / jet fuel substitute , abb would qualify for the biomass - based diesel subcategory , but to date it cannot compete cost - effectively with soy biodiesel in this subcategory .

one study reports that the production of algae biodiesel could cost from $9.84 to $20.53 per gallon , compared to $2.60 per gallon for petroleum diesel production .

in 2011 , the u.s. navy and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) announced the $12 million purchase of 450,000 gallons of advanced drop - in biofuel , from a blend of non - food waste and algae , to be mixed with aviation fuel or marine diesel fuel .

it is unclear what impact abb may have on the rfs biomass - based diesel carveout if it proves to be cost - effective to produce abb as a jet fuel .

even with an rfs2 mandate and tax credits , cellulosic biofuels have yet to meet the required mandate .

epa reports that very few facilities are consistently producing cellulosic biofuels for commercial sale .

as a result , the epa lowered the 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 cellulosic biofuel mandates and proposes to lower the 2014 mandate .

congress may consider whether other biomass feedstock types , including algae , should play a larger role in meeting the overall rfs2 mandate .

some suggest that broadening the rfs2 to include algae as a cellulosic biofuel feedstock would boost production opportunities .

others contend that abb will never be cost - competitive .

others could argue that the potential for higher prices of crude oil would be an incentive to produce fuels that may eventually be lower in cost .

technology exists to convert algae ( like any organic matter ) into multiple forms of energy , including liquid fuels ( eg , diesel or jet fuel ) , electric power , and biogas .

however , there is no current technology to convert this biomass feedstock into a transportation biofuel economically and at commercial scale .

while no technology is currently available to make this conversion commercially viable , microalgae , macroalgae , and cyanobacteria are each being considered for abb production .

microalgae are microscopic photosynthetic organisms .

macroalgae , commonly referred to as seaweed , are fast - growing marine and freshwater plants that can grow to be quite large .

cyanobacteria are not technically algae , but bacteria that live in water and collect energy via photosynthesis .

all three require light , nutrients , water , land , and carbon dioxide ( co2 ) or sugar to be successfully cultivated .

three primary components of algae — lipids , carbohydrates , and proteins — can be used to make energy .

different algae strains produce these components in different proportions .

depending on the biofuel to be produced , all or only one of these components may be used .

algae undergoes four major processes in its conversion to biofuel: cultivation , harvest , processing , and biofuel / bioproduct conversion ( see figure 3 ) .

algae cultivation may be photoautotrophic ( algae requiring light to grow ) or heterotrophic ( algae grown without light and requiring a carbon source such as sugar to grow ) .

photoautotrophic cultivation can occur in an open pond or in a closed system ( eg , a photobioreactor ; see figure 4 ) .

each has advantages and challenges .

open pond cultivation is generally less expensive and simpler to build , but is subject to weather conditions , contamination , and more water consumption .

cultivation conditions may be better controlled in a closed system , but there are scalability concerns , and closed systems historically have been more expensive than open ponds .

heterotrophic cultivation occurs in a fermentation tank and can use inexpensive lignocellulosic sugars for algae growth , which could lead to competition for feedstocks with other biofuel technologies .

after cultivation , a variety of methods can be used to harvest the algae , including flocculation , filtration , and centrifugation .

while algae harvest cycles vary based on the strain , in general algae can be harvested numerous times throughout the year , compared to once a year for many conventional crops .

the next step is to process the algae , usually by dewatering or drying , which separates the algae into the various components necessary for biofuel conversion .

afterward , certain components of the algae , such as lipids and oils , are extracted for biofuel conversion .

the algal biomass is converted into biofuel through a chemical , biochemical , or thermochemical conversion process , or through a combination of these processes ( see figure 5 ) .

congress has debated whether algae - based biofuel could help diversify the u.s. transportation fuel portfolio .

while congress has created a policy that mandates the use of alternative fuels for transportation ( eg , rfs2 ) and set up tax credits that support alternative fuel production , much of the legislation and tax provisions for alternative transportation fuel is constrained to a set of feedstock types ( eg , cellulosic ) and fuel types as defined in the statute ( eg , ethanol , biodiesel ) .

going forward , congress may choose to reevaluate how it supports alternative fuels by possibly expanding the feedstock and fuel types that qualify for transportation and energy mandates .

for example , in the past the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) amended both the cellulosic biofuel production tax credit and the cellulosic biofuel depreciation allowance to include algae - based biofuels .

both tax incentives expired at the end of 2013 and it is not known if the incentives will be extended .

additionally , algae is eligible for one part of the biomass crop assistance program ( bcap ) .

some in congress have expressed interest in abb because it could have significantly lower greenhouse gas emissions on a life - cycle basis than conventional fuels .

if abb is to become an alternative to help reduce u.s. dependence on petroleum and reduce greenhouse gas emissions , some stakeholders contend that consistent , comprehensive , long - term ( for the duration of multiple congressional sessions ) policy support , as well as further research and development , would be required .

options that have been proposed for policies to encourage abb include modifying the rfs2 , creating a federal low - carbon fuel standard , or placing a tax on carbon .

abb advocates also assert that congress could encourage the growth of the u.s. algae industry by providing tax parity with other biofuels , appropriating additional federal funds for algae - related programs , and modifying the rfs2 to be feedstock - neutral so that algae - based biofuels can be more broadly included .

tax incentives may accelerate abb research , development , and demonstration testing , thus possibly shortening the timeline for commercial abb production .

however , some might argue that it is premature to issue tax breaks to an industry that has very few commercial production facilities .

furthermore , it may be that tax breaks for renewable energy in general will phase out under the emerging policy environment of fiscal discipline and budget restraint .

opponents of such support argue that congress should not be involved in selecting biomass feedstock types for biofuels before commercial success has been proven , or more broadly , that congress should not be selecting the technology at any point .

congress did select certain feedstock types for biofuel production under the rfs2 .

at the time , industry assertions and government data supported the argument that certain levels of cellulosic biofuel production capacity would be achievable within the given time frame , although these have not come to pass .

given the federal budget situation , congress could decide to expand the cellulosic biofuel definition for the rfs to include algae and let industry take the research funding lead .

this could give the abb industry a long - term goal and guaranteed market as part of the rfs2 ( for roughly 10 years ) .

at a later time , perhaps after the abb pilot projects that have come online yield data on the feasibility of abb production , congress could have a legislative discussion about what federal funding or other types of support , if any , would be appropriate .

legislation introduced in the 112 th congress would have incorporated some of these ideas .

in general , proposed legislation either would have expanded the cellulosic biofuels definition for the rfs2 to include algae by amending the clean air act ( codified as 42 u.s.c .

7401 et seq .

 ) , and / or would have expanded the definition in the tax code for select tax incentives to incorporate algae — which congress did with atra .

h.r .

1149 ( 112 th congress ) also would have amended the clean air act to include algae - based biofuel in the renewable fuel standard program .

algae - based biofuel is a potential domestic transportation fuel option that could help to smooth fluctuations in petroleum supply , and it could potentially diversify the biomass feedstock supply needed to meet renewable liquid transportation fuel mandates .

the potential benefits of abb include per - acre yields reported to be significantly larger than those for other biofuel feedstocks ( eg , soybean , jatropha ) , and the potential for algae to grow in water not traditionally used for other purposes .

the potential concerns of abb include limited information about the costs of large - scale abb production , the amount of energy required , and life - cycle emissions analysis .

the need for large amounts of the greenhouse gas co 2 to grow algae may be a benefit or a concern: algae cultivation could potentially contribute to emissions neutrality by reusing co 2 from stationary sources , but there are concerns about whether enough co 2 from existing sources is available to support commercial levels of abb production .

the use of genetically engineered algae could also be a benefit or concern: genetically engineered algae could lead to higher yields , but also could have unintended consequences such as threatening aquatic ecosystems .

while the doe has studied algae for at least 35 years , much of that research has focused on using algae to produce biodiesel .

current research efforts examine the use of algae for jet fuel , power , bioproducts , and more .

federal support for abb has occurred through general agency programs and specific projects .

currently , there are no commercial - scale abb plants , although a commercial demonstration facility was completed in 2012 and abb was offered for sale at retail pumps in late 2012 in california for a limited time .

abb pilot facilities that came online over the last year may give a better indication of abb's productivity potential and cost effectiveness .

even if abb is demonstrated to work at a commercial level at one or two facilities , it may not produce a significant portion of the u.s. transportation fuel supply in the near term .

multiple commercial - scale facilities that could possibly produce abb in significant quantities will require financing , a labor force , and distribution and supply infrastructure that may take some time to devise .

because no abb facilities are operating at commercial scale , it is not yet known what regulatory issues might arise .

as with many new technologies , regulatory issues and perception by the general public are likely to be a concern .

abb currently faces many of the same questions as were posed about biofuel industries that preceded it ( eg , corn - starch ethanol ) .

abb is less developed than established biofuels industries such as corn - starch ethanol .

however , its development and deployment at commercial scale may be informed by lessons learned from these industries .

for instance , mastering the technology to convert a certain feedstock to a biofuel may not happen in the timeframe predicted , regardless of the amount of financial and technical assistance granted .

additionally , the development of corn - based ethanol showed that long - term contracts for feedstock supply and associated resource requirements are vital to gauging the economic standing of biofuel production .

last , uncertainties about policy support ( eg , inclusion in the rfs2 , lowering rfs2 mandates , and expiring tax provisions ) and unforeseen competition from other fuels internal and external to the biofuel industry could all have an impact on the bottom line and the aggressiveness put toward abb production .

