this report summarizes the evidence on the relationship between tax rates and economic growth , referring in a number of cases to more - detailed crs reports .

potentially negative effects of tax rates on economic growth have been an issue in the debate about whether to increase taxes to address the budget deficit and whether to broaden the base and lower the rates with tax reform .

after first distinguishing between short - run counter - cyclical considerations and long - run growth effects , the following section provides some historical data on tax rates and measures of factor supply and growth .

this report then reviews the empirical evidence on the major contributors to growth .

the final section concludes with a review of dynamic scoring issues .

initially , it is important to make a distinction between the effects of policies aimed at short - term stimulation of an underemployed economy and long - run growth .

in the short run , both spending increases and tax cuts are projected to increase employment and output in an underemployed economy , such as the united states today .

these effects operate through the demand side of the economy .

in general , the largest effects are from direct spending and transfers to lower - income individuals , whereas the smallest effects are from cutting taxes of high - income individuals or businesses .

long - run growth is a supply - side phenomenon .

in the long run , the availability of jobs is not an issue , as an economy naturally creates jobs .

output can grow through increases in labor participation and hours , increases in capital , and changes such as education and technological advances that enhance the productivity of these inputs .

the remainder of the report addresses this longer - term growth issue .

this section summarizes the historical insights about the effect of tax rates on economic growth and selected factors — labor force participation , savings , and growth in investment — commonly associated with economic growth .

although this type of historical analysis is unable to identify causal relationships , it can offer suggestive evidence on the magnitude of the tax effect on these factors .

to summarize , the evidence presented in this section suggests that past changes in tax rates have had no large clear effect on economic growth and selected factors commonly associated with economic growth .

because much discussion is focused on the consequences of individuals in the top marginal tax rate brackets who provide much of the saving and entrepreneurial input in the economy , the following charts include examinations of the relationship between labor supply , savings , and growth rates for the top marginal rates .

similarly , there is often a particular focus on capital gains tax rates and savings , so these data presented below include relationships between these variables .

this section summarizes the theoretical insights and empirical evidence on the forces driving output and growth which supplement the information provided in the historical comparisons .

more detailed discussion of various issues is contained in cited crs reports .

claims that the cost of tax reductions is significantly reduced through feedback effects , because of increases in economic growth ( and that gains from tax increases are significantly reduced ) have been made .

as indicated in the previous analysis , however , these effects are limited .

although various dynamic models can potentially produce larger results , the models with responses most consistent with empirical evidence suggest a revenue feedback effect of about 1% for the 2001-2004 bush - era tax cuts .

feedback effects could arise from shifts of taxable income outside of changes in real output ( such as increasing itemized deductions such as charitable contributions , realizing more income in fringe benefits , and similar responses ) .

a series of studies providing direct relationships between tax rates and tax revenues designed to measure these responses initially found large effects .

subsequent critiques of the methodological problems with these studies and new estimates found much smaller results .

another problem with this approach is that it would vary depending on the type of tax change ( for example , feedback effects would be less likely for a tax increase that broadened the base than from a rate increase ) .

in any case , the evidence suggests feedback effects from 3% to 10% .

in addition , studies that estimated significant responses to two important types of tax provisions , charitable contributions and capital gains , have recently been found to be much smaller .

capital gains taxes have been scored for some time as having a significant feedback effect through changes in realizations , one that had a revenue offset of around 60% .

more recent estimates , however , have suggested a feedback effect of about 20% .

claims have been made that a corporate rate cut would pay for itself through capital flows from abroad .

however , using estimates from an international general equilibrium model with capital flow responses consistent with empirical evidence to simulate a 10 percentage point cut in the corporate tax rate , this factor offset corporate revenue losses by about 5% .

any positive feedback effects would be much more than offset , for a stand - alone tax change , by the interest and crowding out effects of debt .

for example , in the corporate rate cut , interest payments increased the effect of the change on the deficit by 25% in the budget horizon , and reduced output from crowding out reduced revenue by another 20% .

