i n november 2011 the environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed two clean water act permits to regulate certain types of discharges from vessels into u.s. waters .

the proposed permits would replace a single permit issued by epa in 2008 that was due to expire in december 2013 .

as proposed , the two permits would apply to approximately 71,000 large domestic and foreign vessels and perhaps as many as 138,000 small vessels .

this universe of regulated entities is diverse as well as large , consisting of tankers , freighters , barges , cruise ships and other passenger vessels , and commercial fishing vessels .

their regulated discharges are similarly diverse , including among other pollutants non - native aquatic nuisance species ( ans ) , nutrients , pathogens , oil and grease , metals , and toxic chemical compounds that can have a broad array of effects on aquatic species and human health , many of which can be harmful .

developing and administering a regulatory program covering sources so numerous and different from one another is more complicated than for other currently regulated sources .

because the sources themselves are mobile and move between jurisdictions , the traditional mechanism of regulating through state - issued permits is problematic .

many regulated vessels are small entities ; thus , the economic impacts of regulatory requirements are an important consideration .

identifying technology - based treatment systems and management practices that can control vessel discharges effectively and economically presents many challenges .

the two permits proposed by epa in 2011 included one ( draft vgp ) for large vessels to replace the 2008 vgp , and one for smaller vessels covered by a congressionally enacted temporary moratorium ( draft svgp ) .

on march 28 , 2013 , epa issued a final version of the vgp for large vessels .

it became effective on december 19 , 2013 .

the permit for smaller vessels was issued on september 10 , 2014 ; it was scheduled to become effective on december 19 , 2014 , but congress passed a three - year extension as part of p.l .

113-281 .

this report is an overview of the revised vgp for large vessels and two key issues: inclusion of numeric performance standards to limit ballast water discharges from vessels , and controversies about the role of states in regulating vessel discharges .

it also reviews the final svgp for small vessels and congress's recent interest in these issues .

the clean water act ( cwa ) prohibits the discharge of pollutants from a point source into the navigable waters of the united states without a permit .

vessels are defined in the statute as point sources .

in 1973 , epa promulgated a regulation that excluded discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels ( including ballast water , but not including vessel sewage discharges , which are regulated under cwa section 312 ) from cwa permitting requirements .

this long - standing regulation was challenged in federal district court by environmental advocacy groups who wanted epa to address ballast water as a source of ans in u.s. waters .

in 2005 the court found that congress had directly expressed its intention that discharges from vessels be regulated under the cwa , and that the 1973 regulation contradicted that intention .

in september 2006 the court issued a final order vacating ( revoking ) the regulatory exclusion as of september 30 , 2008 , and remanding the ruling to epa for further proceedings .

the ninth circuit u.s. court of appeals upheld the district court's ruling on july 23 , 2008 .

on june 17 , 2008 , epa proposed two cwa general permits in response to the court's 2006 order , one applicable to commercial vessels and one applicable to small recreational vessels .

cwa permits are either individual permits issued to specific facilities or general permits .

both types of permit are issued for a specific period of time ( not to exceed five years ) , after which the permit must be renewed .

a general permit covers multiple facilities within a specific category having common elements , such as similar types of operations that discharge the same types of wastes .

because of the large number of potential sources of vessels , epa believed that it made administrative sense to use general permits , rather than individual permits .

in august 2008 , the federal district court agreed to epa's request to delay vacating the regulatory exemption for three months , to ensure that permits could be issued before the exemption was eliminated .

epa finalized a vessel general permit for vessels subject to a permit requirement on december 18 , 2008 .

the permit became effective on december 19 , 2008 .

however , on the same day , the federal district court granted an epa motion to delay vacating the existing regulatory exclusion until february 6 , 2009 .

thus , the effective date remained december 19 , 2008 , but regulated sources were not required to comply with terms of the permit until february 6 , 2009 .

the 2013 final vgp applies to seven categories of vessels operating in a capacity of transportation that have discharges incidental to their normal operations into waters subject to the permit: commercial fishing including fish processing , freight barge , freight ship , passenger vessel , tank barge , tank ship , and utility vessel .

freight barges ( such as open and covered dry cargo barges , 68% of total ) , tank barges ( eg , liquid cargo barges , 12% ) , and utility vessels ( such as research vessels and tug vessels , 11% ) account for the majority of the 58,600 domestic vessels eligible for coverage under the vgp .

of the 12,430 foreign vessels eligible for coverage , freight ships ( eg , container ships ) account for 66% , and tank ships ( such as oil tankers ) account for 28% of the total .

like the 2008 vgp , "waters subject to the permit" means "waters of the united states," including the territorial seas as defined in the cwa and extending to 3 miles from the baseline .

epa concluded that requiring all covered vessels to submit an noi indicating coverage under the replacement vgp would be administratively impracticable , so the permit does not require operators of vessels smaller than 300 gross tons and with capacity to carry less than 8 cubic meters ( 2,113 gallons ) of ballast water to submit nois .

consequently , more than 10,000 vessels would be automatically covered by the permit without submitting an noi .

this is essentially the same approach used in the 2008 vgp .

however , all covered vessels are subject to the permit's requirements and must complete a permit authorization and record of inspection form and maintain that form on board at all times .

the purpose of the form , according to epa , is to confirm that vessels owners and operators have read the terms of the vgp and understand their obligation to comply .

as noted above , cwa permits normally are issued for a specific period of time , not to exceed five years , with a provision for reapplying for further permit coverage prior to the expiration date .

epa had proposed a four - year permit term for the draft vgp , as a way to ensure that the permit keeps pace with developing technologies , especially for ballast water treatment , but the final permit provides a five - year term , consistent with most epa - issued cwa permits .

the 2013 permit's principal ballast water and non - ballast modifications of the 2008 vgp are discussed next , along with epa's economic and benefits analysis .

two prominent issues raised by the 2013 vgp are questions about inclusion of specific numeric ballast water discharge limits in the permit , and controversies about the role of states in regulating vessel discharges .

some environmental advocacy groups criticized the 2013 final permit , asserting that it does not include adequate requirements to stop or reduce the spread of invasive species .

challenges to the final permit were filed by the natural resources defense council , inc. and the northwest environmental advocates , and the national wildlife federation , among others , in several federal appeals courts .

all of the challenges were consolidated in the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit in new york .

another party in the consolidated legal challenge to the 2013 permit is the canadian shipowners association ( csa ) , which asked the court to review the vgp's january 1 , 2014 , deadline for implementing best available technology for ballast water management systems .

at issue is the fact that the coast guard has been granting compliance extensions to its ballast water rules because of unavailability of certified technologies .

the association argued that the deadline in the vgp , which does not provide for similar extensions , was not realistic — a point that epa has conceded .

epa officials stated in congressional hearings that enforcement action against vessels that are unable to install coast guard - approved technology to meet the numerical limits in the 2013 vgp would have a low priority for the agency .

in april 2014 , the federal court granted csa's request to stay the january 1 , 2014 , vgp deadline for vessels operated by csa members , and subsequently the court agreed to a joint request by csa and epa to sever the shippers' petition for review from the environmental groups' challenge .

in october 2015 , the court ruled on the environmentalists' challenge and found that epa acted arbitrarily and capriciously in issuing parts of the 2013 vgp .

the court stated that , in choosing the imo standard to control ballast water discharges , epa did not adequately explain why standards higher / more stringent than the imo standard should be used , given available technology .

the court noted that the science advisory board's 2011 report , discussed previously , identified a number of technologies , including onshore treatment , that can achieve standards higher than imo for one or more organism sizes , which would require only "reasonable / feasible modifications. .

the court said that epa should have adjusted its standard in light of available technologies discussed in the sab report , or explained why it would not do so .

the court also agreed with environmentalists that epa's decision to exempt lakers built before 2009 from numeric effluent limits of the vgp was arbitrary and capricious .

the court said that epa's belief that there is a lack of supply of updated shipboard systems for lakers to meet numeric standards was not a legitimate reason to exempt pre - 2009 lakers from the 2013 vgp .

the court remanded the permit to epa for proceedings consistent with the opinion , but allowed the 2013 permit to remain in place until epa issues a new vgp .

the canadian shipowners association's challenge to the 2013 vgp is in abeyance until epa issues its response to the october 2015 remand order .

congressional interest in this topic has been evident for some time — as reflected in the bills enacted in 2008 and described previously to exempt certain vessels from a cwa permit requirement .

as discussed above , a permit moratorium for small non - recreational vessels and commercial fishing vessels enacted in 2008 was temporary , but was extended twice by congress until december 18 , 2014 .

the svgp was to apply to these vessels , if the moratorium had expired without congressional action .

several bills that included provisions to make that moratorium permanent were introduced in the 113 th congress .

these bills included h.r .

3464 , which the house passed in may 2014 as a provision of h.r .

4005 ; s. 2094 , approved by the senate commerce and transportation committee in july 2014 ; and s. 2963 , approved by the senate environment and public works committee in december 2014 .

supporters of proposals in these bills argued that small vessels covered by the current moratorium — commercial fishing vessels and other small non - recreational vessels — contribute little pollution and are not sources of invasive species , so a permanent permit exemption is appropriate .

others disagree with this view and argued that because of environmental concerns over vessel discharges , a permanent permit moratorium is inappropriate .

other legislation , to provide a one - year extension of the permit moratorium , also was introduced ( h.r .

5769 and s. 2943 ) .

the house passed h.r .

5769 on december 3 , 2014 .

some supporters of the approach in these bills said that a short - term extension would allow for comprehensive congressional attention to a number of vessel issues , including ballast water standards , in the 114 th congress .

as the date for the expiration of the moratorium approached , on december 10 , 2014 , the senate and house passed legislation ( s. 2444 / p.l .

113-281 ) that includes a three - year extension of the small vessel moratorium , until december 18 , 2017 .

 ( see appendix a for details of the svgp that would have become effective without this congressional action. ) .

ballast water discharges from vessels less than 79 feet in length are not affected by the moratorium and are required to be authorized by permits .

according to epa , owners and operators of small vessels that discharge ballast water can seek coverage either under the general permit for large vessels , requiring compliance with numeric standards ( see " ballast water requirements " above ) , or the general permit for small vessels , which took effect december 18 , 2014 .

as described in appendix a , the svgp prescribes best management practices ( bmps ) for ballast water discharges , not numeric standards .

in the 114 th congress , several bills that would make the existing temporary permit moratorium for small vessels permanent have been introduced .

these bills are s. 371 , a bill that only addresses the permit moratorium , and s. 373 / h.r .

980 , bills that also address ballast water standards , as described next .

the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee approved s. 373 in february 2015 , and it later included the text of the bill as titles of s. 2829 , the maritime administration authorization and enhancement act for fiscal year 2017 , which the senate passed by voice vote on june 29 , 2016 , and s. 1611 , coast guard authorization act of 2015 .

legislation addressing regulation and management of ballast water discharges that can contribute aquatic invasive species into u.s. waters has been introduced in congress a number of times since 2000 .

in the 112 th congress , two house transportation and infrastructure committee subcommittees held a hearing that focused on how best to address invasive species problems .

since then , several legislative proposals have sought to harmonize ballast water management requirements in a single authority to be implemented by the coast guard , including provisions of h.r .

2838 , which the house passed in 2011.this legislation would establish a single federal ballast water management standard ( i.e. , the imo d - 2 / coast guard numeric standard described previously ) .

the legislation would supersede existing state standards or permits for any discharge incidental to the normal operation of a commercial vessel , although states could develop a ballast water inspection and enforcement program .

it also would supersede epa's ballast water management requirements under the cwa .

upon enactment of the legislation , state 401 certifications for ballast water discharge in the 2008 vgp would expire .

the coast guard would have the primary role for enforcing the ballast water performance standard .

in december 2012 , congress enacted h.r .

2838 with a number of modifications ( p.l .

112-213 ) .

first , as noted previously , it extended for one additional year the moratorium on cwa permit requirements for small vessels that was first enacted in p.l .

110-299 .

second , it deleted all of the comprehensive ballast water management requirements in the house - passed bill .

in the 113 th congress , similar legislation to establish nationally uniform ballast water discharge standards ( s. 2094 ) was approved by the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee in july 2014 , but no further action occurred .

in the 114 th congress , legislation addressing ballast water standards similar to s. 2094 has been introduced: s. 373 and h.r .

980 .

as noted above , these bills also would make permanent the existing temporary permit moratorium for small non - recreational vessels and commercial fishing vessels .

the senate commerce subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held a hearing on issues concerning regulation and management of discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels on february 4 , 2015 .

maritime industry witnesses discussed the overlapping coast guard and epa regulatory requirements , and they also discussed concerns with additional state - imposed requirements .

two weeks later , the full committee approved s. 373 , the vessel incidental discharge act .

as approved , the bill is similar to the legislation that the committee approved in the 113 th congress , with some amendments .

the amended bill would allow a state to adopt or enforce a more stringent ballast water performance standard if the coast guard determines that compliance with the state standard is achievable and is consistent with obligations under relevant international treaties or agreements .

a second amendment would require vessels to conduct saltwater flushing of ballast water tanks prior to entering the great lakes ( as they are required to do under the 2012 coast guard rule ) .

as described above , the commerce committee subsequently included the text of s. 373 as titles of s. 2829 , the maritime administration authorization and enhancement act for fiscal year 2017 , which the senate passed by voice vote on june 29 , 2016 , and s. 1611 , the coast guard authorization act of 2015 .

further , on may 18 , the house passed h.r .

4909 , the national defense authorization act for fy2017 .

title xxxvi of this bill , as passed , is identical to the text of h.r .

980 .

in the statement of administration policy on h.r .

4909 , the administration indicated that it objects to this title of the bill .

the senate - passed companion bill to h.r .

4909 ( s. 2943 ) does not contain similar provisions .

appendix a .

the svgp on september 10 , 2014 , epa issued notice of final permit issuance of the svgp for small vessels .

this general permit was scheduled to become effective on december 19 , 2014 , unless the existing temporary permit moratorium were extended by congressional action — as in s. 2444 , passed by congress on december 10 ( see " small vessel permit moratorium " ) .

by announcing this final permit more than three months ahead of the effective date , epa intended to give affected vessel owners and operators sufficient lead time to meet the permit's requirements .

the 2014 svgp was to apply to non - military , non - recreational vessels operating in a capacity of transportation that are less than 79 feet in length .

epa estimated that approximately 115,000 to 138,000 domestic and 156 foreign vessels were potentially subject to the svgp .

they include various types of commercial fishing vessels , tugs and towing vessels , water taxis and small ferries , tour boats , and various other types of vessels used for non - recreational purposes .

approximately 68,000 are commercial fishing vessels , comprising the largest category , which includes vessels involved in fish catching , fish processing , and charter fishing .

the second - largest category is "unspecified" vessels ( totaling 27,000 ) , followed by passenger vessels ( 21,000 ) , such as charter fishing vessels and harbor cruise vessels .

these vessels were excluded from the 2008 vgp by the initial moratorium in p.l .

110-299 , which congress subsequently extended — most recently to december 18 , 2017 , in s. 2444 .

the svgp would have regulated several categories of discharges , including fuel management , engine and oil control , solid and liquid waste management , vessel hull maintenance , graywater , fish hold effluent , and ballast water .

it prescribed bmps such as preventive maintenance of engines and fuel tanks to minimize the occurrence of leaks and spills that could release fuel or oil to receiving waters , and the minimization of graywater discharges that may contain soaps and detergents or nutrients into sensitive water bodies and confined waters .

most of the practices are already widely implemented by vessels subject to the draft svgp , according to epa .

epa concluded that few vessels covered by the svgp are affected by ballast water management requirements , because vessels less than 100 feet long typically do not load and discharge ballast or rely on ballast for stability .

however , for vessels less than 79 feet long that do use ballast as a stability enhancer , the svgp prescribed bmps , because in epa's view , no existing treatment systems are believed to have been developed for vessels with these small amounts of ballast water .

appropriate ballast water management bmps include avoiding or minimizing ballast water uptake in areas with a high potential to contain harmful organisms and only discharging the minimal amounts of ballast water necessary in u.s. coastal and inland waters .

because of the large universe of vessels covered by the svgp , epa determined that requiring all of these vessels to submit an noi would be an extremely large administrative burden .

further , requiring an noi for these vessels would be of little value , because of the limited range of discharge types and the reduced likelihood that they will introduce significant quantities of toxic and conventional pollutants to waterways .

however , like the vgp , epa would have required all vessel operators covered by the permit to comply with its requirements , including signing an svgp permit authorization and record of inspection form and maintaining that form onboard at all times .

the terms of the svgp would expire five years after the permit's effective date .

epa made several changes in the 2014 svgp , compared with the 2011 draft permit .

for example , the final permit added a condition that accumulated bilgewater must be removed , to the extent practicable , prior to transporting a vessel from one waterbody to another over land .

overall , epa estimated that the svgp requirements could result in total annual costs for domestic vessels ranging between $7.1 million and $16.9 million ( in 2010 dollars ) , in the aggregate .

approximately 35% of these costs were associated with vessel hull maintenance , 25% with recordkeeping and inspection , and 25% with engine and oil control bmps .

the average cost per vessel was estimated to range from $17 per year ( for vessels that already implement control practices ) to $133 per year .

the estimated range depended on the number of applicable discharge categories and baseline practices .

epa lacks data to quantify the environmental benefits of the svgp , but qualitatively , the agency expected that reducing discharges incidental to the operation of small non - recreational vessels would have two broad categories of benefits: enhanced environmental quality from reduced loads of pollutants , and reduced risk of introducing and spreading invasive species .

as it did with the vgp , epa acknowledged uncertainties about impacts of the svgp , largely due to limitations of data regarding financial and operational characteristics of affected firms and compliance costs that firms may incur .

particularly for the smaller vessels covered by the svgp , epa said that uncertainty exists for the revenue data for firms and also on the number of firms that have vessels that could incur cost impacts .

for example , epa assumed the same range of cost per vessel for all industry sectors , based on the best and worst case scenarios , but the agency recognized that this simplifying assumption may be inaccurate , because some vessels may already be implementing discharge control practices and would therefore not incur additional costs .

despite uncertainties , epa concluded that it is "unlikely that a significant number of firms in the commercial fishing industry incurring material economic impacts as a result of complying with the svgp. .

the permit was expected to have some effect on small firms , because of the very large number of small operators , but "the exact impacts on the profitability of these small businesses are difficult to quantify ... due to limitations of the data. .

appendix b. discharges incidental to the normal operation of military vessels as noted in the text of this report , discharges incidental to the normal operation of military vessels are not subject to epa's vgp or the 2012 coast guard rule concerning ballast water discharges .

instead , such discharges are subject to separate regulatory requirements , pursuant to cwa section 312 ( n ) , which congress added to the act in 1996 ( section 325 of p.l .

104-106 ) .

section 312 ( n ) requires epa and the department of defense ( dod ) jointly to promulgate uniform national discharges standards ( unds ) for certain discharges incidental to the normal operation of a vessel of the armed forces , unless the secretary of defense finds that compliance with unds would not be in the national security interests of the united states .

once finalized , the standards will be applicable to discharges from u.s. armed forces vessels operating in the navigable waters of the united states , the territorial seas , and the contiguous zone .

since enactment of these provisions , epa and dod have been working through a multi - stage rulemaking process to develop the required standards .

this process has already been underway for 20 years and is likely to extend for an unknown number of additional years .

first , in phase i , the agencies promulgated regulations in 1999 identifying 25 discharges for which it is "reasonable and practicable" to require a marine pollution control device ( mpcd ) .

phase i also identified 14 discharges as not requiring control with a mpcd .

these 1999 regulations are codified at 40 c.f.r .

part 1700 .

during phase ii , epa and dod are proposing discharge performance standards for the 25 categories of discharges identified in the 1999 rule .

phase ii is occurring in three separate rulemakings .

the first set of performance standards , which addressed 11 discharges , was published in 2014 , and the second set of performance standards , addressing another 11 discharges , was published in october 2016 .

the third set of performance standards , which will address the final three discharges identified in the 1999 rule — all of which involve ballast discharges — will be published separately in a future rule .

phase iii of the unds rulemaking will be a dod - only rule .

it will require dod , in consultation with epa and the coast guard , to promulgate regulations governing the design , construction , installation , and use of mpcds necessary to meet the performance standards covered by phase ii .

similar to phase ii , phase iii will be promulgated in three batches .

cwa section 312 ( n ) requires dod to promulgate the phase iii standards within one year of finalization of the phase ii standards , and these regulations are to become effective upon promulgation , unless dod specifies another effective date .

epa and dod estimate that the universe of armed forces vessels affected by the unds rulemaking is about 6,230 ships of the u.s. navy , army , marine corps , air force , and military sealift command .

approximately 18% of the total ( 1,090 vessels , including aircraft carriers , auxiliary ships , patrol ships , and submarines ) are larger than 79 feet in length .

the remaining 5,140 ships , including a variety of self - propelled boats , are less than 79 feet in length .

according to epa and dod , in developing the phase ii discharge performance standards , the agencies are referencing the 2013 vgp and the 2014 svgp as the baseline for each comparable discharge incidental to the normal operation of a vessel of the armed forces .

