i n the years since president obama took office , congress has included provisions in annual defense authorization bills addressing issues related to detainees at the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba , and , more broadly , the disposition of persons captured in the course of hostilities against al qaeda and associated forces .

the national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( 2012 ndaa ; p.l .

112-81 ) arguably constituted the most significant legislation informing wartime detention policy since the 2001 authorization for the use of military force ( aumf ; p.l .

107-40 ) , which serves as the primary legal authority for u.s. operations against al qaeda and associated forces .

both the national defense authorization acts for fy2013 ( 2013 ndaa ; p.l .

112-239 ) and fy2014 ( 2014 ndaa ; p.l .

113-66 ) contain subtitles addressing u.s. detention policy , particularly with respect to persons held at guantanamo , though neither act addresses detention matters as comprehensively as the 2012 ndaa .

the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) essentially maintained the status quo established by the 2014 ndaa , while the fy2016 ndaa ( p.l .

114-92 ) reverted to a version of the earlier policy .

during congressional deliberations over the house and senate bills competing to become the 2012 ndaa , the white house criticized each version's detainee provisions , and threatened to veto any legislation "that challenges or constrains the president's critical authorities to collect intelligence , incapacitate dangerous terrorists , and protect the nation. .

in particular , the administration expressed strong opposition to any provision mandating the military detention of certain categories of persons , limiting executive discretion as to the appropriate forum to prosecute terrorist suspects , or constraining the executive's ability to transfer detainees from u.s. custody .

the version of the 2012 ndaa passed by congress included a few modifications intended to assuage some of the administration's concerns .

the conference report dropped a house provision that would have required military commissions for certain terrorism cases and modified the house provision prohibiting the transfer of terrorism suspects to the united states for trial so that it only applies to those held at guantanamo and not to all suspects detained abroad .

it modified the senate provision mandating the military detention of certain categories of persons ( originally subject to waiver by the secretary of defense ) by adding a statement to that provision to confirm that it does not affect "the existing criminal enforcement and national security authorities of the federal bureau of investigation or any other domestic law enforcement agency," even with respect to persons held in military custody .

the conferees also transferred the waiver authority from the secretary of defense to the president .

the conference report retained language added during senate floor debate to clarify that the provision affirming the authority to detain persons captured in the conflict with al qaeda does not modify any existing authorities relating to the power to detain u.s. citizens or lawful resident aliens , or any other persons captured or arrested in the united states .

the obama administration then lifted its veto threat , and president obama signed the 2012 ndaa into law on december 31 , 2011 .

nonetheless , president obama issued a signing statement criticizing many of the act's detainee provisions , in which he pledged to interpret certain provisions in a manner that would preserve a maximum degree of flexibility and discretion in the handling of captured terrorists .

among other things , he criticized the blanket bar on guantanamo detainee transfers into the united states and the restrictions imposed on detainee transfers to foreign countries , arguing that some applications of these provisions might violate constitutional separation of powers principles .

president obama also announced that he would "not authorize the indefinite military detention without trial of american citizens," regardless of whether such detention might be legally permissible under the aumf or the 2012 ndaa .

he further declared that his administration would not "adhere to a rigid across - the - board requirement for military detention," and suggested that he would exercise the statutory waiver of the mandatory military detention provision when he deemed it appropriate .

on february 28 , 2012 , president obama issued a directive describing circumstances in which the 2012 ndaa's mandatory military detention requirement would be waived .

both the 2013 and 2014 versions of the ndaa contain subtitles addressing u.s. detention policy , particularly with respect to persons held at guantanamo .

while the detention provisions in the 2013 ndaa largely represented a continuation of existing policies , the 2014 ndaa saw some relaxation of the long - standing restrictions imposed upon the transfer of guantanamo detainees to foreign countries .

the 2015 ndaa did not modify the requirements established by the 2014 ndaa .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( 2015 cromnibus , p.l .

113-235 ) , extended through fy2015 the prohibition on the use of funds to transfer detainees abroad unless the requirements of the 2014 ndaa are satisfied .

the obama administration subsequently stepped up transfers of cleared detainees to foreign countries .

the administration's noncompliance with a congressional notification requirement in the 2014 ndaa , in connection with the transfer of five taliban detainees in exchange for u.s. army sergeant bowe bergdahl in 2014 , appears to have swayed some in congress toward reinstating and strengthening the previous set of requirements for transferring detainees to foreign countries .

the 2016 ndaa reenacted a modified version of earlier restrictions and imposed some new ones .

this report offers a brief background of the salient issues and provides a section - by - section analysis of the detainee provisions in the national defense authorization act for fy2012 .

it also discusses executive interpretation and implementation of the act's mandatory military detention provision .

finally , it addresses detainee provisions in subsequent national authorization legislation and other developments .

at the heart of the consideration of the detainee provisions in the 2012 ndaa appears to have been an effort to confirm or , as some observers view it , expand the detention authority congress implicitly granted the president in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

in enacting the authorization for use of military force ( aumf ; p.l .

107-40 ) , congress authorized the president to use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations , organizations , or persons he determines planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , or harbored such organizations or persons , in order to prevent any future acts of international terrorism against the united states by such nations , organizations or persons .

many persons captured during subsequent u.s operations in afghanistan and elsewhere have been placed in preventive detention to stop them from participating in hostilities or terrorist activities .

a few have been tried by military commission for crimes associated with those hostilities , while many others have been tried for terrorism - related crimes in civilian court .

in the 2004 case of hamdi v. rumsfeld , a majority of the supreme court recognized that , as a necessary incident to the aumf , the president may detain enemy combatants captured while fighting u.s. forces in afghanistan ( including u.s. citizens ) , and potentially hold such persons for the duration of hostilities .

the hamdi decision left to lower courts the task of defining the scope of detention authority conferred by the aumf , including whether the authorization permits the detention of members or supporters of al qaeda , the taliban , or other groups who are apprehended away from the afghan zone of combat .

most subsequent judicial activity concerning u.s. detention policy has occurred in the d.c .

circuit , where courts have considered numerous habeas petitions by guantanamo detainees challenging the legality of their detention .

rulings by the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit have generally been favorable to the legal position advanced by the government regarding the scope of its detention authority under the aumf .

it remains to be seen whether any of these rulings will be reviewed by the supreme court and , if such review occurs , whether the court will endorse or reject the circuit court's understanding of the aumf and the scope of detention authority it confers .

prior to the 2012 ndaa , congress did not pass any legislation to directly assist the courts in defining the scope of detention authority granted by the aumf .

the d.c .

circuit has , however , looked to other post - aumf legislation concerning the jurisdiction of military commissions for guidance as to the categories of persons who may be subject to military detention .

in 2010 , the circuit court concluded that the government had authority under the aumf to detain militarily persons subject to the jurisdiction of military commissions established pursuant to the military commissions acts of 2006 and 2009 ( mca ) ; namely , those who are "part of forces associated with al qaeda or the taliban," along with "those who purposefully and materially support such forces in hostilities against u.s .

coalition partners. .

most of the persons detained under the authority of the aumf are combatants picked up during military operations in afghanistan or arrested elsewhere abroad .

many of these individuals were transported to the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba , for detention in military custody , although a few "high value" guantanamo detainees were initially held at other locations by the cia for interrogation .

the united states also held a larger number of detainees at a facility in parwan , afghanistan .

the united states agreed to hand over control of the facility to the afghan government , and transfer all afghan detainees in its custody at parwan to the afghan authorities by september 2012 , though implementation of this agreement was delayed due to disagreement between afghan and u.s. authorities , with afghan officials reportedly claiming that the united states continued to hold several dozen afghan detainees .

the remaining afghan prisoners were turned over to afghanistan in march 2013 after an agreement was reached whereby u.s. advisors are to remain at the facility and afghanistan agreed not to release prisoners the united states considers particularly dangerous .

although several dozen non - afghan detainees remained in u.s. custody for some time thereafter , in december 2014 the department of defense ( dod ) announced that all remaining detainees in u.s. custody had been transferred to foreign custody , and that it "no longer operates detention facilities in afghanistan.... " neither the guantanamo facility nor any facility in afghanistan appears to be considered a viable option for future captures in the conflict authorized by the aumf ; the current practice in such cases seems to be ad hoc .

in almost all instances , persons arrested in the united states who have been suspected of terrorist activity on behalf of al qaeda or affiliated groups have not been placed in military detention pursuant to the aumf , but instead have been prosecuted in federal court for criminal activity .

there were two instances in which the bush administration transferred persons arrested in the united states into military custody and designated them as "enemy combatants" — one a u.s. citizen initially arrested by law enforcement authorities upon his return from afghanistan , where he had allegedly been part of taliban forces , and the other an alien present in the united states on a student visa who had never been to the afghanistan zone of combat , but was alleged to have been an al qaeda "sleeper agent" planning to engage in terrorist activities on behalf of the organization within the united states .

however , in both cases , the detainees were ultimately transferred back to the custody of civil authorities and tried in federal court when it appeared that the supreme court would hear their habeas petitions , leaving the legal validity of their prior military detention uncertain .

over the years , there has been considerable controversy over the appropriate mechanism for dealing with suspected belligerents and terrorists who come into u.s. custody .

some have argued that all suspected terrorists ( or at least those believed to be affiliated with al qaeda ) should be held in military custody and tried for any crimes they have committed before a military commission .

others have argued that such persons should be transferred to civilian law enforcement authorities and tried for any criminal offenses before an article iii court .

still others argue that neither a military nor traditional law enforcement model should serve as the exclusive method for handling suspected terrorists and belligerents who come into u.s. custody .

they urge that such decisions are best left to executive discretion for a decision based on the distinct facts of each case .

disagreement over the appropriate model to employ has become a regular occurrence in high - profile cases involving suspected terrorists .

in part as a response to the obama administration's plans to transfer certain guantanamo detainees , including khalid sheik mohammed , into the united states to face charges in an article iii court for their alleged role in the 9 / 11 attacks , congress passed funding restrictions that effectively barred the transfer of any guantanamo detainee into the united states for the 2011 fiscal year , even for purposes of criminal prosecution .

these restrictions have been extended through appropriations and defense authorization legislation enacted in subsequent years , including pursuant to the 2016 ndaa and the 2016 omnibus .

the blanket restriction on transfers into the united states effectively makes trial by military commission the only viable option for prosecuting guantanamo detainees for the foreseeable future , as no civilian court operates at guantanamo .

considerable attention has also been drawn to other instances when terrorist suspects have been apprehended by u.s. military or civilian law enforcement authorities .

on july 5 , 2011 , somali national ahmed abdulkadir warsame was brought to the united states to face terrorism - related charges in a civilian court , after having reportedly been detained on a u.s. naval vessel for two months for interrogation by military and intelligence personnel .

some have argued that warsame should have remained in military custody abroad , while others argue that he should have been transferred to civilian custody immediately .

controversy also arose regarding the arrest by u.s. civil authorities of umar farouk abdulmutallab and faisal shahzad , who some argued should have been detained and interrogated by military authorities and tried by military commission .

the administration incurred additional criticism for bringing civilian charges against two iraqi refugees arrested in the united states on suspicion of having participated in insurgent activities in iraq against u.s. military forces , although the war in iraq has generally been treated as separate from hostilities authorized by the aumf , at least insofar as detainee operations are concerned .

the decision of u.s. authorities to bring criminal charges against former al qaeda spokesman sulaiman abu ghayth in civilian court following his arrest , rather than transferring him to military custody at guantanamo , was criticized by some lawmakers .

most recently , the capture of alleged benghazi ringleader ahmed abu khattalah has evoked calls for holding him for interrogation at the guantanamo bay detention facility and for possibly prosecuting him by military commission .

potential issues may also arise with respect to the application of the detainee provisions of defense authorization legislation to u.s. operations against the islamic state ( which formerly referred to itself as the islamic state of iraq and the levant , and is also commonly known as is , isis , or isil ) .

the obama administration has identified the 2001 aumf as providing a legal basis of u.s. military action against the islamic state , because the administration characterizes the islamic state as a successor to the version of al qaeda responsible for the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

the united states does not appear to have captured and detained many islamic state members during military operations .

however , if any islamic state members are apprehended and detained by u.s. authorities without trial , policymakers ( and possibly reviewing u.s. courts ) would likely have to assess whether and how the aumf , along with those detainee provisions of defense authorization legislation which reference the aumf , apply .

current u.s. practice has been to hold persons fighting on behalf of is in iraq on a short - term basis before handing them over to iraqi or kurdish authorities , and the obama administration has reportedly ruled out transferring is detainees to guantanamo .

the following sections address the current status of u.s. policies and legal authorities with respect to detainee matters that are addressed in the 2012 ndaa and subsequent defense authorization legislation .

the first section addresses the scope of detention authority under the aumf as the administration views it and as it has developed in court cases .

the following section provides an overview of current practice regarding initial status determinations and periodic reviews of detainee cases .

the background ends with a discussion of recidivism concerns underlying current restrictions on transferring detainees from guantanamo .

the department of defense has published guidelines for the implementation of the periodic review process established for guantanamo detainees via executive order , which was required by section 1023 of the ndaa , and announced that periodic review boards would soon begin for 71 of the detainees .

those periodic review board proceedings have subsequently commenced .

the executive also submitted a report to congressional committees regarding implementation of the status determination process for wartime detainees required under section 1024 of the act .

restrictions on guantanamo detainee transfers contained in the 2012 ndaa and prior and subsequent legislative enactments are widely believed to have constrained executive efforts to transfer detainees to foreign custody .

after congress relaxed the transfer restriction in the 2014 ndaa , the administration has stepped up the pace of detainee transfers , achieving the placement of a number of detainees in late 2014 to early 2015 .

prior to the enactment of the 2012 ndaa , it had been exceedingly rare for u.s. authorities to transfer a suspected terrorist from civilian to military custody .

section 1022 of the act , which generally requires foreign members of al qaeda or associated forces to be transferred ( at least temporarily ) to military custody , was seen by some observers as potentially having a profound impact on existing practice .

when signing the 2012 ndaa into law , president obama expressed opposition to the provision , and stated that his administration would interpret and implement section 1022 in a manner "that best preserves the same flexible approach that has served us so well for the past 3 years. .

he further mentioned the provision's inclusion of authority for the president to waive its transfer requirements when he certified to congress that it was in the national security interest of the united states to do so .

section 1021 of the 2012 ndaa has continued to draw criticism on the basis that it permits detention without trial of certain individuals , possibly including u.s. citizens and others in the united states .

a federal judge enjoined the detention of persons on the basis of providing support to or associating with belligerent parties under one prong of the definition , but the injunction was reversed on appeal due to lack of standing .

the house version of the 2013 ndaa , h.r .

4310 , was passed in may 2012 .

the senate passed its version , s. 3254 , as a substitute for the house bill on december 4 , 2012 .

the house bill contained a number of restrictions on detainee transfers and requirements to submit detailed reports on such matters .

the senate bill contained extensions of certain restrictions from the 2012 ndaa .

the bills addressed the issue of detention of u.s. persons inside the united states in different ways .

the obama administration had threatened to veto both bills due to the restrictions on detainee transfers from guantanamo , among other provisions .

the house and senate met in conference to resolve differences between the competing bills , with the result that the detainee measures from the house version were largely adopted .

the version of the 2013 ndaa that was reported from conference was subsequently approved by the house and senate , and was presented to the president on december 30 , 2012 .

the 2013 ndaa became law on january 2 , 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) .

the following paragraphs describe the act's provisions concerning wartime detention .

military trials for foreign terrorist suspects .

the conference committee eliminated a provision adopted during house consideration of h.r .

4310 that would have required that a foreign national who "engages or has engaged in conduct constituting an offense relating to a terrorist attack" on a u.s. target , and who is subject to trial for the offense before a military commission , must be charged before a military commission rather than in federal court .

an identical provision was found in the version of the 2012 ndaa originally passed by the house , but it was excised from the enacted version .

detainee transfers from guantanamo .

many provisions in the 2012 ndaa affecting detainees at guantanamo were scheduled to expire at the end of the fiscal year ( though similar restrictions concerning the transfer of guantanamo detainees are found in appropriations enactments in effect beyond that date ) .

the 2013 ndaa effectively extends several of these provisions in the 2012 ndaa through fy2013 , including the blanket funding bar on the transfer of guantanamo detainees into the country ( §1027 ) ; the prohibition on using funds to construct or modify facilities to house these detainees in the united states ( §1026 ) ; and certification requirements and restrictions on the transfer of guantanamo detainees to foreign countries ( §1028 ) .

these three provisions were found in the versions of the bill passed by both the house and senate .

a provision from the house bill that was not retained in the enacted version of the 2013 ndaa would have barred any guantanamo detainee who is "repatriated" to the former u.s. territories of palau , micronesia , or the marshall islands from traveling to the united states .

detainees held elsewhere abroad .

the 2013 ndaa establishes new certification and congressional notification requirements relating to the transfer or release of non - u.s. or non - afghan nationals held at the detention facility in parwan , afghanistan .

the 2013 ndaa also establishes reporting requirements relating to recidivism by former detainees in afghanistan .

specifically , it requires a report to be filed within 120 days describing the "estimated recidivism rates and the factors that appear to contribute to the recidivism of individuals formerly detained at the detention facility at parwan , afghanistan , who were transferred or released , including the estimated total number of individuals who have been recaptured on one or more occasion. .

this is similar to section 1042 of the house - passed bill , which had no analogous provision in the senate version .

the enacted version of the 2013 ndaa also retained a provision to require the secretary of defense to submit a report regarding the use of naval vessels to detain persons pursuant to the aumf , and require congressional notification whenever such detention occurs .

this provision is presumably a response to the situation in 2011 when a somali national was reportedly detained on a u.s. vessel for two months and interrogated by military and intelligence personnel before being brought into the united states to face criminal trial .

detention of persons in the united states .

despite the president's assurances that the administration would not indefinitely detain americans in the united states pursuant to the detention authorization in the 2012 ndaa , that provision has continued to draw criticism from some .

the senate adopted a measure that would have clarified that authorizations to use force are not to be construed to permit detention of u.s. citizens or lawful permanent residents in the united states unless congress passes a law expressly authorizing such detention .

this measure was eliminated from the bill reported out of conference .

an amendment to remove military detention as an optional "disposition under the law of war" for persons in the united states was proposed during floor debates in the house , but failed to garner sufficient votes for adoption .

instead , section 1029 of the enacted version of the 2013 ndaa adopts a modified version of the house provision on habeas corpus rights .

it provides that nothing in the aumf or 2012 ndaa is to be construed as denying "the availability of the writ of habeas corpus" or denying "any constitutional rights in a court ordained or established by or under article iii of the constitution" with respect to persons who are inside the united states who would be "entitled to the availability of such writ or to such rights in the absence of such laws. .

the original provision from the house - passed bill , as amended on the floor , would have covered only persons who are lawfully present in the united states when detained pursuant to the aumf .

under the floor amendment , the provision would also have required the president to notify congress within 48 hours of the detention of such a person , and established a requirement that such persons be permitted to file for habeas corpus "not later than 30 days after the person is placed in military custody. .

the 2013 ndaa does not contain substantive clarification of which u.s. persons are lawfully subject to detention under the aumf .

sections from the house bill setting forth congressional findings with respect to detention authority under the aumf and 2012 ndaa and with respect to habeas corpus were omitted from the final version .

consequently , ambiguity with respect to who can be lawfully detained in the united states appears to have been preserved , but the enacted version of the 2013 ndaa provides reassurance that access to a court to petition for habeas corpus will remain available to those who are detained in the united states pursuant to the aumf .

the house of representatives passed a version of the national defense authorization act for fy2014 , h.r .

1960 , 113 th congress , on june 14 , 2013 .

the senate armed services committee ordered its version of the 2014 ndaa , s. 1197 , 113 th congress , to be favorably reported out of committee on june 20 , 2013 .

on december 9 , 2013 , leaders on the house and senate armed services committees announced an agreement on a new defense authorization bill for fy2014 , h.r .

3304 , which was intended to resolve some of the key differences between the earlier house and senate proposals .

one of those differences had been the bills' approaches to enemy belligerents housed at guantanamo .

house - passed h.r .

1960 would have preserved ( and in some ways strengthened ) the existing limitations on the transfer of guantanamo detainees to the united states or to the custody of foreign governments .

in contrast , s. 1197 would have relaxed restrictions on transfers to foreign countries , and would have permitted detainees to be brought to the united states for continued detention and possible trial .

h.r .

3304 represented a compromise between these approaches — extending the existing blanket prohibition on transferring guantanamo detainees to the united states through the end of 2014 , but allowing the executive greater flexibility in determining whether to transfer detainees to foreign custody .

h.r .

3304 was thereafter passed by congress and presented to the president , and the bill became law on december 26 , 2013 , p.l .

113-66 .

the enacted version of the 2014 ndaa contains provisions addressing the following detention matters: transfer of guantanamo detainees to the united states .

like the version of the 2014 ndaa initially passed by the house , the enacted version of the 2014 ndaa contained an absolute bar on the transfer of guantanamo detainees into the united states for any purpose , and also prohibited the building or modifying of facilities in the united states to house such detainees .

both prohibitions expired at the end of 2014 .

similar to house - passed h.r .

1960 , the enacted version of the 2014 ndaa required a report to be submitted to congress concerning the legal rights that might attach to detainees if they are transferred to the united states .

transfer of guantanamo detainees to foreign countries .

in previous years , appropriations and defense authorization enactments permitted guantanamo detainees to be transferred to foreign countries only when the executive certified to congress that stringent criteria have been satisfied .

the 2014 ndaa relaxed these restrictions in a manner closely resembling that found in s. 1197 .

section 1035 of the 2014 ndaa established permanent restrictions on detainee transfers .

it permitted detainee transfers under two specified circumstances: ( 1 ) when a detainee has been ordered released by a competent u.s. court or the detainee has been assessed by a periodic review board as no longer posing a threat to the united states ; or ( 2 ) the secretary of defense determines that the transfer is in the u.s. national security interest and that actions have been or will be taken to substantially mitigate the risk of recidivism .

the provision required the secretary to consider several factors in making such determinations , but did not require written certification to congress that identified goals had been achieved as a prerequisite to executing a transfer .

the secretary was required , however , to provide the relevant congressional committee with notice at least 30 days in advance before transferring a guantanamo detainee to a foreign country .

the executive branch's non - compliance with this notification requirement when effectuating the transfer of five taliban members from guantanamo in exchange for the release of u.s .

sergeant bowe bergdahl likely had some repercussions in later congressional deliberations upon the nature of statutory restrictions on detainee transfers .

like house - passed h.r .

1960 , the final version of the 2014 ndaa required the executive to report to congress regarding the capability of yemen to detain , rehabilitate , or prosecute detainees who might be transferred there .

unlike the earlier house bill , however , the enacted legislation did not statutorily bar the transfer of any detainee to yemen through 2014 .

parwan detainees .

like the original house version , the enacted 2014 ndaa required that the executive provide information regarding persons held by u.s. forces at the detention facility in parwan , afghanistan , who had been deemed to constitute an enduring threat to the united states .

but whereas the original house proposal would have required an unclassified summary to be made publicly available , the enacted version instead required dod to submit a classified report to the armed forces committees and for it to assess whether any information contained in the report may be made public .

military commissions .

like the initial house and senate proposals , the enacted version of the 2014 ndaa clarifies procedures for the use of alternate members on military commissions employed to try some detainees for war crimes .

the 2014 ndaa also includes a provision similar to one found in house - passed h.r .

1960 requiring that the chief defense counsel in military commissions have the same rank as the chief prosecutor .

however , the enacted version allows this requirement to be waived in some circumstances ( and followed by a report to congress ) , and additionally instructs dod to issue guidance for the equitable allocation of resources and support to the prosecution and defense in military commission proceedings .

detention of persons in the united states .

as result of a floor amendment , the initial house - passed bill contained a provision similar to that in the 2013 ndaa which stated that those apprehended pursuant to the aumf in the united states were not barred from seeking habeas relief , except that this provision would have applied only to u.s. citizens ( §1040b ( a ) ) .

the section further provided that in cases where u.s. citizens apprehended within the united states petition for habeas corpus , the "government shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that such citizen is an unprivileged enemy belligerent and there shall be no presumption that any evidence presented by the government as justification for the apprehension and subsequent detention is accurate and authentic" ( §1040b ( b ) ) .

this evidentiary standard appears to be higher than that which the courts of the d.c .

circuit have applied to cases involving guantanamo detainees .

in those cases , the government need only prove detention is lawful by a preponderance of the evidence , and there is a presumption that official government records submitted as evidence are authentic .

the provision was not included in the final enactment , which does not expressly address the detention of persons in the united states .

as part of its consideration of defense authorization bills for the 2015 fiscal year , congress once again considered u.s. wartime detention policy in the conflict with al qaeda , particularly as it relates to the detention of suspected enemy belligerents at the guantanamo detention facility .

the house passed its version of the 2015 national defense authorization act ( 2015 ndaa ) , h.r .

4435 , 113 th congress , on may 22 , 2014 .

it provided for the extension of existing limitations on the transfer of guantanamo detainees to the united states through 2015 , and did not alter those permanent laws governing the transfer of detainees to the custody of foreign governments .

in contrast , the version of the 2015 ndaa reported out of the senate armed services committee , s. 2410 , 113 th congress , would have significantly altered existing restrictions on the transfer of guantanamo detainees into the united states , and would have potentially enabled the executive to transfer most of the current detainee population into the country for continued detention or trial .

s. 2410 , as reported , would also have modified current law by barring the transfer of detainees to yemen for the duration of 2015 .

the senate did not take up s. 2410 .

instead , house and senate negotiators drafted a compromise version of the 2015 ndaa , h.r .

3979 , which was enacted into law on december 19 , 2014 .

as enacted , the 2015 ndaa extended the prohibitions on the use of funds to transfer detainees to the united states or to construct or modify facilities to house detainees in the united states until december 31 , 2015 .

it also continued the restrictions on transferring detainees to other countries enacted as part of the 2014 ndaa .

shortly after h.r .

4435 was passed by the house and s. 2410 was ordered reported by the senate armed services committee , the united states transferred five taliban detainees from guantanamo to qatar as part of an exchange to effectuate the release of u.s. army sergeant bowe bergdahl , who had been held captive by taliban - affiliated forces for several years .

in completing this prisoner exchange , the executive did not comply with notification requirements contained in section 1035 of the 2014 ndaa , which required it to notify congress at least 30 days before a detainee transfer occurs .

the executive asserted that section 1035 should not be interpreted to apply to the exchange , as it would have interfered with the president's attempt to rescue a u.s. soldier and potentially raise constitutional concerns .

in enacting the 2015 ndaa , congress did not modify the transfer or congressional notification requirements contained in section 1035 of the 2014 ndaa .

accordingly , it seems possible that the executive may continue to maintain that current law does not require prior congressional notification before a guantanamo detainee is transferred in all circumstances .

on february 23 , president obama announced the release of the department of defense ( dod ) plan to close the guantanamo bay prison facility .

the document reiterates current procedures for transferring detainees to their home countries or other countries abroad , but also promises to "work with congress to relocate [certain detainees] from the guantanamo bay detention facility to a secure detention facility in the united states , while continuing to identify other non - u.s .

dispositions. .

the plan does not specify a particular location within the united states where detainees would be housed ( although it states 13 possible sites have been identified ) , but emphasizes the attorney general's 2014 conclusion that relocation to the united states would not risk ascribing to transferees additional rights under the u.s. constitution or immigration laws .

 ( this analysis , required by section 1039 of the national defense authorization act for fy2014 , is attached as an appendix to the plan ) .

predicting that the closure of the detention facility will save between $140 million and $180 million over fy2015 operating costs , the plan lays out how the administration hopes to resolve the disposition of the 91 detainees remaining at guantanamo bay .

the u.s. government , it says , is pursuing three lines of effort: identifying transfer opportunities for detainees designated for transfer ; continuing to review the threat posed by those detainees who are not currently eligible for transfer and who are not currently facing military commission charges ; and continuing with ongoing military commissions prosecutions and , for those detainees who remain designated for continued law of war detention , identifying individualized dispositions where available , including military commission prosecution , transfer to third countries , foreign prosecutions or , should congress lift the ban on transfers to the united states , transfer to the united states for prosecution in article iii courts and to serve sentences .

the administration predicts that a "limited number" of detainees will not be suitable candidates for transfer or prosecution , and hopes to persuade congress to permit their continued detention somewhere within the continental united states .

of the 91 detainees remaining at the guantanamo detention facility , 35 have been determined to be eligible for transfer ; 29 of these are yemeni nationals ; 7 non - eligible detainees are in the pretrial phase of military commissions proceedings ; 2 have pleaded guilty and are awaiting sentencing ; and 22 other non - eligible detainees were initially referred by the guantanamo review task force for prosecution and might yet be prosecuted either by military commission or , in the event transfer prohibitions are lifted , in an article iii court .

the report suggests that 30-60 detainees will fall into the category requiring continued detention pursuant to the aumf .

the plan has come under criticism from some members , primarily because it failed to identify a specific location in the united states considered most suitable for securing detainees transferred to the united states .

the executive branch reportedly avoided such an assessment out of concern that it would violate statutory provisions prohibiting the modification or construction of facilities within the united states for that purpose .

the administration has stated that it recognizes that the plan calls for further action by congress , and has not claimed that the president has independent authority under the constitution to carry it out unilaterally , but some are calling for the executive branch to disavow explicitly any intent to close guantanamo in violation of statutory prohibitions .

the senate armed services committee will likely hold hearings to review the plan .

