at the start of the 112 th congress , the economy was no longer officially in recession .

however , housing markets and the economy as a whole have both continued to appear fragile .

in the short term , this raises policy questions about whether further government intervention is necessary or desirable to support housing markets , or if such intervention might postpone a necessary market correction .

it also raises questions about whether scaling back government involvement in housing finance could further harm already weak housing markets .

finally , given perennial issues related to housing for low - income and other vulnerable populations , the weak economy and the tight fiscal environment raise questions about which housing programs to prioritize in an environment of lower federal spending .

the remainder of this introduction briefly describes the state of u.s. housing markets to provide context for the policy issues discussed in the rest of this report .

this section describes issues related to housing finance , mortgage markets , and accessing and maintaining homeownership that have been considered by the 112 th congress .

perennial issues related to housing assistance for low - income individuals and families and other vulnerable populations have been on the agenda of the 112 th congress .

this section describes issues related to such housing assistance , most of which is administered by hud .

two housing - related tax benefits enacted during the housing crisis are set to expire soon , one at the end of 2012 , the other at the end of 2013 .

the expiration of the first benefit , a temporary exclusion for qualified canceled mortgage debt ( cod ) income , would lead homeowners who have mortgage debt forgiven after 2012 to be responsible for income tax on the amount forgiven .

several bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that would extend the exclusion of cod income .

h.r .

4336 would extend the exclusion through 2013 , s. 2250 and h.r .

4202 would extend the exclusion through 2014 , and h.r .

4250 and h.r .

4290 would extend the exclusion through 2015 .

for more information on the exclusion for canceled mortgage debt income , see crs report rl34212 , analysis of the tax exclusion for canceled mortgage debt income , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the second benefit involves the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) .

traditionally , new affordable housing construction has been eligible for the so - called 9% credit that was designed to subsidize 70% of construction costs .

the actual credit rate fluctuated according to market interest rates , and typically fell below 9% , but always delivered a 70% subsidy .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera , p.l .

110-289 ) temporarily changed the lihtc rate to not less than 9% for new construction placed in service before december 31 , 2013 .

the change implies that the applicable tax credit rate for new construction is temporarily the greater of 9% or the rate as determined under the original method designed to deliver a 70% subsidy .

given the current interest rate environment , the 9% floors leads new construction to receive a subsidy exceeding 70% .

house and senate versions of the same proposal ( h.r .

3661 and s. 1989 ) in the 112 th congress would permanently extend the floor on the 9% credit and provide a similar permanent floor for the so - called 4% credit that is reserved for rehabilitated construction .

for more detail on the 4% and 9% floors , as well as a analysis of proposals to make the floors permanent , see crs report rs22917 , the low - income housing tax credit program: the fixed subsidy and variable rate , by [author name scrubbed] .

moving forward , congress may address the growing concern about the size and sustainability of the united states' recent budget deficits and the country's long - term budget outlook .

this concern has brought the issues of the government's revenue needs and fundamental tax reform to the forefront of the congressional debates .

one place congress may choose to turn to address these issues is the set of tax benefits for homeowners .

reducing , modifying , or eliminating all or some of the current tax benefits for homeowners could raise a substantial amount of revenue while simultaneously simplifying the tax code , increasing equity among taxpayers , and promoting economic efficiency .

while it is unclear at this point if congress will make any housing policy tax changes , recent and past proposals have focused on the mortgage interest deduction .

numerous proposals have been offered , from eliminating the deduction altogether , to limiting the deduction to primary residences , to converting the deduction to a tax credit .

some are concerned , however , that the housing market is still too weak to start scaling back homeowner tax benefits .

others have suggested that a gradual reduction over time of the available tax benefits would give the market time to adjust and reduce uncertainty among current and potential homeowners .

for more detail on the various proposals that have been made , along with estimated budget effects , see crs report r41918 , the mortgage interest and property tax deductions: brief overview with revenue estimates , by [author name scrubbed] .

for an analysis of the rationales for subsidizing homeownership , and an analysis of the effect of current tax incentives on the homeownership rate , see crs report r41596 , the mortgage interest and property tax deductions: analysis and options , by [author name scrubbed] .

