in september 2008 , transcanada corp. , a canadian company , applied to the u.s. department of state ( state department ) for a permit to cross the u.s. - canada international border with the keystone xl pipeline project .

as originally proposed , the pipeline would carry crude oil produced from the oil sands region of alberta , canada , to u.s. gulf coast refineries .

in most instances , decisions about the siting of oil pipelines , even interstate oil pipelines like the proposed keystone xl pipeline , are made by state governments if the state governments choose to exercise a pipeline siting authority .

the federal government generally does not regulate the siting of oil pipelines , although it does oversee oil pipeline safety and pricing issues .

however , the construction , connection , operation , and maintenance of a pipeline that connects the united states with a foreign country requires the permission of the state department , conveyed through a presidential permit .

accordingly , the proposed keystone xl pipeline required a permit .

executive order 13337 delegates to the secretary of state the president's authority to issue such a permit upon a determination that the project is in the national interest .

the proposed project , and the environmental review of the approval pursuant to the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , garnered significant interest in media and political circles .

there was significant debate both at the national level and at the state level , particularly in nebraska , where many expressed concern that the pipeline would run through environmentally sensitive areas in the state .

on december 23 , 2011 , congress passed and the president signed into law the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 .

title v of the act addressed the keystone xl presidential permitting process .

under that provision , the president was required to grant the keystone xl pipeline permit within 60 days of the law's enactment , unless the president determined that the pipeline was not in the national interest .

if the president did not make a national interest determination and took no action to grant the permit , then the law provided that the permit would be "in effect by operation of law. .

title v of the act appears to be the first legislative foray into the permitting of the border crossing facilities as contemplated in executive orders 11423 and 13337 .

as required by title v of the act , on january 18 , 2012 , the state department recommended that "the presidential permit for the proposed keystone xl pipeline be denied and , that at this time , the transcanada keystone xl pipeline be determined not to serve the national interest. .

the state department asserted that its recommendation "was predicated on the fact that the department does not have sufficient time to obtain the information necessary to assess whether the project , in its current state , is in the national interest. .

the state department press release also indicated that the 60-day time period provided for the in the act "is insufficient" for a determination as to whether the pipeline is in the national interest .

the state department said that "subsequent permit applications" and "applications for similar projects" were not precluded by the denial of this particular permit application .

the same day , the president stated his determination that the keystone xl pipeline project "would not serve the national interest. .

he made this determination , as required by title v of the act , in a memorandum to the secretary of state .

on may 4 , 2012 , the state department received a new application from transcanada for a reconfigured keystone xl pipeline that would run from the canadian border and connect to an existing pipeline located in steele city , ne .

this new application identified proposed new routes through nebraska .

also , on september 5 , 2012 , transcanada submitted this preferred alternate route to the nebraska department of environmental quality .

the governor of nebraska approved this new route through the state on january 22 , 2013 .

while this process played out at the federal and state administrative level , congress continued to show legislative interest in the pipeline .

in addition to title v of the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 , several other pieces of legislation were introduced in the 112 th congress to compel expedited review of the keystone xl application .

another legislative proposal , the north american energy access act ( h.r .

3548 ) , would have transferred permitting authority over the keystone xl pipeline project from the state department to ferc , and would require the commission to issue a permit for the project within 30 days of enactment .

this legislative interest has not abated in the 113 th congress , as multiple bills have been introduced that would effectively supersede the state department's permitting authority and grant a presidential permit for transcanada to construct and operate the border - crossing facility of the keystone xl pipeline , including h.r .

334 , h.r .

3 , and s. 582 .

meanwhile , on march 1 , 2013 , the state department issued a draft supplemental environmental impact statement ( draft seis ) as required by nepa , evaluating the environmental impacts of the revised proposal .

the issuance of this document is followed by a 45-day comment period .

after the comment period ends , the state department may issue the final eis , and subsequently a decision on whether to issue the presidential permit .

this recent legislative activity intended to direct action on the two keystone xl presidential permit applications appears to represent the first congressional efforts to amend the established executive branch procedure for the permitting of cross - border pipeline facilities , and there is some question as to whether this raises constitutional issues related to the jurisdiction of the two branches over such facilities .

additionally , as states considered taking action with respect to the pipeline , questions arose regarding whether state siting of a federally approved pipeline is preempted by federal law .

another question was whether a state's dictating the route of the pipeline was a violation of the dormant commerce clause of the constitution , which prohibits one state from acting to protect its own interests to the detriment of other states .

finally , the adequacy of government review of the proposed pipeline under nepa , the routing of the pipeline , and the emissions caused by the oil production was a cause of some concern and controversy .

this report reviews those legal issues , observing generally that legislation altering the pipeline border crossing approval process appears likely to be a legitimate exercise of congress's constitutional authority to regulate foreign commerce and that state oversight of pipeline siting decisions does not appear to violate existing federal law or the constitution .

the report also suggests that the state department's implementation of its authority to issue presidential permits appears to allow for judicial review of its nepa determinations .

a companion report from crs focusing on policy issues associated with the proposal , crs report r41668 , keystone xl pipeline project: key issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al. , is also available .

as noted earlier , the federal government's role in siting the keystone xl pipeline is limited to the border crossing facility , although its environmental review considered impacts of the entire project pursuant to nepa .

however , some state and local government officials voiced concern regarding the pipeline's proposed route through areas perceived to present safety or environmental issues .

at least one state , nebraska , took action in november 2011 , adopting two laws that ( 1 ) carve out a role for the state in siting "major oil pipelines" that run through the state , and ( 2 ) directing collaboration with the state department on a supplemental environmental statement for the proposed pipeline .

debate over the legislation in nebraska gave rise to two constitutional concerns that some feel may limit the extent to which states may legislate and regulate interstate oil pipelines generally , and the proposed keystone xl pipeline in particular .

first , some have expressed concern that a state action may place too great of a burden on interstate commerce , in violation of a doctrine known as the dormant commerce clause .

second , some have wondered whether state legislation or regulation of interstate pipelines is preempted by federal legislation related to interstate pipeline safety .

the state department reviews environmental impacts prior to making the national interest determination .

however , the legal necessity of the state department's review under nepa for projects under executive order 13337 is uncertain .

compliance with nepa in this instance could mean a project once immune from judicial oversight is subject to court review .

as discussed above , executive order 13337 delegates the president's authority to the state department to issue permits for certain energy projects that cross international borders .

executive order 13337 requires that the state department seek the views of certain agency heads , including the secretary of the interior and the administrator of the environmental protection agency , prior to issuing the determination .

while the introductory language of the order indicates one purpose of the process is to maintain "environmental protections," the order does not explicitly require consideration of environmental impacts .

it states only that the permit be in the national interest .

executive order 13337 is a modification of executive order no .

11423 , which predates nepa , and thus , does not reference a nepa review to inform the national interest determination .

the keystone xl project has had a series of environmental reviews under nepa initiated by the january 28 , 2009 , state department announcement that it would prepare an eis: with respect to the application submitted by keystone , the department of state has concluded that the issuance of the presidential permit would constitute a major federal action that may have a significant impact upon the environment within the meaning of the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) of 1969 .

for this reason , department of state intends to prepare an eis to address reasonably foreseeable impacts from the proposed action and alternatives .

a draft eis was issued in april 2010 .

a supplemental draft eis was issued in april 2011 , and a final eis in september 2011 .

following the decision to reroute the nebraska portion of the pipeline , a draft seis was issued in march 2013 .

the state department's decision to prepare an eis was consistent with its regulations .

under 22 c.f.r .

ยง161.7 ( c ) , the state department will prepare an environmental review for certain projects , including issuing permits for construction of international pipelines as provided under executive order 11423 .

pursuant to its regulations , the state department evaluates the environmental impacts under nepa prior to making a national interest determination for a permit .

for example , it prepared an environmental assessment for an oil pipeline that crossed from alberta , canada , to superior , wisconsin .

it also prepared an eis for the earlier keystone oil pipeline from canada .

courts have considered whether any environmental review prepared by the state department for projects seeking a permit under executive order 13337 is subject to judicial review .

only trial - level courts have heard the issue , and the decisions in those courts have been split .

the u.s. district court for the district of columbia held that there was no judicial review of executive order 13337 actions .

a year later , the u.s. district court for the district of minnesota , which was not bound by that precedent , held that a state department nepa review prepared for a permit under executive order 13337 was a final agency action subject to review by a court .

in order to sue the federal government , the government must waive sovereign immunity .

for federal agency actions , that waiver is typically provided by the administrative procedure act ( apa ) : "agency action made reviewable by statute and final agency action for which there is no other adequate remedy in a court are subject to judicial review. .

courts have consistently held that an eis is a final agency action subject to review under the apa .

however , under accepted precedent , no nepa review is required for actions by a president because nepa applies to "agencies of the federal government," and not to presidential actions .

thus , although it seems no nepa review was required under executive order 13337 , the state department's nepa review may be an agency action that is judicially reviewable .

by conducting a nepa review , the state department may have opened that evaluation to court scrutiny .

district courts disagree over whether an eis would be an agency action under these circumstances .

the u.s. district court for d.c. held that it is not , relying on the fact that the executive order is a delegation by the president of a constitutional authority .

the court in that case focused on the issuance of the permit and not on the eis , itself .

since the delegation did not change the underlying authority for the action , just who issues the permit , according to the d.c. district court , any activity by the state department pursuant to that executive order is a presidential action , and not an agency action .

the u.s. district court for the district of minnesota disagreed with the reasoning of the d.c. district court and found that an eis by the state department for a cross - border pipeline permit was reviewable .

the court noted the state department's federal register notice in which it stated that the pipeline permit was a "major federal action. .

the court noted that although the permit pertained to a pipeline crossing an international border , that did not excuse the state department from analyzing the environmental impacts of the entire route .

more important , the court held that the fact that the permit for the international crossing was a presidential action did not "convert the state department's preparation of the feis into a presidential action. .

to some extent , the two courts are arguing about two different things: the issuance of the permit , and the issuance of the eis .

however , only the minnesota district court separates the two actions , noting that the issuance of the permit was not before the court , and allowing judicial review of the eis .

further , evidence appears to support the notion that an eis is an agency action separate from the state department's issuance of a presidential permit under executive order 13337 .

first , the state department , under apa notice and comment rulemaking , created a rule stating it would prepare an ea for pipelines under that executive order .

if the state department failed to complete a nepa review while that rule was still in effect , it could be liable under the apa for acting contrary to its own regulations .

second , there is no directive in the executive order to perform any type of environmental review .

a permit could be issued without any nepa review , but occurs because of a state department regulation requiring an ea , consistent with nepa .

thus the nepa review could be characterized as a congressional delegation of authority by statute ( nepa ) rather than a presidential delegation of authority via executive order 13337 .

additionally , the state department's description of its process indicates that the national interest determination is separate from the nepa review , lending further support to the argument that there are two actions: "following the release of the final eis , a review period begins to determine if the proposed project is in the national interest .

this broader evaluation of the application extends beyond environmental impact , taking into account economic , energy security , foreign policy , and other relevant issues. .

in reaching its conclusion that issuing a permit under executive order 13337 is judicially untouchable , the d.c. district court reviewed supreme court precedent and noted that no decision is directly on point .

the supreme court has considered presidential actions only in the context of those authorized by statute .

in those cases , franklin v. massachusetts and dalton v. specter , the court reviewed challenges to the sufficiency of agency or commission reports submitted to the president before he acted .

the decisions of the president in each case were held to be insulated from judicial review because , regardless of the documents' content , the court held the president had ultimate discretion .

the reports submitted to the president as part of each underlying statutory directive did not change the nature of the authority: regardless of the content of the reports , the decision was still made by the president .

in the case of franklin , the statute did not require the president to use the data in the report .

in dalton , the court held that despite the statute's requirement limiting the president to approving or rejecting the list in its entirety , the ultimate authority was still presidential: no action was final until the president submitted his certificate of approval to congress .

distinctions between the supreme court cases and an eis for executive order 13337 may be made .

in those court cases , the documents given to the president were required by an underlying statute and deemed part of the delegated authority .

in cases under executive order 13337 , there is no presidential directive suggesting or requiring an environmental review .

the eis was a discretionary action of the agency based on a statutory requirement that agencies act "to the fullest extent possible" to review agency actions .

to make that distinction more clear , if a secretary submitted a "view" under executive order 13337 section 1 ( b ) ( 2 ) stating it was not in the national interest to issue the permit , but the state department issued the permit anyway , under supreme court precedent neither the "view" nor the permit issuance appears to be reviewable .

under the holdings in franklin and dalton , that "view" would not be final and the permit issuance would be part of the delegated presidential authority because the "view" was advisory and part of the delegated presidential authority .

in contrast , if the eis finding was in error , well - established case law would allow challenge of the eis as "arbitrary and capricious" under the apa .

while that might not change the state department's determination of the project's being in the national interest , it would make the eis a final agency action reviewable under accepted legal precedent .

second , the reports in franklin and dalton were found not to be final actions because the presidential decision still had to be made .

whereas , courts have held repeatedly that a completed eis is a final action .

in fact , in franklin , the court noted the ways that the census report was not an apa agency action: it was "not promulgated to the public in the federal register , no official administrative record is generated , and its effect on reapportionment is felt only after the president makes the necessary calculations and reports the results to congress. .

in contrast , each of those factors occurs for an executive order 13337 nepa review: it was promulgated to the public , there is an administrative record , and under supreme court precedent , injury under nepa occurs when the agency fails to comply with the law .

because the state department prepared a supplemental eis to address epa's concerns with the draft eis , the state department appears to concede that its eis was different from the documents at issue in franklin and dalton .

the franklin court said that until the president acted there was "no determinate agency action to challenge , since the president , not the secretary , takes the final action that affects the states. .

in the case of keystone xl , while issuing a permit is a final action taken under presidential authority , the eis may also be a final action , which is taken under separate statutory authority .

the d.c. court's holding did not recognize that distinction .

instead , the d.c. court found that the permit was a presidential action not subject to judicial review .

minnesota found that the eis was a final agency action subject to judicial review .

