pakistan has long been a leading recipient of u.s. foreign aid despite contentious issues in the bilateral relationship .

in may 2013 , pakistan conducted scheduled national elections to seat new national and provincial assemblies .

the exercise was itself historic as an unprecedented transfer of power from one elected government to another .

the right - leaning , conservative pakistan muslim league faction led by former prime minister nawaz sharif ( pml - n ) won an unexpectedly strong victory that includes a simple majority in the national assembly as well as continued control of punjab , where the bulk of pakistan's citizens reside .

the incumbent pakistan people's party suffered a major defeat and is relegated to opposition status at the federal level , although it retained control of the sindh government .

the newly formidable pakistan tehreek - e - insaf ( movement for justice ) part — led by imran khan , a strident critic of pakistan's cooperation with the united states — now heads a coalition government in khyber pakhtunkhwa .

in june , sharif began his third non - consecutive term as prime minister .

although the elections were marked by violence and some reports of rigging , their conduct was welcomed by the u.s. and other international governments as an important step in pakistan's democratization process .

analysts do not anticipate any major adjustments in the u.s. - pakistan relationship in the near - or middle - term and sharif's priorities — resolving pakistan's energy crisis and reversing its economic decline — track well with the central goals of the u.s. assistance program .

following the may 2011 u.s. commando raid in pakistan to kill osama bin laden , already troubled u.s. - pakistani relations soured , prompting the 112 th congress to consider new restrictions on , or even elimination of , the billions of annual assistance dollars currently being provided .

since the raid , u.s. - pakistani military cooperation has been disrupted and clouded by increased mutual distrust ; islamabad has significantly reduced the number of u.s. military trainers allowed in the country , and the obama administration indicated that deliveries of certain security - related financial transfers and other aid are under suspension .

a november 2011 incident near the pakistan - afghanistan border left two dozen pakistani soldiers dead after their posts came under fire from nato forces ; the event further disrupted relations .

a significant shift in the obama administration's public statements on u.s. relations with pakistan was suggested in september 2011 when admiral mike mullen , the outgoing chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , and then - secretary of defense leon panetta testified before the senate armed services committee .

in that hearing , both explicitly accused pakistan's main intelligence agency , inter - services intelligence ( isi ) , of supporting haqqani network insurgents who engage in attacks on u.s. targets in afghanistan .

when asked by a committee member whether he supported a move in congress to further condition u.s. aid to pakistan , secretary panetta replied , "anything that makes clear to them that we cannot tolerate their providing this kind of safe haven to the haqqanis , and that they have to take action — any signal that we can send to them — i think would be important to do. .

weeks later , however , president barack obama stated in a press conference , "we could not have been as successful as we have been without the cooperation of the pakistan government .

and so on a whole range of issues , they have been an effective partner with us," adding , "[w]e will constantly evaluate our relationship with pakistan" in the context of u.s. interests .

the administration's scrutiny of the relationship has continued since , especially in light of increased congressional attention following the tumultuous events of 2011 .

yet its fundamental support for a continued large - scale assistance program is unchanged .

during an april 2013 house hearing on the administration's fy2014 foreign affairs budget proposal , newly seated secretary of state john kerry was asked about ending all foreign assistance to pakistan .

his reply: "cutting off aid to pakistan would — would not be a good move , certainly at this point in time , for a lot of different reasons .

we are working with pakistan with respect to nuclear safety and nonproliferation .

we are working with pakistan to get our supplies both in and out of afghanistan. .

at the same time that the administration expressed serious displeasure with pakistan , the united states responded in fy2011 and fy2012 with more than $110 million in humanitarian aid to a september 2011 disaster due to flooding there .

previously , the united states had provided about $600 million in disaster and refugee assistance for the widespread summer 2010 pakistan floods .

more recently , in september 2012 and february 2013 , the administration waived certification requirements to allow for continued transfers of major defense equipment .

the latter waiver was taken as a signal that the bilateral security relationship was being substantively renewed after a nearly two - year - long period of estrangement .

while numerous concerns exist about whether pakistan can be accountable in how it uses u.s. aid and whether it is capable of being a reliable u.s. partner in combating terrorism , many experts believe that key u.s. strategic interests are inextricably linked with a stable pakistan and region .

they emphasize the importance of maintaining close bilateral engagement with pakistan , including providing assistance , to promote stability and contribute to u.s. national security .

over past decades congress has expressed concern with the u.s. - pakistan relationship and has placed limitations and reporting requirements on u.s. aid to pakistan in both authorization and appropriation laws .

following , in reverse chronological order , are laws passed by congress that restrict aid and / or establish certain requirements for the release of such aid .

some members of the 113 th congress have concerns about providing billions of dollars of annual aid to a country that appears unwilling or unable to act as a reliable u.s. partner .

numerous legislative proposals before the 113 th congress go beyond current law .

in order of most recent congressional action , following are pending measures proposed to restrict future aid to pakistan .

h.r .

5857 was introduced on may 25 , 2012 , and approved by the house appropriations committee on the same day .

this bill to fund the state department and foreign operations for fy2013 , contains provisions that would provide no funding for pccf ; withhold all funds appropriated for pakistan under esf , incle , fmf , and pccf unless the secretary of state certifies that pakistan is ( 1 ) cooperating with the united states in counterterrorism efforts against the haqqani network , the quetta shura taliban , lashkar - e - taiba , jaish - e - mohammed , al qaeda , and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations ; ( 2 ) not supporting terrorist activities against united states or coalition forces in afghanistan , and pakistan's military and intelligence agencies are not intervening extra - judicially into political and judicial processes in pakistan ; ( 3 ) dismantling ied networks ; ( 4 ) preventing nuclear - related proliferation ; ( 5 ) issuing visa in a timely manner for official u.s. visitors ; and ( 6 ) providing humanitarian organizations access to detainees , internally displaced persons , and other pakistani civilians affected by the conflict ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) ( unlike s. 3241 , this provision does not include a national security waiver ) ; require the secretary of state to submit to congress a spend plan for assistance to pakistan to include achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results regarding furthering development in pakistan , countering extremism , and establishing conditions conducive to the rule of law and transparent and accountable governance ; report biannually on the status of achieving that plan's goals and benchmarks ; and recommend that the secretary suspend all assistance to pakistan if this report finds pakistan is failing to make measureable progress toward stated goals and benchmarks ( sec .

7046 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) ; allow esf funds , notwithstanding any other provision of law , for cross border stabilization and development programs between afghanistan and pakistan or between either country and the central asian republics ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ) .

allow incle and fmf funds to be transferred to pccf and remain available until september 30 , 2014 , as long as the secretary of state notifies congress 15 days before such action and specifies source of funds and implementation plan .

obligation of such funds are subject to sec .

7046 ( b ) of this act .

s. 3241 was introduced may 24 , 2012 .

the full senate appropriations committee approved it the same day .

as approved by the senate appropriations committee , the bill contains provisions that would provide $50 million for the pccf ( about 6% of both the amount requested by the administration and the amount appropriated for fy2012 ) , but only if the secretary of state certifies that pakistan has reopened the glocs to afghanistan and that the funds can be used efficiently and effectively ; if certification is not possible , then all pccf funds shall be transferred to the economic support fund ( esf ) , development assistance ( da ) , the middle east and north africa incentive fund ( mena if ) , and nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) .

withhold all funds appropriated for pakistan under esf , international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and the pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund ( pccf ) unless the secretary of state certifies that pakistan is ( 1 ) cooperating with the united states in counterterrorism efforts against the haqqani network , the quetta shura taliban , lashkar - e - taiba , jaish - e - mohammed , al qaeda , and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations ; ( 2 ) not supporting terrorist activities against united states or coalition forces in afghanistan , and pakistan's military and intelligence agencies are not intervening extra - judicially into political and judicial processes in pakistan ; ( 3 ) dismantling ied networks ; ( 4 ) preventing nuclear - related proliferation ; ( 5 ) implementing policies to protect judicial independence and rule of law ; ( 6 ) issuing visas in a timely manner for official u.s. visitors ; and ( 7 ) providing humanitarian organizations access to detainees , internally displaced persons , and other pakistani civilians affected by the conflict ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) ( the secretary may waive these requirements if doing so is important to u.s. national security interests ) ; limit total state department aid to pakistan to about $800 million ( roughly 36% of the administration's request ) , including no more than $375 million for esf , $100 million for incle , and $250 million for fmf ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) ; further withhold $33 million of appropriated fmf funds unless the secretary of state certifies that dr. shakil afridi has been released from prison and cleared of all charged relating to the assistance provided to the united states in locating osama bin laden ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( g ) ) ; and require the secretary of state , in consultation with the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) administrator , to submit to congress a spend plan for assistance to pakistan to include achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results regarding furthering development in pakistan , countering extremism , and establishing conditions conducive to the rule of law and transparent and accountable governance ; report biannually on the status of achieving that plan's goals and benchmarks ; and recommend that the secretary suspend all assistance to pakistan if this report finds pakistan is failing to make measureable progress toward stated goals and benchmarks ( sec .

7046 ( c ) ( 3 ) ) .

the bill also provides that $100 million of the esf funds may be used by the president for overseas contingency operations if so designated by congress .

as passed by the full house on may 18 , 2012 , the national defense authorization act for fy2013 would prohibit the secretary of defense from preferential procurement of goods or services from pakistan until such time as that country's government reopens the ground lines of communication ( glocs ) to afghanistan ( sec .

821 ( d ) ) ; limit fy2013 csf payments to pakistan to no more than $650 million ( sec .

1211 ( b ) ) ; withhold csf payments to pakistan unless the secretary of defense reports to congress on the claims process , any new conditions pakistan has placed on use of its glocs , and estimates any differences in transit costs from fy2011 to fy2013 ( sec .

1211 ( c ) ) ; withhold fy2012 csf payments to pakistan unless the secretary certifies that the islamabad government is ( 1 ) supporting counterterrorism operations against al qaeda , its associated movements , the haqqani network , and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations ; ( 2 ) dismantling ied networks ; ( 3 ) preventing nuclear - related proliferation ; and ( 4 ) issuing visas in a timely manner for official u.s. visitors ( sec .

1211 ( c ) ; and limit the obligation or disbursement of fy2013 pcf funds to 10% of those appropriated or transferred unless the secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , reports to congress an updated strategy on utilization of the fund , metrics for determining relevant progress , and a strategy for enhancing pakistan's efforts to counter ieds ( sec .

1217 ) .

h.r .

3115 was introduced october 6 , 2011 , and was referred to the house agriculture and house foreign affairs committees on the same day .

it was referred to the house subcommittee on october 14 , 2011 .

no further action has occurred .

section 2 of the bill would prohibit non - security assistance to pakistan including development assistance , economic support funds , global health and child survival assistance , aid from the democracy fund , international disaster assistance , and any provision of law that authorizes the secretary of state to provide a contribution to the international committee of the red cross , assistance to refugees , including contributions to the international organization for migration and the united nations high commissioner for refugees and other activities to meet refugee and migration needs , certain food aid , the $1.5 billion in annual economic assistance to pakistan authorized by the eppa ( p.l .

111-73 ) and any law authorizing contributions to international organizations .

section 3 states that security assistance may be provided to pakistan under any provision of law other than those in section 2 above and only during a period for which a certification or recertification is in effect .

the certification must be transmitted by the president to congress .

issues addressed in the certification include a determination by the president that the government of pakistan is cooperating with the united states in efforts against al qaeda , the taliban , and associated terrorist groups , including prevention of such groups from carrying out cross - border attacks on neighboring countries ; does not impede united states counterterrorism efforts ; and will use the assistance solely for the purpose of border security , counter - terrorism , and law enforcement activities directed against al qaeda , the taliban , and associated terrorist groups .

recertification must be no later than 90 days after the date on which the president transmits to congress an initial certification and every six months thereafter .

the president shall transmit to congress a recertification that the original certification conditions are continuing to be met ; or if the president is unable to make such a recertification , the president shall transmit to congress a report that contains the reasons .

these measures would take effect on the date of the enactment .

the foreign relations authorization act , 2012 , was introduced on july 19 , 2011 , and amended and reported out of the committee on foreign affairs on september 23 , 2011 .

no further action has occurred .

as reported in the house , section 1025a of the bill would amend the eppa ( p.l .

111-73 ) by withholding amounts appropriated for assistance to pakistan unless the secretary of state annually certifies for congress that assistance has to date made or is making measurable progress toward achieving the principal objectives of u.s. assistance to pakistan contained in the pakistan assistance strategy report and a memorandum explaining the reasons justifying the certification ; removing the eppa's national security waiver ; and altering some of the eppa's section 203 limitations on security assistance and arms transfers , including adding to required certification criteria that pakistan ( 1 ) is fully assisting the united states with investigating the existence of an official or unofficial support network in pakistan for osama bin laden , including by providing the united states with direct access to osama bin laden's relatives in pakistan and to osama bin laden's former compound in abbottabad and any materials therein ; and ( 2 ) is facilitating the issuance of entry and exit visas for official u.s. visitors engaged in counterterrorism efforts and training or other cooperative programs and projects in pakistan .

section 1025b would require that the eppa's section 301 pakistan assistance strategy report be submitted to congress annually through 2014 rather than one time , and that it further include descriptions of ( 1 ) progress toward creating a searchable internet database and other public communications strategies that will provide american and pakistan people with updated and accurate information on proposed spending plans , disbursements of assistance , and results achieved using funds authorized ; ( 2 ) progress toward meeting the recommendations of audits , reviews , and investigations completed by the general accountability office and by the office of inspector general of the united states agency for international development , the department of state , and the department of defense ; and ( 3 ) a description of how the administration is incorporating support for private sector development and enhanced trade opportunities as part of the foreign assistance approach to pakistan .

h.r .

3013 was introduced on september 22 , 2011 , and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

no further action was taken .

section 2 of the bill would prohibit all u.s. aid to pakistan except aid that would ensure the security of nuclear weapons .

the prohibition would take effect on the date of the enactment of the measure and would prohibit already allocated assistance to pakistan that is unexpended on or after the date of enactment .

s. 1601 was introduced on september 22 , 2011 , marked up in the senate committee on appropriations , and sent to the senate the same day .

no further action has been taken .

section 7010 would require that the secretary of state provide to the appropriations committee by april 1 , 2012 , and for every fiscal quarter thereafter , a report on the uses of fmf , imet , and pcf .

the report "shall include a description of the obligation and expenditure of funds ... and the use or purpose of the assistance provided by such funds. .

section 7065 ( c ) would require that to release any economic or security assistance funds for pakistan ( including the pccf ) the secretary of state must certify to congress that the u.s. and pakistani governments "have agreed , in writing , to achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results for the use of such funds , and have established mechanisms within each implementing agency to ensure that such funds are used for the purposes for which they were intended ; " the secretary "should suspend any direct government - to - government assistance to an implementing agency if s / he has credible information of misuse of such funds by any such agency ; " and that funds made available "shall be subject to prior consultation with , and the regular notification procedures of , the committees on appropriations. .

to meet these requirements , the secretary of state must certify that the pakistani government is "cooperating with the united states in efforts against the haqqani network , the quetta shura taliban , lashkar - e - tayyiba , al qaeda and other domestic and foreign terrorist organizations , including taking steps to end support for such groups and prevent them from operating in pakistan and carrying out cross border attacks into neighboring countries ; not impeding the issuance of visas for u.s. visitors engaged in counterterrorism efforts and assistance programs in pakistan ; and providing humanitarian organizations access to detainees , internally displaced persons , and other pakistani civilians affected by the conflict. .

the secretary may waive this certification requirement "if to do so is in the national security interests of the united states. .

section 7065 ( c ) further stipulates that esf for pakistan "should be made available to stop the flow of precursor materials used to manufacture improvised explosive devices , including calcium ammonium nitrate , from pakistan to afghanistan , including programs to train border and customs officials in pakistan and afghanistan as well as agricultural extension programs that encourage alternative fertilizers among pakistani farmers. .

section 7082 ( a ) would require that no later than 45 days after the date of enactment any agency providing economic assistance to pakistan shall submit to the committees on appropriations an operating plan that "provides details of the use of such funds at the program , project , and activity level. .

section 7082 ( b ) would require that , prior to the initial obligation of funds , the secretary of state , in consultation with the usaid administrator , shall submit to congress a detailed spend plan , which shall include achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results , for funds appropriated under the heading "democracy fund ; " economic and security assistance funds for pakistan ; and economic assistance funds appropriated for food security and agriculture development programs and for climate change and environment programs .

as per section 7065 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( b ) , the spend plan report for pakistan shall include "achievable and sustainable goals , benchmarks for measuring progress , and expected results regarding furthering the development of pakistan , countering extremism , and establishing conditions conducive to the rule of law and accountable governance," and it provides that , not later than six months after submission of such spend plan , and each six months thereafter until september 30 , 2013 , the secretary of state "shall submit a report on the status of achieving the goals and benchmarks in the spend plan" and "should suspend assistance for the government of pakistan if any such report indicates that pakistan is failing to make measurable progress in meeting any such goal or benchmark. .

the department of defense appropriations act for fy2012 was introduced in the house on june 16 , 2011 , and referred to the house appropriations committee on the same day .

the house passed the measure on july 8 , 2011 .

the senate committee on appropriations reported it with an amendment in the nature of a substitute on september 15 , 2011 , and it was placed on the senate legislative calendar .

no further action has occurred .

the house version contains restrictions and reporting requirements regarding aid to pakistan .

the senate appropriations committee strikes out those measures , among others , and does not include restrictions on aid to pakistan .

the house measure includes the following: section 9009 would require that the secretary of defense submit to congress not later than 45 days after the end of each fiscal quarter a report on the proposed use of all appropriated pcf on a project - by - project basis , for which the obligation of funds is anticipated during the three - month period from such date , including estimates of the costs required to complete each such project .

the report shall include the use of all funds on a project - by - project basis , including estimates of the costs to complete each project ; and an estimated total cost to train and equip pakistani security forces , disaggregated by major program and sub - elements by force , arrayed by fiscal year .

section 9015 stipulates that not more than 25% of pcf appropriated after fy2011 may be obligated or expended until such time as the secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , reports to congress on the strategy to utilize such funds and the metrics used to determine progress with respect to those funds .

the report shall include , at a minimum , ( i ) a discussion of u.s. strategic objectives in pakistan ; ( ii ) a listing of the terrorist or extremist organizations in pakistan opposing u.s. goals in the region and against which the united states encourages pakistan to take action ; ( iii ) a discussion of the gaps in capabilities of pakistani security units that hampers the ability of the pakistani government to take action against the organizations listed in clause ( ii ) ; ( iv ) a discussion of how assistance provided utilizing the funds will address the gaps in capabilities listed in clause ( iii ) ; ( v ) a discussion of other efforts undertaken by other u.s. government departments and agencies to address the gaps in capabilities listed in clause ( iii ) or complementary activities of the department of defense and how those efforts are coordinated with the activities undertaken to utilize the funds ; and ( vi ) metrics that will be used to track progress in achieving u.s. strategic objectives in pakistan , to track progress of the pakistan government in combating the organizations listed in clause ( ii ) , and to address the gaps in capabilities listed in clause ( iii ) .

this unnumbered bill was marked up by the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs during the summer of 2011 .

no further action has occurred .

section 7047 states that none of the funds made available may be obligated for aid to pakistan until the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of defense and the director of national intelligence , certifies and reports to congress that the government of pakistan is cooperating on nuclear nonproliferation efforts ; investigating how osama bin laden found refuge in pakistan for years ; and is making demonstrable progress in combating terrorist groups .

funds will be provided only for programs that are in america's national security interest and must foster economic development and decrease the appeal of extremism .

the secretary of state must report to congress within 45 days of enactment of this act on projects to be funded .

section 7031 .

the house appropriations subcommittee on state department , foreign operations , and related programs is concerned about direct government - to - government assistance to pakistan .

this bill would require the secretary of state to certify that any government - to - government aid will be used as intended ; that pakistan agrees to clear , achievable goals ; that the implementing agency and staff are fully qualified ; and that there are sufficient monitoring and evaluation systems in place .

section 7006 .

the bill includes a requirement that the secretary of state , in consultation with the usaid , provide a spending plan to the congressional appropriations committees prior to obligation of funds .

h.r .

1699 was introduced on may 3 , 2011 , and referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

no further actions were taken .

section 2 ( prohibition on assistance to pakistan ) states the following: ( a ) prohibition — assistance may not be provided to pakistan under any provision of law unless the secretary of state certifies to congress that the government of pakistan did not have any information regarding osama bin laden's possible whereabouts on or after september 11 , 2001 ; or if the government of pakistan did have information regarding osama bin laden's possible whereabouts on or after september 11 , 2001 , it communicated such information to the united states government in an expedited manner .

 ( b ) a certification described shall be submitted in writing and include specific findings and conclusions ; and in unclassified form , but may contain a classified annex if necessary .

 ( c ) this act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of it and shall apply with respect to amounts allocated for assistance to pakistan that are unexpended on or after such date .

h.r .

1790 was introduced on may 5 , 2011 , and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs .

no further action was taken .

section 3 ( prohibition on assistance to pakistan ) states , "assistance may not be provided to pakistan under any provision of law. .

the prohibition of aid to pakistan would be effective upon enactment of the act and would apply to unobligated or unexpended aid to pakistan as of that date .

h.r .

1 was introduced february 11 , 2011 , agreed to in the house on february 19 , and sent to the senate floor , where it was returned to the calendar on march 9 .

no further actions were taken .

section 2123 ( b ) states that esf funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this division for assistance for afghanistan and pakistan may not be made available for direct government - to - government assistance unless the secretary of state certifies to the committees on appropriations that the relevant implementing agency has been assessed and considered qualified to manage such funds and the government of the united states and the government of the recipient country have agreed , in writing , to clear and achievable goals and objectives for the use of such funds , and have established mechanisms within each implementing agency to ensure that such funds are used for the purposes for which they were intended .

