since 1917 , united states military services have researched and employed unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) .

over that time , they have been called drones , robot planes , pilotless aircraft , rpvs ( remotely piloted vehicles ) , rpas ( remotely piloted aircraft ) and other terms describing aircraft that fly under control with no person aboard .

they are most often called uavs , and when combined with ground control stations and data links , form uas , or unmanned aerial systems .

the department of defense ( dod ) defines uavs as powered , aerial vehicles that do not carry a human operator , use aerodynamic forces to provide vehicle lift , can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely , can be expendable or recoverable , and can carry a lethal or nonlethal payload .

ballistic or semi - ballistic vehicles , cruise missiles , and artillery projectiles are not considered uavs by the dod definition .

uavs are either described as a single air vehicle ( with associated surveillance sensors ) , or a uav system ( uas ) , which usually consists of three to six air vehicles , a ground control station , and support equipment .

although only recently procured in significant numbers by the united states , uas were first tested during world war i , although not used in combat by the united states during that war .

indeed , it was not until the vietnam war that the united states employed uas such as the aqm - 34 firebee in a combat role .

the firebee exemplifies the versatility of uas — initially flown in the 1950s as an aerial gunnery target and then in the 1960s as an intelligence - collection drone , it was modified to deliver payloads and flew its first flight test as an armed uav in 2002 .

the military use of uas in conflicts such as kosovo ( 1999 ) , iraq ( since 2003 ) , and afghanistan ( since 2001 ) has illustrated the advantages and disadvantages of unmanned aircraft .

uas regularly make national headlines as they perform tasks historically performed by manned aircraft .

uas are thought to offer two main advantages over manned aircraft: they eliminate the risk to a pilot's life , and their aeronautical capabilities , such as endurance , are not bound by human limitations .

uas also protect the lives of pilots by performing those dull , dirty , or dangerous missions that do not require a pilot in the cockpit .

uas may also be cheaper to procure and operate than manned aircraft .

however , the lower procurement cost of uas can be weighed against their greater proclivity to crash , while the minimized risk to onboard crew can be weighed against the complications and hazards inherent in flying unmanned vehicles in airspace shared with manned assets .

uas use has increased for a number of reasons .

advanced navigation and communications technologies were not available just a few years ago , and increases in military communications satellite bandwidth have made remote operation of uas more practical .

the nature of the iraq and afghanistan wars has also increased the demand for uas , as identification of and strikes against targets hiding among civilian populations required persistent surveillance and prompt strike capability , to minimize collateral damage .

further , uas provide an asymmetrical — and comparatively invulnerable — technical advantage in these conflicts .

for many years , the israeli air force led the world in developing uas and tactics .

u.s. observers noticed israel's successful use of uas during operations in lebanon in 1982 , encouraging then - navy secretary john lehman to acquire a uas capability for the navy .

interest also grew in other parts of the pentagon , and the reagan administration's fy1987 budget requested notably higher levels of uas funding .

this marked the transition of uas in the united states from experimental projects to acquisition programs .

initial u.s. capabilities came from platforms acquired from israel .

one such uas , pioneer , emerged as a useful source of intelligence at the tactical level during operation desert storm , when pioneer was used by navy battleships to locate iraqi targets for its 16-inch guns .

gulf war experience demonstrated the potential value of uas , and the air force's predator was placed on a fast track , quickly adding new capabilities .

debuting in the balkans conflict , the predator performed surveillance missions such as monitoring area roads for weapons movements and conducting battle damage assessment .

operations in iraq and afghanistan have featured the air force's global hawk , as well as adding a new mission that allows the predator to live up to its name — armed reconnaissance .

reflecting a growing awareness and support for uas , congress has increased investment in unmanned aerial vehicles annually .

the fy2001 investment in uas was approximately $667 million .

for fy2012 , dod has asked for $3.9 billion in procurement and development funding with much more planned for the outyears .

dod's inventory of unmanned aircraft increased from 167 to nearly 7,500 from 2002 to 2010 .

dod's uas research and development ( r&d ) funding has also grown , for a variety of reasons: uas are considered a growth industry , many uas are relatively inexpensive to produce , and new technology in miniaturization has helped accelerate the development of many uas types .

congress has approached uas development with strong encouragement tempered with concern .

notably , in 2000 , congress set the goal of making "one - third of the aircraft in the operational deep strike force aircraft fleet" unmanned .

congress has also directed the formation of joint program offices to ensure commonality among the services' uas programs .

following expressed concern that dod's "growing enthusiasm may well lead to a situation in which there is no clear path toward the future of uas," congress also required dod to submit a uas roadmap .

in some instances , congress has chastened dod for what it saw as a leisurely rate of uas acquisition and encouraged it to speed up this pace , or speed up the incorporation of certain capabilities .

for example , in 1996 , the house armed services committee ( hasc ) supported legislation directing dod to weaponize both the predator and hunter , but dod opposed the initiative .

although this report focuses on the military uses of uas , congress's interest in uas extends beyond the defense committees , as uas capabilities have also led to their use in missions outside the military .

the department of homeland security operates uas to help patrol u.s. borders , and congress has questioned the efficacy of such operations .

further , the use of uas in a variety of roles , but particularly as platforms for delivering lethal force , raises a number of legal issues of interest to congress .

advances in uas technology and their expanding role in national security lead to a number of possible questions for congressional consideration .

they may include .

this section addresses the program status and funding of some of the most prominent uas programs being pursued by dod , and most likely to compete for congressional attention .

this section does not attempt to provide a comprehensive survey of all uas programs , nor to develop a classification system for different types of uas ( eg , operational vs. developmental , single mission vs. multi mission , long range vs. short range ) .

one exception is a short subsection below titled "small uavs. .

the uavs described in this section are distinguished from the proceeding uavs by being man - portable and of short range and loiter time .

these smaller uavs are not currently , and are unlikely to be , weaponized .

the services do not provide as detailed cost and budget documentation for these uavs as they do for major uas programs .

individually , these uavs appear very popular with ground forces , yet do not necessarily demand as much congressional attention as larger uas programs like predator or global hawk .

as a whole , however , these small , man - portable uavs appear likely to increasingly compete with major uas programs for congressional attention and funding .

in the mid - 1990s , the pentagon began developing a uas designed primarily for combat missions .

the result was two separate unmanned aerial combat vehicles ( ucav ) programs , the air force's ucav and the navy's ucav - n demonstrator program .

the air force favored boeing's x - 45 for its program , while northrop grumman's x - 47 pegasus and boeing's x - 46 competed for the navy's project .

however , in june 2003 , the pentagon merged the two programs in order to establish the joint unmanned combat air system ( j - ucas ) project under the management of the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) .

the objective of the j - ucas merger was to create a flexible offensive network in which the air and ground elements are adapted to meet specific combat missions .

as part of program budget decision ( pbd ) 753 in december 2004 , darpa was ordered to transfer administration of the j - ucas resources to air force .

j - ucas was cancelled in 2006 .

the total money spent on the j - ucas / ucav program , which reached more than $1.45 billion in rdt&e funding , made it one of the most expensive uas ventures undertaken by dod .

subsequently , in may 2010 , the navy issued a request for information for a carrier - borne ucav called uclass , seeking ideas on a stealthy strike / surveillance platform that could operate alongside manned aircraft as part of a carrier air wing by the end of 2018 .

the notional system would comprise four to six aircraft capable of autonomous operation from nimitz - and ford - class carriers , with an unrefueled endurance of 11-14 hours and the capability for both hose - and - drogue and boom - and - probe aerial refueling .

another significant attribute of uclass is that — unlike most current uas that are designed to operate only in permissive or lightly defended environments — uclass "must be capable of operating in hostile airspace , which means the aircraft design must feature low - observable traits. .

navy secretary ray mabus said that "the notion here is that — just like the f - 35 carrier version — it is going to be stealthy .

it is going to be low observable," he says .

"and , if you are going to integrate an airplane into the carrier air wing , it should be able to go into contested airspace. .

the navy has awarded uclass concept study contracts to boeing , general atomics aeronautical systems , lockheed martin , and northrop grumman .

the uclass request for proposal is expected in fall 2011 .

likely uclass contenders include the following .

northrop grumman's x - 47b , an advanced version of the x - 47a ucav - n contender , is nearly 36 feet long , with a wingspan of 62 feet .

the increased wingspan in combination with the pratt & whitney f100-220u turbojet engine may allow x - 47b an endurance of nine hours and range of 1,600 nautical miles .

the x - 47b features folding wing - tips that cut down on size , making it more suitable for storage aboard an aircraft carrier .

system characteristics .

36 feet long with a wingspan of 50 feet ; single ge f404-102d engine .

the x - 45c was expected to achieve speeds of 450 knots and altitudes of 40,000 feet , with a flight duration of up to seven hours and a range of 1,200 nautical miles .

program status .

first flown on may 27 , 2011 , phantom ray is a development of boeing's x - 45c j - ucas contender .

although it is a company - funded one - off demonstrator , it is expected to contend for the navy's uclass program .

general atomics is currently developing a third generation predator that uses a turbojet engine to fly long - endurance , high - altitude surveillance missions .

the avenger ( formerly "predator c" ) will reportedly use the fuselage of the reaper , but will be similar to northrop grumman's global hawk in payload capacity and flight performance .

general atomics confirmed its offer of the "sea avenger" variant for the uclass competition in 2010 .

with a 41-foot long fuselage and 66-foot wingspan , the avenger is capable of staying in the air for up to 20 hours , and operating at up to 50,000 feet .

powered by a 4,800-lb .

thrust pratt & whitney pw545b jet engine , it can fly at over 400 knots — 50 percent faster than the turboprop - powered reaper unmanned plane , and more than three times as quick as the predator .

general atomics says the first avenger is now flying two to three times a week.... a second and third avenger are now in production .

it'll be a little longer than the first — 44 feet — and able to haul a 6,000 pound payload .

that's a 50 percent improvement over what the reaper can carry .

lockheed is also reported to be interested in entering an rq - 170 variant in the uclass competition .

tactical uas , ranging from raven to reaper , have become familiar , and the prototypes of combat uas like uclass are already in the air .

but a new class of uas is under development that would move beyond the endurance and range of global hawk to provide much more persistent platforms for isr , data relay , and other purposes .

among these hale , for high altitude long endurance systems , are .

proposed by the boeing phantom works , phantom eye would use hydrogen - fueled automobile engines to carry a 3,000-pound payload for 10 days .

a 150-foot wingspan demonstrator version hopes to achieve "up to four days of endurance at 65,000 ft." with a first flight in autumn 2011 .

in 2009 , aurora flight sciences unveiled the orion , which would use hydrogen - fueled diesel engines to carry a 2,600-pound payload at 30,000 feet , or a 1,000-pound payload for 10 days at 15,000-20,000 feet .

its demonstrator version is designed to reach 5-day endurance with the same payload .

orion is part of a system called magic , an acronym for medium - altitude global isr and communications , being developed by under a $4.7-million contract from the air force research laboratory .

a third hydrogen - powered hale contender , aerovironment's global observer "can fly as high as 65,000 feet for five to seven days while carrying a 400-pound payload. .

it is optimized for "persistent communications and remote sensing. .

global observer flew for the first time in 2010 , but the first test aircraft crashed in april 2011 .

several firms ( lockheed martin , mav6 , northrop grumman , and others ) are developing unmanned airships for long - to extremely long - endurance missions .

"in comparison with unmanned fixed - wing aircraft , such as the global hawk or reaper , an airship ... would have a similar payload and substantially longer endurance but considerably slower cruise speed. .

the army's high altitude airship program "has the long - term objective of building an airship capable of carrying a 2,000-pound payload and generating 15 kilowatts of power ( to run the payload and aircraft systems ) at 65,000 feet for more than 30 days. .

