the internet has become a central part of the american economy , delivering innovative products while eliminating the need for inefficient middlemen .

however , the free flow of information facilitated by the internet has also created problems with copyright and trademark infringement .

the problem is significant ; as much as 6% of the u.s. gross national product is generated by industries supported by intellectual property laws .

a recent report contends that nearly 24% of all internet traffic worldwide is infringing .

piracy of the content created by movie , music , and software companies , and the sale of counterfeit goods that include inauthentic clothing , pharmaceutical drugs , and consumer electronics , negatively impacts the american economy .

although the government accountability office cautions that it is difficult to precisely quantify the economy - wide impacts of piracy , it is believed to be a serious problem .

however , many websites trafficking in copyrighted content or counterfeit goods are registered and operate entirely in foreign countries .

these foreign "rogue sites" often provide creative content and physical goods protected by u.s. intellectual property law to people located within the united states .

s. 968 , the preventing real online threats to economic creativity and theft of intellectual property act ( protect ip act ) , and h.r .

3261 , the stop online piracy act ( sopa ) , are legislative responses to the jurisdictional problem of holding foreign websites accountable for piracy and counterfeiting .

the bills also authorize new enforcement mechanisms against domestic sites that facilitate infringing activities .

these bills would create new obligations for u.s. - based domain name servers , internet advertisers , search engines , and financial transaction providers to address such harm to intellectual property rights holders .

there has been considerable public debate about the changes to existing law that are proposed by these two bills .

an alternative legislative measure , the online protection and enforcement of digital trade act ( open act ; s. 2029 , h.r .

3782 ) has been introduced in response to the concerns raised about the protect ip act and sopa .

on september 20 , 2010 , senator leahy with senator hatch introduced the combating online infringement and counterfeits act ( coica ) .

the senate judiciary committee voted to report coica favorably to the senate , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

however , no public hearing was held to consider coica before the end of the 111 th congress , and the full senate did not act on the legislation before the end of the congressional term .

at the request of senator coburn , the senate judiciary committee in the 112 th congress held a hearing february 16 , 2011 , on the topic of "targeting websites dedicated to stealing american intellectual property. .

this hearing considered the scope of intellectual property theft over the internet and the problem of "rogue websites" that exclusively traffic in infringing material , issues that coica was designed to address .

on may 12 , 2011 , senator leahy introduced s. 968 , the protect ip act .

on may 26 , 2011 , the senate committee on the judiciary voted to report the legislation to the full senate , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

senator wyden then placed a hold on the bill , indicating his intent to object to any unanimous consent request to proceed , a sentiment that has been since joined by senators moran , cantwell , and paul .

the senate judiciary committee held a hearing on june 22 , 2011 , entitled "oversight of intellectual property law enforcement efforts" that included testimony from ice and other agencies charged with enforcement of intellectual property laws online .

on july 22 , 2011 , senator leahy filed a written report .

on december 17 , 2011 , senator reid presented a cloture motion on a motion to proceed to s. 968 , the protect ip act , with a roll call vote scheduled to be held on january 24 , 2012 .

senator wyden expressed his intent to filibuster the bill .

on october 26 , 2011 , representative lamar smith , chairman of the house judiciary committee , introduced h.r .

3261 , the stop online piracy act ( sopa ) .

the house judiciary committee held a hearing on sopa on november 2 , 2011 .

on december 12 , 2011 , representative smith released a manager's amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

3261 .

on december 15 and 16 , the house judiciary committee held markup sessions in which the committee considered 60 amendments that were filed to the manager's amendment .

however , the committee did not complete the markup and postponed continuation of the sopa markup "due to house schedule. .

on january 14 , 2012 , the white house responded to an online petition submitted under the obama administration's "we the people" initiative that urged the president to veto the sopa bill .

in an online post written by the intellectual property enforcement coordinator victoria espinel , the u.s. chief technology officer aneesh chopra , and cybersecurity coordinator howard schmidt , the white house explained that it would support online piracy legislation that "provides prosecutors and rights holders new legal tools to combat online piracy originating beyond u.s .

borders. .

however , the white house stated that it "will not support legislation that reduces freedom of expression , increases cybersecurity risk , or undermines the dynamic , innovative global internet. .

several websites , including wikipedia , reddit , and mozilla , participated in a 24-hour shutdown of their webpages on january 18 in order to express their opposition to the protect ip act and sopa .

the online protests , increased public awareness and negative opinions concerning the bills , and largely unfavorable media coverage , contributed to several members of congress withdrawing their support for the legislation in its current form .

on january 20 , 2012 , senator reid announced that , "in light of recent events," he was postponing the cloture vote that had been scheduled for the protect ip act on january 24 , although he expressed his hope that a compromise could be reached between supporters and opponents of the legislation "in the coming weeks. .

moments after senator reid's announcement , chairman smith released a statement that the house judiciary committee would similarly postpone consideration of sopa "until there is wider agreement on a solution" to the online piracy problem .

the following is a brief summary of the key provisions of s. 968 , as reported in the senate .

as introduced , sopa contains two titles: ( 1 ) combating online piracy and ( 2 ) additional enhancements to combat intellectual property theft .

prior to the titles are savings and severability clauses .

the first savings clause pronounces that "nothing in this act shall be construed to impose a prior restraint on free speech or the press protected under the 1 st amendment to the constitution. .

the second savings clause explains that nothing in title i of this act shall be construed to enlarge or diminish copyright infringement liability for any cause of action under the copyright act , including any limitations on liability that the copyright act provides .

the severability clause explains that if any provision of this act is held to be unconstitutional , the other provisions of the act are not to be affected by that determination .

numerous concerns have been raised about the provisions of the protect ip act and sopa by a variety of organizations , including human rights and civil liberties groups , technology companies , law professors , public interest groups , and consumer organizations .

these concerns , and the responses by the legislation's supporters ( the bills' sponsors as well as organizations representing intellectual property rights holders , labor unions , and small and large businesses that manufacture and sell goods ) , can be organized broadly into the following categories .

as noted earlier in this report , house judiciary chairman lamar smith released a manager's amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

3261 on december 12 , 2011 .

the manager's amendment offers several substantial changes to sopa , several of which would more closely align the provisions of sopa with those in the protect ip act , including the following: adds additional savings clauses , including one that clarifies that nothing in title i of sopa shall be construed to impose a duty on service providers to monitor activity on their network or service .

another savings clause specifies that service providers are not required take actions that would impair the security or integrity of the domain name system .

removes the non - judicial "written notification procedure" that was originally available to rights holders , leaving only one private enforcement mechanism for rights holders under sopa ( the same one provided by the protect ip act ) – they must seek the authorization of a court in order to create a legal obligation on the part of payment processors and internet advertisers to cease doing business with the offending website .

revises sopa's definition of a "u.s. - directed site" to expressly require that the website be a foreign internet site , thus removing domestic websites from the scope of the act's provisions .

 ( note that the protect ip act permits private plaintiff actions against domestic websites ) .

changes the definition of "foreign infringing site" ( which applies to the section 102 action by the attorney general ) to remove the requirement that the owner / operator of the site is committing or facilitating the commission of criminal trademark and copyright infringement .

instead , the definition of a "foreign infringing site" is a website that "is being operated in a manner that would , if it were a domestic internet site , subject it ( or its associated domain name ) to seizure or forfeiture in the united states" under exiting law .

changes the definition of an "internet site dedicated to theft of u.s. property" ( which applies to the section 103 action by private plaintiffs ) to require that in order for a website to meet such definition , the website's violation of copyright must be for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain .

 ( the protect ip act does not contain such a requirement ) .

in addition , the revised definition eliminates sopa's original language that would have encompassed a website offering goods or services in a manner that "engages in , enables , or facilitates" infringement .

 ( the protect ip act uses these three verbs in its definition of an internet site dedicated to infringing activities. ) .

finally , the revised definition drops language that would have included a website that "is taking , or has taken , deliberate actions to avoid confirming a high probability of the use of the u.s. - directed site to carry out acts that constitute" copyright infringement or circumvention of copyright protection systems .

provides a new section ( section 104 ) that states: "in any case in which only a specifically identified portion of an internet site is identified by the court as a foreign infringing site or as an internet site dedicated to theft of u.s. property , and made subject to an order [under section 102 and 103] , the relief granted under such subjection , and the obligations of any entity served with a copy of an order … shall be confined to that specified portion so identified and made subject to the order .

nothing in the order shall be interpreted to impose obligations on any entity served with a copy of the order with respect to any other portion of an internet site not specified in the order. .

deletes sopa's original requirement that service providers take "measures designed to prevent the domain name of the foreign infringing site ( or portion thereof ) from resolving to that domain name's internet protocol address. .

instead , the manager's amendment allows a service provider to take "such measures as it determines to be the least burdensome , technically feasible , and reasonable means designed to prevent access by its subscribers located within the united states to the foreign infringing site that is subject to the order. .

deletes sopa's "5 day" time limit within which third parties would have had to satisfy their obligations to take actions against the foreign infringing site ; rather , the manager's amendment provides that "[s]uch actions shall be taken as expeditiously as possible. .

on december 17 , 2011 , senator wyden , along with senators cantwell and moran , introduced s. 2029 , the online protection and enforcement of digital trade act ( open act ) , to serve as an alternative to the protect ip act and sopa .

s. 2029 has been referred to the senate committee on finance .

on january 18 , 2012 , representative darrell issa introduced a version of the open act in the house , h.r .

3782 , which is nearly identical to s. 2029 .

h.r .

3782 has been jointly referred to the house ways and means committee and to the house judiciary committee .

the following is a brief summary of the key provisions of the open act .

section 337 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

§1337 ) , as amended , prohibits unfair methods of competition or other unfair acts in the importation of products into the united states .

it also prohibits the importation of articles that infringe valid u.s. patents , copyrights , processes , trademarks , or protected design rights .

the international trade commission ( itc ) is an independent , quasi - judicial federal government agency responsible for investigating and arbitrating complaints of unfair trade practices under section 337 .

the primary remedy employed by the itc is to order the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) to stop imports from entering the border .

additionally , the itc may issue cease and desist orders against individuals determined to be violators of intellectual property rights .

the majority of unfair competition acts asserted under section 337 involve allegations of patent infringement .

the open act would amend the tariff act of 1930 to insert after section 337 a new section 337a , entitled "unfair trade practices relating to infringement of copyrights and trademarks by certain internet sites. .

the open act defines "infringing activity" to mean an activity that constitutes copyright infringement ; circumvention of copyright protection systems ; or the sale , distribution , or promotion of goods , services , or materials bearing a counterfeit mark .

it defines an "internet site dedicated to infringing activity" to mean an internet site that is ( 1 ) foreign , ( 2 ) conducts business directed at u.s. residents , and ( 3 ) "has only limited purpose or use other than engaging in infringing activity and whose owner or operator primarily uses the site" to willfully commit copyright infringement , circumvent copyright protection systems , or use counterfeit marks on products and services ( emphasis added ) .

the open act provides several exclusions from this definition of an "internet site dedicated to infringing activity," including ( 1 ) if the internet site has a practice of complying with dmca notice and takedown requests , ( 2 ) if the internet site qualifies for a section 512 dmca safe harbor from liability , or ( 3 ) if the internet site distributes content and goods that do not infringe a copyright or trademark .

the open act declares that it is an unfair practice in import trade , and thus a violation of the new section 337a that it would add to the tariff act of 1930 , for an internet site dedicated to infringing activity to facilitate imports into the united states .

the itc would be empowered to make the determination as to whether there has been such a violation .

the only websites that may be investigated by the itc are ones that have a nondomestic domain name ; if the itc discovers that the accused domain name is a domestic one , the itc is required to terminate or not initiate the investigation and then refer the matter to the attorney general for further proceedings as the attorney general determines is appropriate .

in addition , the open act requires the itc to terminate , or not initiate , an investigation of a domain name if the operator of the associated internet site provides a legal notice on the site that states that the operator consents to the jurisdiction and venue of the u.s. district courts .

the open act charges the itc with the power and duty to investigate an alleged violation on its own initiative or upon receiving a complaint filed by a rights holder .

an owner of a copyright or trademark that is the subject of the infringing activity on a nondomestic website may file a complaint with the itc alleging , under oath , that the internet site dedicated to infringing activity is being operated or maintained in violation of section 337a .

the open act requires the complainant to send a notice of the complaint to the registrant of the domain name at its postal and e - mail addresses , if they are reasonably available .

in addition , the open act specifies that the complaint must identify ( and notify ) any financial transaction provider or internet advertising company that may be required to take measures against the offending website , if the itc determines that there has been a section 337a violation .

the open act requires the itc to determine , with respect to each section 337a investigation , whether or not the internet site is operated or maintained in violation of section 337a .

final itc determinations may be appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit .

the senate version of the open act also provides the president with an opportunity to disapprove of any itc determination "for policy reasons" no later than 60 days after the determination is made ; such presidential disapproval nullifies the determination .

in contrast , the house version of the open act allows the president to disapprove of any itc determination "for policy reasons" at any time after the itc has made a determination regarding a foreign website .

the open act permits the itc , in administering a section 337a proceeding , to allow the submission of information electronically , hold hearing electronically or obtain testimony electronically , or "by such means as the commission determines allows participation in proceedings … at as low a cost as possible to participants in the proceedings. .

the open act provides the itc with the power to issue an order against the internet site dedicated to infringing activity to cease and desist such activity , after the itc makes the determination that such internet site is in violation of the new section 337a .

the itc may grant a temporary or preliminary cease and desist order against the internet site if the complainant files with the itc chairperson ( or his designee ) a petition requesting such order .

the open act mandates that the itc chairperson , prior to issuing a temporary or preliminary cease and desist order , must give the owner / operator of the internet site an opportunity to be heard ( which may include submitting information electronically ) .

the itc chairperson may issue such an order if he determines that "there is reason to believe" that an internet site dedicated to infringing activity is operated or maintained in violation of section 337a .

the open act specifies that the itc chairperson follow the provisions of rule 65 of the federal rules of civil procedure in deciding whether to issue the temporary or preliminary cease and desist order .

if the complainant makes a showing of "extraordinary circumstances," the itc chairperson may make a determination regarding the petition for a temporary cease and desist order on an expedited basis ; otherwise , the itc chairperson is required to make a determination within 30 days .

the cease and desist order may last no longer than 14 days after its issuance , although the itc chairperson may extend the order for additional periods of 14 days for good cause or with consent of the entity against which the order is issued .

in order to discourage the filing of frivolous petitions for temporary or preliminary cease and desist orders , the itc chairperson may require the complainant to post a bond ; such bond may be forfeited to the owner of the internet site if the itc later determines that the internet site was not in violation of section 337a .

if the itc "reasonably believes that a financial transaction provider or an internet advertising service" is supplying services to an internet site that is subject to a cease and desist order , the itc may allow the complainant to serve a copy of the order upon the financial transaction provider or internet advertising service .

upon receipt of the order , financial transaction providers must take measures , as expeditiously as reasonable , to prevent or prohibit completion of payment transactions by the provider to the internet site , and internet advertising services must take technically feasible measures , as expeditiously as reasonable , to cease serving advertisements to the internet site .

the open act confers immunity from civil actions for these third parties that take any act reasonably designed to comply with these obligations ( or that make a good faith effort to comply ) .

the attorney general may bring an action for injunctive relief against any person subject to a cease and desist order who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the order .

a defendant in such an action may assert an affirmative defense that the defendant lacks the technical means to comply with the order without incurring an unreasonable economic burden .

the open act also confers immunity from liability ( under any federal or state law ) to a financial transaction provider or internet advertising service for ceasing or refusing to provide services to an internet site that the providers believe ( in good faith and based on credible evidence ) to be an internet site that is primarily designed for the purpose of offering , selling , dispensing , or distributing any prescription medication without a valid prescription .

 ( the protect ip act and sopa contain a similar provision , although the two bills would extend such immunity to service providers , search engines , domain name registries and registrars in addition to financial transaction providers and internet advertising companies .

 ) .

the open act allows the itc to appoint hearing officers , to be called "section 337 judges," to preside at the taking of evidence at section 337 and 337a hearings and to make initial and recommended decisions in investigations brought under section 337 and 337a of the tariff act of 1930 .

a section 337 judge is required to possess a minimum of seven years of legal experience and be licensed to practice law ; the open act allows the itc to promulgate regulations regarding other qualifications of the section 337 judges , including technical expertise and experience in ip matters .

while the protect ip act and sopa rely primarily on the authority of federal judiciary for their enforcement measures , the open act places the responsibility of addressing online piracy and counterfeiting upon the international trade commission .

in addition , the open act does not apply to internet service providers and search engines and thus does not require or encourage domain name system filtering as a potential action against offending websites .

the open act also only applies to foreign websites , whereas the protect ip act ( as reported ) and sopa ( as introduced ) could apply to domestic websites in certain circumstances .

finally , the open act does not provide rights holders with a private right of action against rogue websites in federal courts ; rights holders instead must seek relief through the itc .

