the klamath river basin , a region along the california - oregon border , has been a focal point for local and national discussions on water resources and species management .

water management issues were brought to the forefront when severe drought conditions in 2001 exacerbated competition for scarce water resources and generated conflict among several interests — farmers ; fishermen ( commercial and sport ) ; other recreationists ; federal wildlife refuge managers ; environmental organizations ; and state , local , and tribal governments .

subsequent problems with klamath basin fisheries , in particular events in 2002 and 2006 ( see " previous events ," below ) , and conflict over the relicensing of the klamath hydropower project , exacerbated these conflicts .

low water conditions and a call for water by senior water rights holders in 2013 have again brought these issues to the forefront .

congress has oversight authority over federal activities in the klamath basin related to operation of the bureau of reclamation's ( reclamation's ) klamath project ; management of federal lands ( including six national wildlife refuges , managed by the fish and wildlife service ) ; and implementation of endangered species act ( esa ; p.l .

93-205 ) and other federal laws .

previously , congress has held hearings and appropriated funding to address issues in the klamath basin .

past congressional debate has generally focused on the esa's role in water management , the operation of the klamath project , and other topics , such as supplemental support for parties impacted by federal policies .

the klamath basin restoration agreement ( kbra ) and the klamath hydroelectric settlement ( khsa ) , collectively referred to as the klamath a greements in this report , were signed in 2010 by a wide array of basin interests ( although not all basin interests support the agreements ) .

they aim to address many of the ongoing conflicts in the klamath basin .

the kbra would , among other things , set limits for water allocations for irrigators and wildlife refuges under a range of conditions related to the amount of water forecast in a given year ; attempt to make available supplemental water and power supplies in the basin ; and provide for restoration and monitoring of certain fish species .

it also includes other assurances to settle ongoing water conflicts between basin tribes and other entities , although it would not settle all ongoing conflicts in the basin .

the khsa lays out a process that could lead to removal of four nonfederal hydroelectric dams currently owned and operated by a private entity , pacificorp .

if carried out as envisioned , the project would be one of the largest , most complex dam removals in history .

under the khsa , the secretary of the interior led a study process to determine whether removal of these dams is in the public interest .

most of this study process has been completed , but the final step — a determination by the secretary — would require congressional authorization .

although the klamath agreements require congressional authorization to move forward on key components , some activities under existing authorities have already been undertaken .

consideration of the agreements could result in congress revisiting previous issues in the klamath basin , as well as considering new ones .

this report focuses on congressional consideration of the klamath agreements .

it assumes some familiarity with the basin on the part of the reader .

the klamath river basin is a largely sparsely populated area on the oregon and california border with limited water resources ( see figure 1 ) .

irrigated agriculture in the upper basin relies in large part on water provided by the bureau of reclamation's klamath project .

other farmers and ranchers ( known as off - project irrigators ) also rely on basin water supplies for irrigation .

the area is home to six national wildlife refuges that rely on the same water supplies to sustain migratory bird populations and several native american tribes that were historically dependent on lower and upper basin fish species .

two species of upper basin fish are currently listed as endangered under the esa ( the lost river and shortnose sucker ) , and one species of lower basin fish is listed as threatened under the esa ( coho salmon , an anadromous fish ) .

the basin also includes seven dams on the klamath river and its tributaries , built between 1918 and 1962 .

six of these dams are owned by pacificorp , a private company , and are known collectively as the klamath hydroelectric project ( khp ) .

historically , all but one of the dams produced hydroelectric power for the basin , including low - cost power for klamath project irrigators .

the original federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) license to operate the khp expired in 2006 , and pacificorp applied for relicensing of the project in 2004 .

to date , a new long - term license has not been granted because of the lack of state certification under section 401 of the clean water act ( p.l .

92-500 ) , as well as ongoing uncertainty related to fish passage upgrades and the status of the klamath agreements , discussed below .

in the absence of a new ferc license , the project continues to operate under a temporary annual license with the same conditions of the expired ferc license .

while water and species management issues have been prevalent throughout the history of the klamath project , recent congressional consideration related to klamath basin usually centers on one or more of three seminal events that occurred in 2001 , 2002 , and 2006 .

these events resulted in press coverage , legal conflicts , and studies that framed the negotiations and agreements currently at issue .

more recently , in the summer of 2013 , a call on water rights under the newly released oregon water rights adjudication resulted in limitations on water deliveries for junior water rights holders in the upper part of the basin .

several events have put the klamath region in the national spotlight .

in 2001 , as a result of previous biological opinions by the federal fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , the bureau of reclamation severely curtailed water deliveries to the klamath project to provide more water for endangered fish in the basin and to prevent their extinction .

these allocations were met with protests by area irrigators , who threatened to open irrigation head gates by force .

later , in 2002 , irrigators received more water than had been allocated in 2001 , but thousands of fish ( mainly chinook salmon ) died on the lower part of the klamath river , largely due to poor water conditions and fish health in that part of the basin .

in 2006 , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration severely restricted ocean fishing for salmon in the region due to low numbers of naturally spawning adults ( due in part to residual effects of the aforementioned 2002 event ) .

this restriction resulted in a large decrease in that year's commercial and recreational salmon catch compared to previous years .

the federal government provided emergency funding in response to these and other events in the klamath basin .

the funding included at least $170 million in addition to regular programmatic expenditures over the last decade .

for instance , for the 2001 and 2006 events , the federal government provided approximately $35 million and $60 million in emergency aid , respectively .

aid in addition to regular agency programs and appropriations was also provided in other years .

between 2002 and 2007 , reclamation spent $14 million on a pilot water bank to alleviate water shortages .

due to drought events in 2010 , an additional $10 million in supplemental appropriations was provided to the klamath basin in that year and $2 million was provided for a klamath drought initiative by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the 2002 farm bill provided $50 million to the klamath basin , and usda funding was also provided under other general authorities and programs authorized in the 2002 and 2008 farm bills .

in addition to these events , an oregon state water rights adjudication in the basin that was first initiated in the 1970s received added attention in 2013 ( see box above , "klamath water rights adjudication" ) .

at the conclusion of the adjudication's administrative phase , the state of oregon upheld a number of previous water rights claims including , among other things , that the klamath tribes have water rights with a date of "time immemorial. .

these water rights are now protected under oregon law and were exercised over junior water rights holders in the basin for the first time in the summer of 2013 .

the 2013 "call" on water rights ( in which senior water rights holders gave notice that their demands exceeded available flows ) limited or shut off water deliveries to some junior water rights holders ( for the most part , off - project irrigators ) in the upper basin .

in response to conflicts and other issues in the klamath basin , the federal government facilitated talks among multiple groups between 2002 and 2010 , including formal negotiations to reach two major settlement agreements between 2006 and 2010 .

participants in negotiations included state governments , tribes , counties , irrigators , fishermen , conservation groups , and hydropower facility owners and users .

the goal of the negotiations was a long - term solution to the multiple water and endangered species issues in the klamath basin , including the aforementioned issues associated with irrigation deliveries and flows for fish , as well as potential issues associated with pending water rights adjudications and relicensing of the basin's hydroelectric dams .

the two agreements that resulted from the negotiations , the kbra and the khsa , are officially linked in that signatories see them as complementary and do not support authorization of one agreement without the other .

originally , both agreements were set to expire without congressional authorization by 2012 , but this deadline has been extended to 2014 .

in response to concerns and outstanding issues in the upper basin , in 2013 a task force was convened to incorporate additional issues not addressed by the kbra and khsa .

among other things , it resulted in an additional settlement agreement in late 2013 , the " upper klamath basin settlement agreement ," discussed below .

the klamath agreements require congressional authorization to be implemented .

in the 114 th congress , s. 133 would authorize the klamath agreements , with certain changes .

in the 113 th congress , two bills were proposed to authorize the agreements: s. 2379 and s. 2727 .

s. 133 would provide congressional authorization of the actions described under the kbra , the khsa , and the upper klamath basin agreement .

it would authorize approximately $250 million in new federal activities envisioned under the kbra and the upper basin settlement for various actions in the on - project plan .

some of the prominent activities from the agreements that would be authorized ( either directly or by reference ) in the bill include a drought response plan , potential water rights retirement for certain junior water rights holders , economic development payments and activities for tribes , ecosystem restoration activities , and provision of low - cost power for project and off - project irrigators .

s. 133 would also provide congressional authorization for certain steps under the khsa that are important to the dam removal process moving forward .

in addition to authorization of new activities in the klamath agreements , the bill also includes assurances that certain preexisting rights and authorities ( eg , specific tribal claims / rights ) would not be affected .

other significant changes to klamath authorizing legislation have been made over time and are included in s. 133 .

among other things , the current legislation alters the proposed structure of the dam removal arrangement so that the dam removal determination under the khsa would be made jointly by doi and the states of oregon and california ( rather than being made solely by doi with concurrence by the states ) .

similar to legislation in the 113 th congress , s. 133 would add new reporting requirements for dam removal ( including a report on planned facilities removal to be published one to two years prior to the removal of the dams ) and ecosystem restoration , plus several smaller alterations to individual provisions of the agreements .

among other things , it would direct that dam removal costs include "reasonable compensation" for property owners affected by dam removal and would alter the disposition of certain revenues from fws lands in the basin .

in considering legislation related to klamath restoration , congress may focus on a number of issues , including the cost of implementing the legislation , its position on specific strategies and actions in the two agreements versus the status quo , and the potential for future disruptions in water supply deliveries in the basin .

a brief discussion of some of these issues is provided below .

while stakeholder views on the klamath agreements can broadly be divided into those supporting the agreements and those opposed to one or both of the agreements , such a simple characterization may not do justice to the various motives , preferences , and specific interests of many of these groups .

although a majority of interest groups involved in initial settlement negotiations endorsed both agreements , reasons for support among these groups are varied and in some cases are likely to be contingent on specific parts of the agreements ( eg , guarantees related to water supplies , whether or not dam removal is provided for , etc. ) .

going forward .

among those opposed to the agreements , reasons for opposition also vary widely .

they include reasons ranging from perceived economic damages resulting from the agreements to the agreements' overall lack of environmental protections or effect on implementation of existing laws .

among those supporting the klamath agreements are all the parties listed as nonfederal parties within both the kbra and the khsa .

for the kbra , this includes 5 state agencies in oregon and california , 3 tribes , 1 county ( humbolt county , in california ) , 25 parties related to the reclamation project , some off - project interests , and several other groups ( including environmental interests ) .

these same groups are also party to the khsa .

other groups and individuals were not party to the agreements but have stated their support for them .

these include , most recently , off - project irrigators in the upper basin who have agreed to support the klamath agreements under the upper klamath basin agreement in principle , signed in april 2014 .

notably , supporters have agreed to support authorizing legislation for both agreements ( eg , kbra signatories have backed enactment of the khsa ) and have generally argued that the agreements themselves must be linked .

the states of california and oregon , as well as the obama administration , support the agreements because they represent a potential solution to the protracted resource conflicts in the upper and lower basins .

government representatives also have pointed to the costs that resulted from previous conflicts in the basin , including supplemental aid , crop insurance , mitigation actions , and litigation costs .

other groups have chosen to support the agreements not only for their potential to end conflicts in the basin but also because they include specific provisions that are important to certain groups .

for instance , environmental groups have pledged to support the allocations for irrigation absent a similar allocation for fish in exchange for assurances of dam removal under the khsa and other promised fisheries restoration actions under the kbra .

among irrigators , those on the klamath project have pledged to support restoration provisions and less water in wet years in exchange for benefits from water supplies in dry years that presumably would be higher than under the status quo .

approximately half of the off - project irrigators in the upper basin support the agreements , in some cases because the agreements offer potential alternatives that are preferable to losing water deliveries outright due to their junior water rights status .

for its part , pacificorp notes that it supports removal of its four dams under the khsa because retirement of the dams under the terms of the khsa reportedly represents a more cost - effective option for its ratepayers than ferc relicensing .

previously there have been disagreements over which option the company would pursue in absence of the khsa: ferc relicensing for ongoing operations on all four dams ( which would entail costly improvements for fish passage , and altered operations for water quality ) or a surrender of its license and related decommissioning of some or all of the klamath hydropower projects .

both options would likely be costly for pacificorp and its ratepayers , and could potentially cost the company more than the arrangement under the khsa .

the khsa also has the added benefit of allowing the company to operate the dams under the current management regime through 2019 , through annual extensions to the project's ferc license .

some groups and individuals oppose the klamath agreements and their authorization .

some of these parties were initially involved in settlement negotiations but dropped out for various reasons , while others were not invited to participate in negotiations because they were not seen as representing significant interests .

still others , including county officials in the areas of the reclamation project and dams , oppose the agreements in their elected capacities .

notable opponents of the klamath agreements include local officials in klamath county in oregon and siskiyou county in california , the hoopa valley and resighini rancheria and quartz valley tribes , the northcoast environmental center , waterwatch of oregon , oregon wild , and others .

as noted above , some groups that initially opposed the agreements , including approximately half of the off - project irrigators in the upper basin , recently reached an agreement , the upper basin agreement , the effectiveness of which is tied to the authorization of the kbra and khsa .

other opponents , including klamath and siskiyou county , have since stated their opposition to that agreement for its ties to the kbra and khsa ( which they also oppose ) .

some groups oppose the agreements because they believe the agreements will further damage the region's economy .

some off - project users continue to oppose the agreements ( including the upper basin settlement ) because of economic damages to farmers resulting from water rights retirement and restoration requirements .

siskiyou county has opposed the agreements for a number of reasons , including the assertion that the pacificorp dams provide flood protection and economic benefits for downstream areas .

some residents and officials in these areas also oppose dam removal because of an expected loss of property taxes associated with certain lands that will lose lake frontage when the dams are removed .

others argue that the agreements do too little to benefit fisheries and give up too much to farmers and other interests .

for instance , the hoopa valley tribe has been critical of the agreements because it feels that the provisions of the kbra have the potential to terminate the duty of the united states to assert and protect tribal fishery rights when they conflict with operation of the klamath reclamation project .

the tribe argues that the kbra would subordinate its senior priority water rights to the junior water rights of the irrigation project .

some opponents have also focused on the uncertain nature of fisheries restoration in the klamath under the kbra .

some contend that these uncertainties were highlighted in expert panels as a part of the larger doi dam removal study process but were not adequately acknowledged by doi in its final studies .

some of these groups favor dam removal but argue that removal could be achieved through the existing ferc relicensing processes and does not need to be tied to the kbra .

they note that by providing annual renewals of the ferc license for the klamath hydroelectric project , the khsa allows the company to avoid project upgrades ( or removal ) that would otherwise be paid for by the company and benefit fisheries in the short term .

combined with a lack of performance metrics for fisheries restoration provisions and promises to not make a call on project water rights holders under the kbra , these opponents assert that the agreements disproportionately benefit pacificorp and irrigators at the expense of fisheries .

some environmental groups oppose other provisions of the klamath agreements and dropped out of negotiations as a result .

waterwatch of oregon and oregon wild find fault with a number of the provisions in the agreements , including the lack of water supplies for fish and the inclusion of lease - land farming on wildlife refuges .

along with the hoopa valley tribe , these groups have called for voiding the khsa and resuming water quality certification processes under the clean water act to force dam upgrades or removal through a separate process , which they argue will be more expedient and less costly for state and federal taxpayers ( i.e. , a process to be funded by pacificorp and potentially its ratepayers ) .

the yurok tribe , which initially supported the klamath agreements , issued a notice of withdrawal from the agreements in september 2015 .

among other things , the tribe cited inaction by congress and disagreements with the provisions of the upper klamath settlement agreement , in which it was not invited to participate .

