social security is financed by payroll taxes , which are paid by covered workers and their employers .

in the absence of a payroll tax reduction , employees and employers would each pay 6.2% of covered earnings , up to an annual limit , whereas self - employed individuals would pay 12.4% of net self - employment income , up to an annual limit .

in december 2010 , congress temporarily reduced the employee and self - employed shares by two percentage points ( to 4.2% for employees and 10.4% for the self - employed ) , with the social security trust funds "made whole" by a transfer of general revenue .

the temporary reduction was scheduled to expire at the end of 2011 , but was extended for two months as part of the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-78 ) .

the temporary payroll tax rate reduction was extended through the end of 2012 in the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) and subsequently allowed to expire at the end of 2012 .

as part of the agreement on the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 , a conference committee was appointed to consider a full - year extension of the payroll tax reduction .

in addition to an extension of the payroll tax rate reduction , the conferees also considered a further extension of unemployment benefits and adjusting payments to doctors under medicare .

the conference committee agreed to extend the payroll tax rate reduction , emergency unemployment compensation , and physician payments under medicare .

the final legislation , however , did not fully pay for ( or offset ) these extensions .

whether to provide a full - year extension was then debated among policymakers .

concerns included those related to the potential of the temporary reduction to endanger the social security trust funds , signaling a departure from the self - finance structure of social security , while increasing the federal deficit .

supporters of an extension emphasized the potential of an extension to stimulate the economy and the general revenue "repay" as a way to counter concerns about endangering the social security trust funds .

however , the use of offsets to reduce the budgetary cost of repaying the social security trust funds would reduce the stimulative effect , though the choice of offsets can influence the magnitude of the reduction .

this report briefly discusses economic stimulus considerations related to temporary payroll tax reductions and efforts to offset the budgetary cost of an extension .

for a discussion of social security policy considerations concerning a temporary payroll tax reduction , see crs report r41648 , social security: temporary payroll tax reduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

short - term fiscal stimulus measures aim to boost economic activity primarily through increases in the demand for goods and services .

the goal of these measures is to break a cycle of decreasing output leading to decreasing employment , resulting in lower consumption and leading to further decreases in output .

without stimulative policies the economy would eventually stabilize and recover , but recovery would take longer and the overall disruption to the economy would be greater .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , in testimony before congress , has identified three key criteria for assessing proposals to stimulate the economy .

the criteria are timing , cost - effectiveness , and consistency with long - term fiscal objectives .

the following sections evaluate the payroll tax rate reduction using these criteria .

extending the two percentage point payroll tax reduction through the end of 2012 cost an estimated $93.2 billion .

in considering a further extension of the payroll tax reduction , many proposals include some form of budgetary offset .

the use of offsets is not , however , universal , as the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2012 ( h.r .

4013 ) , introduced on february 13 , 2012 , did not contain any offsets .

ultimately , costs associated with the extension of the payroll tax rate reduction as enacted in the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) were not offset .

offsets that reduce spending , or increase revenues , are contractionary .

while offsets address the issue of long - term fiscal sustainability , depending on design , they can diminish the short - term stimulative effects of the tax cut .

having offsets occur after the period of economic weakness has passed could limit short - term contractionary effects while simultaneously promoting long - term fiscal sustainability .

in addition to the aggregate economic impacts of the offset , there are distributional effects .

the percentage increase in after - tax income and the percentage decrease in average federal tax liability is greater for low - and middle - income taxpayers , as compared to the highest - income taxpayers ( see table 1 ) .

offsets that reduce income or benefits to low - and middle - income earners , or offsets that otherwise increase taxes , could diminish the potential benefit of the payroll tax rate reduction for affected groups .

a number of other issues were considered alongside an extension of the payroll tax rate reduction .

the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-78 ) also provided a temporary extension of emergency unemployment compensation and a temporary readjustment of physicians' medicare reimbursements .

these provisions were extended in the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) .

lawmakers also considered including provisions that would extend the 100% bonus depreciation allowance to promote investment .

extending the 100% bonus depreciation allowance would generate revenue losses .

to avoid increasing the deficit , the cost of extending policies such as an extension of the 100% bonus depreciation allowance would require a budgetary offset .

ultimately , an extension of the 100% bonus depreciation allowance was not enacted as part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) .

in addition to the issues mentioned in this report , legislation to extend the temporary payroll tax rate reduction has included provisions related to a number of other policy issues .

several of these issues are noted below ( links to relevant crs reports provided as footnotes ) : environmental protection agency ( epa ) regulations related to the maximum achievable control technology ( mact ) standards for boiler and solid waste combustion units ; flood insurance reform ; spectrum reallocation and assignment and emergency communications ; and keystone xl pipeline project .

