electronic waste ( e - waste ) is a term that refers loosely to obsolete , broken , or irreparable electronic devices like televisions , computer central processing units ( cpus ) , computer monitors ( flat screen and cathode ray tubes ) , laptops , printers , scanners , and associated wiring .

e - waste has become a concern in the united states in part because of the high volumes in which it is generated and the hazardous ingredients it often contains ( such as lead , mercury , and chromium ) .

e - waste is essentially unregulated at the federal level — meaning it can be disposed of with common household garbage in municipal solid waste landfills ( the primary disposal method ) or incinerators .

u.s. producers of e - waste may also opt to export it overseas for processing .

although it is difficult to know exactly how much e - waste is exported , developing countries in asia or africa appear to be active importers of it .

many of these countries lack , or do not enforce , labor or environmental laws that would mitigate or prevent the harms associated with e - waste processing .

the result is that e - waste recycling operations in those countries may pose a significant risk to human health and the environment .

environmental impacts reportedly include contamination of the local soil , air , surface water , and groundwater .

although the united states has been involved in international efforts aimed at regulating the transboundary movements of hazardous waste for decades , it is not a party to the primary multilateral agreement governing the international waste trade: the basel convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal ( basel convention ) .

this convention forbids parties from exporting hazardous wastes to a party who has not received notice of , and consented to , that export .

it also requires parties to adopt domestic policies aimed at reducing the production of hazardous waste .

an amendment to that convention , which has not yet entered into force , would ban hazardous waste exports from "annex vii" parties — members of the oecd , european union , and liechtenstein — to other convention parties , which are primarily developing countries .

recently , momentum has developed for domestic legislation restricting e - waste exports from the united states .

these restrictions could take many forms , including a ban akin to the one proposed by the ban amendment to the basel convention , an e - waste export licensing system , or a quota on e - waste exports .

these restrictions may be difficult to reconcile with the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , one of the world trade organization ( wto ) agreements , and could be susceptible to challenge before a wto panel .

since the 1980s , the united states has been a party to international agreements governing the transboundary movements of hazardous wastes .

these agreements , one among the member countries of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) and two bilateral agreements with canada and mexico , condition hazardous waste exports on the notification of both exporting and destination countries and the destination country's consent .

however , these agreements cover a broader category of waste — all hazardous waste — than the hazardous electronic waste commonly called e - waste .

although the united states has engaged in some international efforts to regulate hazardous waste exports , it is not a party to the primary multilateral agreement governing the international waste trade: the basel convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal ( basel convention ) .

over 170 other countries are parties to the basel convention , which was negotiated under the auspices of the united nations environment programme .

the basel convention forbids parties from exporting hazardous wastes to any other party who has not received notice of , and consented to , that export .

article 4 of the basel convention imposes several other prohibitions and obligations on the parties , including , inter alia : a prohibition on the export of hazardous wastes to ( or importing hazardous wastes from ) non - parties unless the exporting and importing countries have entered into an international agreement with provisions on environmentally sound waste management that are at least equivalent to those in the convention ; an obligation to ensure that the generation of hazardous wastes within their territories is reduced to a minimum ; a requirement to prohibit persons within their jurisdictions from transporting hazardous wastes unless they are authorized to do so ; and an obligation to require that hazardous waste exports are managed in an environmentally sound manner in the state of import .

in addition , in 1995 , basel convention parties adopted an amendment to the convention to impose an absolute ban on hazardous waste export from "annex vii" parties — members of the oecd , european union , and liechtenstein — to other convention parties , which are primarily developing countries .

although some parties implemented the ban domestically , the "ban amendment" has not entered into force .

the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) is one of the foundational agreements of the wto's legal regime .

at its most general , the gatt sets the maximum tariffs for particular goods and disciplines certain trade - restricting measures adopted by wto members .

among the gatt's cornerstone provisions are article xi , which prohibits quantitative prohibitions or restrictions on the exportation of goods to any other member country , and article i , which bans measures that grant less favorable treatment to the products of one wto member country than to the like products of any other country .

the wto understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes ( dsu ) provides a means for wto members to resolve disputes arising under wto agreements .

wto members must first attempt to settle their dispute through consultations , but , if these fail , the member initiating the dispute may request that a panel examine and report on its complaint .

in addition , a member may appeal a panel's report to the wto appellate body .

members whose measures are deemed inconsistent with its wto obligations and unjustified under one of the gatt exceptions , such as those in article xx , are expected to implement the panel and / or appellate body's report .

that is , the defending member must withdraw , modify , or replace its inconsistent measures .

if a disagreement arises as to whether the defending member has , in fact , implemented the report , a wto panel may be convened to hear the dispute over compliance .

the wto appellate body hears appeals of these compliance panel reports .

ultimately , when a defending member fails to implement a panel or appellate body report within the established compliance period , the prevailing member may request that the defending member negotiate a compensation agreement .

if these negotiations are not requested or if an agreement is not reached , the prevailing member may also request authorization to impose certain trade sanctions against the non - complying member .

specifically , the wto may authorize the prevailing member to suspend tariff concessions or other trade obligations that it otherwise owes the non - complying member under a wto agreement .

there is concern that electronic waste ( e - waste ) producers in the united states are opting to export e - waste containing hazardous materials to developing countries rather than disposing of the waste in the united states .

e - waste is one type of hazardous waste , and , as such , its trade is regulated under a series of international agreements .

the united states is a party to several agreements restricting hazardous waste trade , but it is not a party to the largest multilateral agreement in this field: the basel convention .

the basel convention forbids parties from exporting hazardous wastes to any other party who has not received notice of , and consented to , that export .

it also requires parties to adopt domestic policies aimed at reducing the production of hazardous waste .

basel convention parties have adopted an amendment to impose an absolute ban on hazardous waste export from "annex vii" parties — members of the oecd , european union , and liechtenstein — to other convention parties , which are primarily developing countries .

although some parties implemented the ban domestically , the "ban amendment" has not entered into force and is not expected to do so for several years .

despite an international movement to regulate the transboundary flow of e - waste , a country that imposes restrictions on e - waste exports unilaterally may risk repercussions in the wto system .

specifically , these restrictions may be deemed inconsistent with articles xi:1 , xiii:1 , and i:1 of the gatt .

article xi:1 prohibits any government actions that impose , or result in , bans or other quantitative restrictions on exports and imports destined to wto members .

duties , taxes , and other charges are the only article xi:1 consistent methods of restricting imports or exports .

article i:1 prohibits any rule or formality affecting exportation from conferring a trade "advantage" — such as exemption from export licensing requirements — to exports destined to particular countries unless it "immediately and unconditionally" confers that same advantage to "like" products destined to all other wto members .

nevertheless , a wto panel will uphold export restrictions that are inconsistent with articles xi:1 , xiii:1 , and / or i:1 of the gatt if they fit under one of the exceptions listed in paragraphs ( a ) to ( j ) of article xx and satisfy the requirements imposed by the article xx chapeau .

there are several aspects of export restrictions that may make them difficult to provisionally justify under one of article xx's sub - paragraphs and characterize as consistent with the article xx chapeau .

for example , if e - waste export restrictions are imposed as a substitute for international diplomacy , it may be difficult to show that they are "necessary" to protect human life or health under article xx ( b ) .

although article xx ( g ) can be used to justify measures that fail article xx ( b ) 's "necessity" test , it cannot justify e - waste export restrictions imposed instead of , or otherwise without , comparable restrictions on domestic consumption or production .

ultimately , if a wto member imposed e - waste export restrictions that a wto panel or the appellate body deemed inconsistent with the gatt , the member would be expected to lift or modify those restrictions .

if the member failed to do so , it could face wto - authorized trade sanctions from the complaining member or members .

