on december 8 , 2011 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued a draft report on its investigation of groundwater contamination near the town of pavillion , wyoming .

this crs report provides a synopsis of the statutory authority for epa's investigation under the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) , a summary of the primary findings in the epa draft report , and a brief discussion of issues raised subsequent to the release of the draft report by proponents and opponents of the use of hydraulic fracturing for natural gas development .

epa had extended the public comment period on its draft report through september 30 , 2013 , but on june 20 , 2013 , epa announced that it no longer plans to finalize the report .

epa indicated that it would defer to the state of wyoming to assume the lead role in investigating drinking water quality in the area , and that the continuing role of epa would focus on providing technical support and input to the state .

the scope of the investigation by the state would seek to address water quality concerns by evaluating the water quality of certain domestic water wells , the integrity of certain oil and gas wells , and the historic use of waste disposal pits in the pavillion area .

in its announcement , epa noted that the state intends to conclude its investigation and release a final report by september 30 , 2014 .

although the epa draft report focused on one specific region where hydraulic fracturing was employed to enhance the production of natural gas , it has raised concerns about hydraulic fracturing practices in general , and whether epa's findings at pavillion are more broadly applicable to other regions of the country .

because the epa draft report linked groundwater contamination in wyoming to activities related to hydraulic fracturing , it had raised concerns about hydraulic fracturing practices in general .

some stakeholders took issue with some of the findings in the draft report .

various organizations representing private business interests within the oil and gas industry questioned the scientific validity of epa's contention that "the explanation best fitting the data for the deep monitoring wells is that constituents associated with hydraulic fracturing have been released into the wind river drinking water aquifer at depths above the current production zone. .

in contrast , some environmental organizations cited epa's findings in calling for more stringent regulation of hydraulic fracturing .

some stakeholders also commissioned independent assessments of epa's draft report and released their respective assessments in may 2012 .

an assessment commissioned by an industry organization disagreed with epa's findings , whereas an assessment commissioned by four environmental organizations supported the agency's findings .

stakeholder responses of various industry and environmental organizations are discussed further below .

the issuance of epa's draft report also received attention in the second session of the 112 th congress and in the first session of the 113 th congress .

on january 20 , 2012 , 11 members of the senate environment and public works committee sent a letter to epa administrator lisa jackson asking that the epa investigation be considered a "highly influential scientific assessment and that any related , generated report is subject to the most rigorous , independent , and thorough external peer review process. .

notwithstanding the senators' request , epa did not classify the pavillion draft report as constituting "highly influential scientific information. .

however , the agency did classify the draft as "influential scientific information" and explained as follows: epa classified the pavillion draft report as "influential scientific information" ( isi ) rather than a highly influential scientific assessment ( hisa ) because the pavillion investigation is a single study rather than the type of broad assessment involving an evaluation of a body of scientific or technical knowledge that comprises a hisa ( as defined by omb ) .

such a classification , however , does not limit the rigor of the peer review .

in recognition of the high profile of this investigation , the agency is using the peer review procedures for the draft report that are equivalent to those required for a hisa , including higher standards for ensuring reviewer independence from the agency and making agency responses to the peer reviewers available to the public .

in fact , epa has gone one step beyond the hisa requirement of simply making the final peer review charge publicly available by soliciting public comments on the draft charge to the reviewers .

in the house , the subcommittee on energy and environment of the committee on science , space , and technology held a hearing on february 1 , 2012 , to examine epa's findings and stakeholder concerns .

the subcommittee received testimony from officials representing epa and the state of wyoming , the western energy alliance ( an industry organization representing oil and natural gas exploration and production companies ) , and a public health scientist .

testifying for epa , james martin , regional administrator for epa region 8 , noted that pavillion draft report analysis "is limited to the particular geologic conditions in the pavillion gas field and should not be assumed to apply to fracturing in other geologic settings. .

mr. tom doll , testifying for the state oil and gas supervisor at the wyoming oil and gas conservation commission , questioned epa's conclusions , stating that , "state of wyoming experts do not support the epa's data or analysis and recommend further testing before any conclusion of groundwater contamination by any source can be made. .

all of the witnesses agreed that more research is needed .

in the first session of the 113 th congress , some members of the senate committee on environment and public works had expressed concern in january 2013 about the pending epa draft report for the pavillion site and the quality of the science upon which it was based .

epa's june 20 , 2013 , decision not to finalize the pavillion draft report , and to defer to the state of wyoming to assume the lead role in investigating drinking water quality in the area , has received support from the entire wyoming delegation .

on december 14 , 2011 , epa officially issued notice of the public availability of its draft report and initially began a 45-day public comment period with a closing date of january 27 , 2012 .

due to heightened interest , epa subsequently extended the public comment period for an additional 45 days through march 12 , 2012 .

shortly after this period expired , epa announced on march 29 , 2012 , that the agency would continue to accept public comments through october 16 , 2012 .

epa decided to continue accepting public comments for this longer period while the agency collected more data than first examined in the draft report .

on march 8 , 2012 , epa had announced its decision to collect additional samples from the deep monitoring wells in response to concerns about the scientific validity of the agency's findings .

epa stated that it would partner with the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) and the state of wyoming to perform the additional sampling and analysis , in collaboration with the tribes .

in conjunction with its decision to extend the public comment period , epa delayed the convening of a panel of independent scientists to peer review the findings of its draft report until the additional sampling was completed and the data could be made available to the panel to incorporate into its review .

on january 17 , 2012 , epa had published a 30-day notice inviting public nominations of scientific experts to be considered as peer reviewers for the external review of the draft report .

epa subsequently extended the public comment period on its draft report to january 15 , 2013 , and again to september 30 , 2013 .

on june 20 , 2013 , epa announced that it no longer intends to finalize its draft report or to seek scientific peer review .

instead , epa has deferred to the state of wyoming to assume the lead role in investigating drinking water quality in the vicinity of pavillion , but noted that it would continue to provide technical support to the state .

the wyoming department of environmental quality and the wyoming oil and gas conservation commission are the two agencies that would lead the continuing investigation on behalf of the state .

the scope of the investigation by the state would seek to address water quality concerns by evaluating the water quality of certain domestic water wells , the integrity of certain oil and gas wells , and the historic use of waste disposal pits in the pavillion area .

epa reported in its june 20 , 2013 , announcement that the state's investigation would seek to clarify water quality concerns and assess the need for any further action to protect drinking water resources .

epa also noted that the state intends to conclude its investigation and release a final report by september 30 , 2014 .

the following sections discuss various issues related to the epa draft report , including subsequent sampling by the usgs , how epa's findings may be used moving forward , and certain hydrogeological characteristics for consideration in interpreting and applying these findings .

in sum , the epa draft report has raised many issues , questions , and concerns among potentially affected stakeholders , including the oil and natural gas industry , environmental organizations , and individual citizens .

epa's actions since the release of its draft report in december 2011 have entailed collecting additional samples from the deep monitoring wells to broaden the data for its analysis , and extending the public comment period and delaying the convening of the independent scientific peer review panel until the additional sampling and analysis are complete .

now that epa has decided not to finalize its report , nor to subject it to independent scientific peer review , whatever additional actions may be taken at the pavillion site would appear to depend on the outcome of the investigation of the state of wyoming and what role epa may play in a supporting capacity .

 ( the following appendix to this report reviews epa's response authorities under cercla at the federal level. ) .

regardless of these outcomes , the potential applicability of either the findings of epa or the state of wyoming at the pavillion site to other sites where hydraulic fracturing operations are conducted would depend heavily upon the extent to which the geology and hydrogeology are similar , as well as other site - specific factors .

the pavillion site groundwater investigation outlined in the epa draft report constitutes an early stage of the standard site - specific evaluation process under cercla .

this process first focuses on characterizing a site to identify potential contamination and potential sources of contaminants to discern whether a release of hazardous substances may have occurred that may warrant further action under cercla .

if epa were to determine that cleanup of contamination is warranted to protect human health and the environment , certain exclusions , limitations , or exemptions could constrain the actions that epa could pursue under cercla .

in the case of a site like pavillion , these constraints may include the exclusion of releases of natural gas from the reach of the statute , the general limitation on the use of the authorities of the statute to respond to releases of hazardous substances that may be naturally occurring , and the exemption from liability under the statute for response costs or damages resulting from federally permitted releases of hazardous substances ( including permits issued by states with delegated federal authorities , and certain permits issued by states under their own authorities that govern underground injection involved in oil or natural gas production ) .

although the initial site - specific evaluation process under cercla may be funded and performed under epa's superfund program , it does not constitute the placement of a site on the national priorities list ( npl ) .

rather , such an evaluation is the initial — and in most cases the only — stage of the site - specific process under cercla .

most potentially contaminated sites initially brought to epa's attention are deferred to the states for further action .

epa's investigation of the pavillion site formally constituted the preliminary assessment / site inspection step of the site - specific evaluation process under cercla .

epa broadened the site inspection phase at the pavillion site to an "expanded site inspection" to collect additional samples and more fully characterize the contaminants that may be present in the groundwater and the potential sources .

the primary purpose of this step of the process is to identify whether a release of hazardous substances may warrant emergency response actions to address immediate risks , and whether the site may warrant listing on the npl to take more extensive response actions .

relatively few potentially contaminated sites reported to epa result in an npl designation .

approximately 50,000 potentially contaminated sites have been reported to epa over time since the enactment of cercla in 1980 .

of this total site universe , more than 21,000 sites have been the subject of site inspections similar to that conducted at pavillion , of which 1,685 have been listed on the npl to date , including sites that have since been deleted once the cleanup objectives were met .

whether epa may pursue further action at a site under investigation depends on the findings .

in its draft report for the pavillion site , epa did not reach a conclusion definitively linking contaminants found in the groundwater to a specific release that may present a risk to human health or the environment .

accordingly , the agency did not determine that cleanup actions were warranted , nor did the agency identify any potentially responsible parties as being liable for any response actions under section 107 of cercla .

at any site , a source of contamination first would have to be confirmed and the potential risks further examined , before any determinations could be made as to whether cleanup may be warranted and whether any potentially responsible parties are identified who may be liable for the cleanup .

if epa were to find that a release or threatened release of a hazardous substance may present a threat to human health or the environment , epa would evaluate the potential hazards according to the criteria established under section 105 ( a ) ( 8 ) ( a ) of cercla to determine whether the site may be eligible for listing on the npl .

these criteria and how to apply them are outlined in federal regulation under the hazard ranking system ( hrs ) .

this system is based on a scale of 1 to 100 to rank the degree or severity of the potential hazards .

sites scoring 28.5 and higher generally are eligible for listing on the npl .

whether epa may list an eligible site on the npl to elevate its priority for cleanup at the federal level would depend on numerous other criteria , including the criteria under section 105 ( h ) of cercla for deferring a site to the state in which the site is located instead of listing it on the npl , if the state requests such deferment .

if a site is not listed on the npl but still is not deferred to the state , epa may take certain actions at the federal level to address potential health and environmental risks , including the performance of emergency "removal" actions if warranted .

under cercla , removal actions generally are measures intended to address more immediate risks of exposure , whereas "remedial" actions generally are measures intended to provide a more permanent solution to address long - term risks .

although a site must be listed on the npl to be eligible for superfund appropriations to perform remedial actions , removal actions are eligible for such federal funds regardless of a site's listing status .

the initial stage of evaluating a site also may be funded with superfund appropriations prior to any listing decision , to determine whether further response actions may be warranted .

the use of superfund appropriations at the pavillion site was limited to the performance of the preliminary assessment / site inspection of potential groundwater contamination , upon which the epa draft report was based .

epa also may pursue mechanisms to enforce cleanup liability under cercla if the source of contamination is confirmed , the release that caused the contamination falls under the authorities of the statute , and the potentially responsible parties who can be held liable under the statute can be identified and are financially viable .

these mechanisms include cleanup orders under section 106 and cleanup agreements under section 122 , neither of which hinges upon whether a site is listed on the npl .

however , section 128 ( b ) of the statute generally limits epa's enforcement authority under cercla to issue a cleanup order under section 106 , if a state is already pursuing the cleanup of a site under its own authorities .

epa did not use any of these enforcement authorities of cercla at the pavillion site .

rather , the epa draft report identified constituents in certain portions of the aquifer that the agency characterized as being consistent with , or similar to , some substances used in the natural gas production operations .

epa did not definitively identify the source of the constituents , any potentially responsible parties , or any potential risks that may warrant cleanup .

