there is no universally agreed - upon definition of "internet governance. .

a more limited definition would encompass the management and coordination of the technical underpinnings of the internet — such as domain names , addresses , standards , and protocols that enable the internet to function .

a broader definition would include the many factors that shape a variety of internet policy - related issues , such as such as intellectual property , privacy , internet freedom , e - commerce , and cybersecurity .

one working definition was developed at the world summit on the information society ( wsis ) in 2005: internet governance is the development and application by governments , the private sector and civil society , in their respective roles , of shared principles , norms , rules , decision - making procedures , and programmes that shape the evolution and use of the internet .

another definition developed by the internet governance project ( igp ) delineates three aspects of the internet that may require some level of governing: technical standardization , which involves arriving at and agreeing upon technical standards and protocols ; resource allocation and assignment , which includes domain names and internet protocol ( ip ) addresses ; and human conduct on the internet , encompassing the regulations , rules , and policies affecting areas such as spam , cybercrime , copyright and trademark disputes , consumer protection issues , and public and private security .

with these three categories in mind , the igp definition is: internet governance is collective decisionmaking by owners , operators , developers , and users of the networks connected by internet protocols to establish policies , rules , and dispute resolution procedures about technical standards , resource allocations , and / or the conduct of people engaged in global internetworking activities .

the nature of the internet , with its decentralized architecture and structure , makes the practice of governing a complex proposition .

first , the internet is inherently international and cannot in its totality be governed by national governments whose authority ends at national borders .

second , the internet's successful functioning depends on the willing cooperation and participation by mostly private sector stakeholders around the world .

these stakeholders include owners and operators of servers and networks around the world , domain name registrars and registries , regional ip address allocation organizations , standards organizations , internet service providers , and internet users .

given the multiplicity and diversity of internet stakeholders , a number of organizations and entities play varying roles .

it is important to note that all of the internet stakeholders cited above participate in various ways within the various fora , organizations , and frameworks addressing internet governance and policy .

key organizations in the private sector include the following: internet corporation for as signed names and numbers ( icann ) — icann was created in 1998 through a memorandum of understanding with the department of commerce ( see the following section of this report , " role of u.s. government " ) .

directed by an internationally constituted board of directors , icann is a private , not - for - profit organization based in los angeles , ca , which manages and oversees the critical technical underpinnings of the internet such as the domain name system ( dns ) and ip addressing ( see the appendix for more background information on icann ) .

icann implements and enforces many of its policies and rules through contracts with registries ( companies and organizations who operate and administer the master database of all domain names registered in each top level domain , such as .com and .org ) and accredited registrars ( the hundreds of companies and organizations with which consumers register domain names ) .

policies are developed by supporting organizations and committees in a consensus - based "bottom - up" process open to various constituencies and stakeholders of the internet .

as such , icann is often pointed to as emblematic of the "multistakeholder model" of internet governance .

internet standards organizations — as the internet has evolved , groups of engineers , researchers , users , and other interested parties have coalesced to develop technical standards and protocols necessary to enable the internet to function smoothly .

these organizations conduct standards development processes that are open to participants and volunteers from around the world .

internet standards organizations include the internet engineering task force ( ietf ) , the internet architecture board ( iab ) , the internet society ( isoc ) , and the world wide web consortium ( w3c ) .

governmental entities involved in internet governance include the following: governmental advisory committee ( gac ) — as part of icann's multistakeholder process , the gac provides advice to the icann board on matters of public policy , especially in cases where icann activities and policies may interact with national laws or international agreements related to issues such as intellectual property , law enforcement , and privacy .

gac advice is developed through consensus among member nations .

although the icann board is required to consider gac advice and recommendations , it is not obligated to follow those recommendations .

membership in the gac is open to all national governments who wish to participate .

currently , there are 171 members and 35 observers .

the gac chair is currently held by switzerland , with vice chairs held by egypt , peru , france , the united kingdom , and china .

internet governance forum ( igf ) — the igf was established in 2006 by the united nations' world summit on the information society ( wsis ) .

the purpose of the igf is to provide a multistakeholder forum which provides an open discussion ( in yearly meetings ) on public policies related to the internet .

open to all stakeholders and interested parties ( governments , industry , academia , civil society ) , the igf serves as an open discussion forum and does not have negotiated outcomes , nor does it make formal recommendations to the u.n .

in december 2010 , the u.n. general assembly renewed the igf through 2015 and tasked the u.n.'s commission on science and technology for development ( cstd ) to develop a report and recommendations on how the igf might be improved .

a working group on improvements to the internet governance forum was formed by the u.n. , which includes 22 governments ( including the united states ) and the participation of internet stakeholder groups .

in december 2015 , the general assembly renewed the igf through 2025 .

other international organizations — other existing international organizations address internet policy issues in various ways .

the international telecommunications union ( itu ) is the united nations' specialized agency for communications and information technology .

the world intellectual property organization ( wipo ) is another specialized agency of the u.n. , which addresses a wide range of intellectual property issues , including those related to internet policy .

the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) provides a forum for governments to work together to address economic issues , including the recent development of internet policymaking principles .

while none of these organizations have direct control or authority over the internet , their activities can have influence over future directions of global internet policy .

national governments — national governments have acted to address various internet policy issues within their own borders .

many of the national laws and regulations pertain to user behavior on the internet .

for example , in the united states , laws have been passed addressing such issues as cybersecurity and cybercrime , internet gambling , internet privacy , and protection of intellectual property on the internet .

governments have also established internal internet policy coordinating bodies ( eg , the national telecommunications and information administration's internet policy task force and the european commission's information society ) .

the u.s. government has no statutory authority over icann or the domain name system .

however , because the internet evolved from a network infrastructure created by the department of defense , the u.s. government originally funded and operated ( primarily through private contractors ) many of the key components of network architecture that enabled the domain name system to function .

in the early 1990s , the national science foundation ( nsf ) was given a lead role in overseeing domain names used in the civilian portion of the internet ( which at that time was largely comprised of research universities ) .

by the late 1990s , icann was created , the internet had expanded into the commercial world , and the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce ( doc ) assumed the lead role .

a 1998 memorandum of understanding between icann and the doc initiated a process intended to transition technical dns coordination and management functions to a private - sector not - for - profit entity .

while the doc played no role in the internal governance or day - to - day operations of icann , the u.s. government , through the doc / ntia , most recently retained a role with respect to the dns via three separate contractual agreements: a 2009 affirmation of commitments ( aoc ) between doc and icann ; a contract ( referred to as the "iana contract" ) between icann and doc to perform various technical functions such as allocating ip address blocks , editing the root zone file , and coordinating the assignment of unique protocol numbers ; and a cooperative agreement between doc and verisign to manage and maintain the official dns root zone file .

by virtue of those three contractual agreements , the u.s. government — through doc / ntia — exerted a legacy authority and stewardship over icann , and arguably had more influence over icann and the dns than other national governments .

while ntia has been the lead agency overseeing domain name issues , other federal agencies have maintained a specific interest in the dns that may affect their particular missions .

for example , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) seeks to protect consumer privacy on the internet , the department of justice ( doj ) addresses internet crime and intellectual property issues , and the department of defense and department of homeland security address cybersecurity issues .

however , none of these agencies has legal authority over icann or the running of the dns .

given its complexity , diversity , and international nature , how should the internet be governed ? .

some assert that a multistakeholder model of governance is appropriate , where all stakeholders ( both public and private sectors ) arrive at consensus through a transparent bottom - up process .

others argue that a greater role for national governments is necessary , either through increased influence through the multistakeholder model , or under the auspices of an international body exerting intergovernmental control .

to date , icann and the governance of the domain name system has been the focal point of this debate .

while icann's mandate is to manage portions of the technical infrastructure of the internet ( domain names and ip addresses ) , many of the decisions icann makes affect other aspects of internet policy , including areas such as intellectual property , privacy , and cybersecurity .

these are areas which many national governments have addressed for their own citizens and constituencies through domestic legislation , as well as through international treaties .

as part of the debate over an appropriate model of internet governance , criticisms of icann have arisen on two fronts .

one criticism reflects the tension between national governments and the current performance and governance processes of icann , whereby governments feel they lack adequate influence over icann decisions that affect a range of internet policy issues .

the other criticism has been fueled by concerns of many nations that the u.s. government has held undue legacy influence and control over icann and the domain name system .

the debate over multistakeholderism vs. intergovernmental control initially manifested itself in 2005 at the world summit on the information society ( wsis ) , which was a conference organized by the united nations .

more recently , this debate has been rekindled in various international fora .

with ongoing concern over the use of the internet by terrorist organizations , the question has arisen whether internet governance mechanisms could be used to combat the use of the internet by terrorist entities .

traditionally , nation - states can govern the use and content of the internet within their national boundaries and many have the authority , pursuant to their respective national laws , to monitor , block , and / or shut down websites within their borders .

in some instances , these powers and actions have been controversial when , for example , antiterrorism concerns may be used to justify censorship or the suppression of free speech on the internet .

on an international level , governance of the internet with respect to its content and use is problematic .

as discussed earlier in this report , the internet is decentralized and its functioning relies on the cooperation and participation by mostly private sector stakeholders around the world .

as such , there is no international governance entity that currently has authority to remove global internet content used to promote terrorism .

while there have been proposals to establish some level of authority over the internet by the united nations , these proposals have originated , for the most part , from regimes such as china , russia , and iran , and have been consistently opposed by the united states and other western nations who fear that increased united nations authority over the internet would ultimately support censorship and suppression of free speech .

could icann — a functioning model of nongovernmental multistakeholder internet governance — be deployed to restrict or limit the use of the global internet by terrorist groups ? .

currently , icann administers the technological infrastructure of the internet ( domain names , internet protocol numbers and standards ) and explicitly does not regulate internet content .

any attempt to change icann policy toward regulating internet content would likely be strongly opposed by most of the internet stakeholders who administer and set policy for icann through a consensus process .

congress has played an important role overseeing ntia's stewardship of icann and icann's management of the domain name system .

the house committee on energy and commerce and the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation have held numerous oversight hearings exploring icann's performance in general , as well as specific dns issues that arise .

additionally , other committees , such as the house and senate judiciary committees , maintain an interest in the dns as it affects internet policy issues such as intellectual property , privacy , and cybercrime .

since 1997 , congressional committees have held over 40 hearings on the dns and icann .

the 114 th congress closely examined ntia's proposal to relinquish its authority over icann and the dns , thereby transitioning icann to a wholly multistakeholder - driven entity .

with the transition now complete , congress may continue assessing how effectively ntia is advancing u.s. government positions within the governmental advisory committee .

of particular interest may be to what extent ongoing and future intergovernmental telecommunications conferences constitute an opportunity for some nations to increase intergovernmental control over the internet — at the expense of the multistakeholder system of internet governance — and how effectively ntia and other government agencies ( such as the state department ) are working to counteract that threat .

finally , the ongoing debate over internet governance will likely have a significant impact on how other aspects of the internet may be governed in the future , especially in such areas as intellectual property , privacy , law enforcement , internet free speech , and cybersecurity .

looking forward , the institutional nature of internet governance could have far - reaching implications on important policy decisions that will likely shape the future evolution of the internet .

icann is a not - for - profit public benefit corporation headquartered in los angeles , ca , and incorporated under the laws of the state of california .

icann is organized under the california nonprofit public benefit law for charitable and public purposes , and as such , is subject to legal oversight by the california attorney general .

icann has been granted tax - exempt status by the federal government and the state of california .

icann's organizational structure consists of a board of directors ( bod ) advised by a network of supporting organizations and advisory committees that represent various internet constituencies and interests ( see figure a - 1 ) .

policies are developed and issues are researched by these subgroups , who in turn advise the board of directors , which is responsible for making all final policy and operational decisions .

the board of directors consists of 16 international and geographically diverse members , composed of one president , eight members selected by a nominating committee , two selected by the generic names supporting organization , two selected by the address supporting organization , two selected by the country - code names supporting organization , and one selected by the at - large advisory committee .

additionally , there are five nonvoting liaisons representing other advisory committees .

the explosive growth of the internet and domain name registration , increasing responsibilities in managing and operating the dns , and the rollout of the new gtld program has led to marked growth of the icann budget , from revenues of about $6 million and a staff of 14 in 2000 , to total support and revenue of $162.9 million and a headcount of 382 budgeted for 2016 .

icann has been traditionally funded primarily through fees paid to icann by registrars and registry operators .

registrars are companies ( eg , godaddy , google , network solutions ) with which consumers register domain names .

registry operators are companies and organizations that operate and administer the master database of all domain names registered in each top level domain ( for example verisign , inc. operates .com and .net , public interest registry operates .org , and neustar , inc. operates .biz ) .

icann also collects significant revenue from new gtld application fees ( an estimated $49.5 million in 2016 ) .

