federal funding provided by congress for major disasters has grown considerably in the past decade , driven principally by the hurricane seasons of 2005 , 2008 , and hurricane sandy .

as concern over the size of federal budget deficits and the national debt has grown , so has congressional attention to both the amount of funding the federal government provides to states and localities for disaster assistance , and the processes the federal government uses to provide that assistance .

although funds have been reallocated at times from one account to another to provide for disaster - related assistance , disaster relief funding has historically not been fully offset .

in addition , assistance for large - scale disasters has usually been funded outside traditional budget constraints .

as a result of the concern over the size of the deficit and rising level of national debt , congress has implemented measures to limit federal spending .

these include the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 , hereinafter the bca ) , which established a range of budget - controlling mechanisms .

caps were placed on discretionary spending from fy2012 through fy2021 .

if these caps are exceeded , an automatic cancellation of budget resources — known as sequestration — would take place across most discretionary budget accounts to reduce spending down to the cap .

however , the bca includes a mechanism that recognizes the unexpected nature of disasters and the periodic need for disaster relief funding beyond what the budget might envision .

this mechanism has changed the way congress approaches spending on major disasters allowing for a less crisis - driven debate on providing relief funding in the immediate wake of an incident and providing somewhat more transparency into federal disaster relief spending .

the first section of this report addresses the pre - bca funding mechanism for major disaster declarations , including the role of the president's disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

next , this report provides a basic overview of how that funding mechanism has evolved under the bca , and how hurricane sandy was addressed under that mechanism .

finally , the report explores a number of other issues pertinent to disaster relief funding in the bca - regulated environment , including time frames for congressional action after a large - scale disaster strikes ; the implications of the rising number of stafford act declarations ; funding disaster relief efforts in severe disaster years ; offsetting the cost of disaster relief ; calculating the allowable adjustment for disaster relief ; the degree to which different types of disaster relief are included in the methodology for calculating the 10-year average on disaster relief spending ; and the possible implications of excluding stafford act assistance for emergencies and fires from the allowable adjustment calculation .

the drf is a no - year account that is used to fund response activities and pay for ongoing recovery programs resulting from declared major disasters , emergencies , and fire management assistance grants ( fmags ) .

the majority of its funding goes to pay for response to and recovery from major disasters .

the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) authorizes the president to declare a major disaster in response to a governor or tribal nation leader's request for federal assistance .

the declaration enables federal agencies to provide assistance to state and local governments overwhelmed by the incident .

while the majority of federal assistance for major disasters to states and localities is provided through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , other federal agencies and offices also may provide assistance once a major disaster has been declared .

these agencies include the u.s. army corps of engineers , the department of transportation , and the department of education among others .

the assistance provided by these agencies may be funded through their own budgets , but in many cases is requested and paid for by fema .

in some circumstances , however , federal agencies have the authority to provide assistance regardless of whether a disaster is declared under the stafford act .

for example , under the small business act , the administrator of the small business administration ( sba ) is authorized to issue declarations that make loans available to homeowners and businesses through the sba disaster loan program .

this report focuses primarily on the drf , as it has been the most commonly used tool to fund disaster relief efforts .

the bca allows for adjustments to the cap in a handful of situations , essentially raising it to allow for certain categories of spending .

one of those adjustments is for emergencies , which is familiar to many observers of the budget process , but a new category of spending was defined in law for "disaster relief," allowing it to be treated separately from other emergencies .

under the bca , the discretionary spending limit can be adjusted upward to make room for an uncapped amount of emergency spending and adds the following definitions to existing budget law: ( 20 ) the term "emergency" means a situation that — ( a ) requires new budget authority and outlays ( or new budget authority and the outlays flowing there from ) for the prevention or mitigation of , or response to , loss of life or property , or a threat to national security ; and ( b ) is unanticipated .

 ( 21 ) the term "unanticipated" means that the underlying situation is — ( a ) sudden , which means quickly coming into being or not building up over time ; ( b ) urgent , which means a pressing and compelling need requiring immediate action ; ( c ) unforeseen , which means not predicted or anticipated as an emerging need ; and ( d ) temporary , which means not of a permanent duration .

prior to the bca's enactment , supplemental appropriations for disaster relief were often designated as emergency spending , and for a limited period even some of the annual appropriations requests included an emergency designation .

however , the enactment of the bca distinguishes disaster relief spending , though often unanticipated , as separate from emergency spending .

a separate allowable adjustment is created for disaster relief spending that some have interpreted as a limit on certain types of disaster relief funding .

"disaster relief" is specifically defined under the bca as follows: ( iii ) for the purposes of this subparagraph , the term 'disaster relief' means activities carried out pursuant to a determination under section 102 ( 2 ) of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c .

5122 ( 2 ) ) .

[determination of a major disaster ] ( iv ) appropriations considered disaster relief under this subparagraph in a fiscal year shall not be eligible for adjustments under subparagraph ( a ) [the unlimited adjustment for emergency spending] for the fiscal year .

the limit established by the bca on adjustments to the caps for disaster relief is based on the average funding provided for disaster relief over the last ten years , excluding the highest and lowest annual amounts , calculated by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

if congress spends less than that average on disaster relief in a given fiscal year , the caps can be further adjusted upward by the unspent amount in the following year .

it is important to note that this adjustment limitation is not a restriction on disaster assistance per se — rather it is a restriction on how much the caps can be adjusted upward in a given fiscal year to accommodate the assistance .

also , spending within the cap or within the adjustment does not require offsets .

because of the way "disaster relief" is defined in the bca , not all of the drf's activities are eligible for funding under the allowable adjustments .

fema operating expenses , funding for fire management assistance grants , and emergencies under the stafford act are not eligible for funding under the adjustment , and are therefore funded through ordinary discretionary appropriations to the drf that fall within the discretionary budget caps .

in response to the bca , fema and the appropriations committees developed a new , two - part approach to accounting for disaster - related activity , with one approach for major disasters and another for all other drf activity .

as fema's first post - bca budget justification described it: essentially , requests for drf funding for fema's stafford act programs and disaster support activities fall into two categories: disaster relief cap adjustment and base / non - major disasters .

funding requested under the disaster relief cap adjustment is for major disasters declared pursuant to the stafford act and designated by the congress as being for disaster relief pursuant to section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of the bbedca , as amended by the bca .

funding requested under the base / non - major disasters category includes emergencies , pre - disaster surge support , fire management assistance grants and activities that are non - disaster specific , such as disaster readiness support ( drs ) activities ( eg , distribution centers , reservist training , etc. ) .

according to fema , the funding request for major disasters is based on fema's spending plans for all past declared major disasters .

the non - catastrophic funding request is based on a revised approach that uses a 10-year average for non - catastrophic events .

fema argued that using a 10-year average of costs as opposed to the previous use of a 5-year average of costs "provides a more accurate projection of non - catastrophic needs since it normalizes the effects of outlier years. .

as demonstrated earlier in figure 2 , fema's two - part approach to accounting for disaster - related activity has coincided with higher administration budget requests for drf funding , which , in turn , may have led to higher annual appropriation amounts , as opposed to reliance on supplemental appropriations to fund disaster relief and recovery efforts .

as mentioned earlier , not all disaster relief flows through fema's drf , and the allowable adjustment can be used to compensate for that non - drf relief .

for example , in fy2012 , the allowable adjustment was used to pay for disaster relief programs under the army corps of engineers , department of agriculture , department of housing and urban development , and department of transportation , as well as the drf .

hurricane sandy provided the first case where demand for disaster relief exceeded the allowable adjustment .

for discussion of how this was resolved , see the bca and disaster relief in practice: hurricane sandy later in this report .

omb manages the sequestration process and the limits on adjustments available to raise the discretionary spending limit .

the bca requires omb to annually calculate the adjusted 10-year rolling average of disaster relief spending that sets the allowable adjustment for disaster relief .

these calculations are included in the final sequestration report and sequestration update report issued under section 254 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 as amended ( bbedca ) .

omb has not made any other estimates of "disaster relief" spending other than those called for by the bca .

omb's methodology for calculating the initial allowable adjustment was tied to the language of the bca's definition of "disaster relief," which included only amounts that were appropriated or authorized through legislation that specifically referenced section 102 ( 2 ) of the stafford act .

in its initial sequestration report under the bca structure , omb illustrated this by comparing two similar education programs targeting students in hurricane - affected areas .

one program had appropriations language specifically referencing the major disaster declaration ( which was counted as disaster relief ) , and one program that had language only mentioning the hurricanes rather than the disaster declaration ( which was not counted as disaster relief ) .

in making its calculation , omb included funding provided through both annual and supplemental appropriations bills for 29 individual accounts managed by 11 agencies and departments .

omb makes a similar calculation each year , taking into account the latest information available on disaster funding for the 10 previous fiscal years , and excludes the highest and lowest years .

if congress does not designate appropriations equal to the 10-year rolling average , the unused portion of that average can be carried forward to the allowable adjustment for the next year .

as a result of the process outlined above , omb calculated the initial allowable adjustment for disaster relief for fy2012 as $11.3 billion .

$10.5 billion of that adjustment was used , leaving $799 million in carryover .

when this carryover was added to the recalculated rolling average of $11 billion for fy2013 , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief under the bca for fy2013 rose to $11.8 billion .

in fy2012 , $6.4 billion of the allowable adjustment went to the drf , and that in turn was calculated into the rate of spending provided for in p.l .

112-175 , the continuing resolution for fy2013 .

no other disaster relief designations were carried forward in p.l .

112-175 .

it was this adjustment that provided a relatively significant balance for the drf ( roughly $5.4 billion ) at the beginning of fy2013 , which in turn may have reduced the urgency of the debate on hurricane sandy supplemental funding .

p.l .

113-2 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 ( that provided $50.5 billion in supplemental funding for hurricane sandy ) , used the remaining $5.4 billion of the allowable adjustment to provide additional resources for the drf .

as a result , fy2013 was the first year the entire allowable adjustment for disaster relief was used for a single account .

a number of policy questions are before congress as the country recovers from its first large - scale disasters with the bca in effect .

these include: time frames for congressional action after a large - scale disaster strikes ; the implications of the rising number of stafford act declarations ; funding disaster relief efforts in severe disaster years ; offsetting the cost of disaster relief ; calculating the allowable adjustment for disaster relief ; the inclusiveness of all types of disaster assistance in omb's methodology for calculating the 10-year average on disaster relief spending ; and the possible implications of excluding stafford act assistance for emergencies and fires from the allowable adjustment calculation .

enactment of the bca resulted in several key changes in the way disaster assistance is funded .

the structure of the appropriation for the drf has change d to reflect the availability of resources that do not count against the allocation for annual appropriations , allowing for prefunding of disaster needs .

this in turn has led to a more deliberate development of a supplemental appropriation in the face of a major disaster with abnormally high cost and broad scope .

the bulk of the debate over the impact of disaster relief on the federal budget tends to occur in moments of crisis , such as in the past when the drf was on the brink of depletion , or when a major incident like hurricane katrina or sandy seems ready to overwhelm the budgetary structures in place .

it is difficult to assemble a clear picture of the issue on such a short time frame in the wake of a major disaster .

in fy2013 , the federal response to hurricane sandy led to a certain legislative response in the shape of supplemental appropriations and reforms to the stafford act .

to some , the legislative intent of the bca was to eliminate or reduce the use of the emergency designations to pay for disaster assistance by creating the disaster relief designation .

they argue that in the case of assistance for hurricane sandy , congress circumvented the use of offsets by designating the incident as an emergency .

opponents of the use of emergency designations for disaster assistance may conclude that while the bca may have helped budget the drf at more sustainable levels , disaster assistance for larger incidents should be offset to lessen their budgetary impact .

proponents , on the other hand , might argue that emergency designations are still needed for larger , arguably catastrophic incidents .

now that some time has passed since the bca , congress may choose to consider whether its mechanisms have produced the intended result more broadly , or in the specific area of disaster relief .

exploring the actual costs of governmental assistance in the wake of floods , fires , explosions , and storms , and understanding how the local , state , and federal governments fund those relief efforts is a valuable first step .

a more accurate accounting for the size of that burden and how it is shared across the levels of government would appear to be essential .

the funding and budget control functions do not operate in a vacuum , however .

controlling disaster costs cannot be done without addressing the laws that establish the role of the federal government in disaster response and recovery , and the expectations of state and local governments and the american people .

