congress periodically establishes agricultural and food policy in an omnibus farm bill .

federal farm commodity price and income support , conservation , food assistance , agricultural trade , marketing , and rural development policies are governed by a variety of separate laws .

however , many of these laws are regularly evaluated , revised , and renewed through an omnibus , multi - year farm bill .

these policies can be , and sometimes are , modified or overhauled as freestanding authorizing legislation , or as part of other laws .

however , periodic farm bills have provided congress , the administration , and interest groups with an opportunity to reexamine agriculture and food issues more carefully , and address them more comprehensively .

the most recent omnibus farm bill is the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , the 2008 farm bill ) , and many of its provisions expire in 2012 .

without new legislation , notably in the area of farm commodity support programs , permanent statutes would take effect .

most of these statutes were enacted decades ago and are no longer compatible with current national economic objectives , global trading rules , and federal budgetary or regulatory policies .

these largely outdated permanent laws have been kept on the books by congress in part to compel increasingly urban and suburban future congresses to pay attention to national agricultural policy .

for most other topics addressed in the farm bill , the authority to appropriate funds would end , and in some cases all program authority could terminate .

traditionally , the primary focus of every omnibus farm bill has been farm commodity price and income support policy — namely , the methods and levels of support that the federal government provides to agricultural producers .

however , farm bills typically include titles on agricultural trade and foreign food aid , conservation and environment , forestry , domestic food assistance , agricultural credit , rural development , agricultural research and education , animal agriculture , and marketing - related programs , among others .

in recent farm bills , titles have been added to address emerging issues such as agriculture - based biofuels , specialty crops ( fruits and vegetables ) , and organic agriculture .

 ( see the appendix at the end of this report for a complete list of titles and subtitles of the 2008 farm bill. ) .

the omnibus nature of the farm bill creates a broad coalition of support among sometimes conflicting interests for policies that , individually , might not survive the legislative process .

among the groups lobbying congress are farm and commodity organizations ; input suppliers ; commodity handlers , processors , exporters , retailers , foreign customers , and competitors ; universities and scientific organizations ; domestic consumers and food assistance advocates ; environmentalists ; local and regional producers ; and rural communities , to name a few .

so , for example , farm state lawmakers may seek urban legislators' backing for commodity price supports in exchange for votes on domestic food aid — and vice versa .

farm bill titles also are growing increasingly integrated .

the conservation title , for example , includes provisions that affect commodity programs , and some of the commodity provisions likewise affect conservation .

this integration means that one cannot simply look at a single title for all provisions that affect the topic of the title .

as the 112 th congress considers reauthorization of the next farm bill , it does so in an economic setting of high farm commodity prices and income and an austere federal budget that calls for deficit reduction .

this combination of events has drawn into question whether the current farm safety net should be restructured or portions eliminated ( eg , direct payments ) , with the limited available financial resources possibly redirected to other initiatives .

proponents of the current approach to farm commodity support want a stronger safety net , with many focusing on enhancements to risk management tools .

opponents of the status quo often cite cost and budget concerns .

some point to other competing policy priorities , including equitability concerns across the farm sector , and call for enhanced support for small and medium - sized farms , specialty crops , organic agriculture , local and regional food systems , healthy and nutritious foods , research , conservation , and rural development , among other topics .

for more background on the nature of the farm bill and the major provisions in the enacted 2008 farm bill , see crs report rs22131 , what is the "farm bill" ? .

and crs report rl34696 , the 2008 farm bill: major provisions and legislative action .

this report begins by reviewing the budget and economic setting for the next farm bill debate , and follows with background on each of the major titles of the current farm bill and a preview of some of the potential issues that could factor into the debate .

federal spending is divided into mandatory and discretionary spending .

mandatory spending in the farm bill is primarily authorized for the farm commodity programs , crop insurance , nutrition assistance programs , and some conservation and trade programs .

discretionary spending ( i.e. , spending subject to annual appropriations ) is authorized for essentially everything else , including other conservation programs , most rural development programs , research and education programs , and agricultural credit .

various smaller research , bioenergy , and rural development programs sometimes secure some mandatory funding , but most of their funding is discretionary .

in addition to determining the policy direction for farm bill programs , the farm bill also "pays" for mandatory spending when it is used .

this is done under the jurisdiction of authorizing committees , using resources available under budget rules .

on the other hand , discretionary programs that are authorized in the farm bill are paid for separately in annual appropriations bills under the jurisdiction of the appropriations committees .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) develops baseline projections for mandatory spending ( direct spending ) under the supervision of the house and senate budget committees within a framework of various budget enforcement laws .

this process sets the mandatory budget for the farm bill .

the baseline projection is an estimate at a particular point in time of what federal spending on mandatory programs likely would be under current law .

from a budget perspective , programs with a continuing baseline are assumed to go on under current law , and have their own funding if policymakers want them to continue .

however , some programs may not be assumed to continue in the budget baseline beyond the end of a farm bill , and can continue only if their cost is offset .

the baseline thus serves as a benchmark or starting point for the farm bill budget .

when new provisions are introduced that affect mandatory spending , their impact ( or "score" ) is measured as a difference from the baseline .

increases in cost above the baseline may be subject to budget constraints such as pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) requirements .

reductions from the baseline may be used to offset other provisions or to reduce the deficit .

the january 2012 cbo baseline for continuing mandatory farm bill programs is about $994 billion for the 10-year period fy2013-fy2022 ( figure 1 ) .

most of this baseline ( $772 billion , or 78% ) is for domestic nutrition assistance programs , primarily the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

the rest , about $222 billion , is divided among various agriculture - related programs , primarily crop insurance ( $90 billion ) , farm commodity price and income supports ( $62 billion ) , and conservation ( $65 billion ) .

these estimates do not include any reductions for sequestration ( across - the - board cuts ) .

cbo will issue an updated baseline in march 2012 that will become the official scoring baseline for a potential 2012 farm bill .

the budget situation is more difficult and uncertain this year than for past farm bills because of the attention to the federal debt .

how much of the above baseline can be used to write a farm bill and how much will remain for 2013 and beyond is unknown , given the uncertainty about deficit reduction that is beyond the control of the agriculture committees and may not be resolved for months .

several high - profile congressional and administration proposals for deficit reduction are specifically targeting agricultural programs with mandatory funding .

to date , none of these plans has been enacted ( table 2 ) .

discretionary appropriations for agricultural programs also have fallen in recent years , further affecting farm bill opportunities .

the discretionary agriculture appropriation decreased by 14% in fy2011 and another 2% in fy2012 .

more imminently , given the failure of the joint select committee on deficit reduction to enact budget reductions by january 15 , 2012 , budget sequestration is forthcoming in 2013 under the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 , sec .

302 ) .

the budget sequestration process under the bca will reduce the future baseline for farm bill programs , even if legislation is not enacted to specifically change or reduce the programs .

certain farm bill programs , such as the nutrition programs and the conservation reserve program , are statutorily exempt from sequestration .

other programs , including prior obligations in crop insurance and marketing loan contracts , may be exempt ; however , cbo does not determine the official sequestration amount or the scope of programs included .

those decisions rest with the office of management and budget ( omb ) interpretation of the bca and statutes , and are still forthcoming .

no official estimate has been released , but many believe sequestration of mandatory farm bill programs may total about $16 billion over 10 years .

this is consistent with cbo estimates of nearly 8% sequestration on nondefense mandatory programs on roughly $200 billion of nonexempt agriculture baseline .

the budget picture is further clouded by other factors .

while some programs ( like most farm subsidies and nutrition assistance ) have assumed future funding , other programs ( mostly newer ones ) do not .

thirty - seven programs that received mandatory funding throughout nearly all titles of the 2008 farm bill do not continue to have assured funding for the next farm bill .

three of these programs — the agricultural disaster assistance program , the wetlands reserve program , and the biomass crop assistance program — account for about three - fourths of the affected amount .

continuing these programs could cost about $10 billion over five years , an additional cost that would need to be offset from other programs .

this could be doubly difficult during a simultaneous contraction from sequestration or deficit reduction .

also , new pay - as - you - go budget rules enacted in 2010 ( p.l .

111-139 ) restrict some of the budget - related maneuvers that were used in past farm bills to offset new spending .

consequently , even a "simple" extension of the 2008 farm bill may be challenging given the current budgetary pressures .

the desire by many to redesign farm policy and reallocate the remaining farm bill baseline — in a post - sequestration and / or post - deficit reduction environment — is driving much of the farm bill debate this year .

political dynamics regarding sequestration and achieving broader deficit reduction goals leave open difficult questions about how much and when the farm bill baseline may be reduced .

thus , in an era of deficit reduction , congress faces difficult choices about how much total support to provide for agriculture , and how to allocate that support among competing constituencies .

the u.s. agricultural sector has been thriving economically since the mid - 2000s , as rising commodity prices and land values have pushed farm incomes to record levels and reduced debt and debt - to - asset ratios to historically low levels .

usda currently projects that u.s. net farm income reached a record high in 2011 of $100.9 billion , up 28% from 2010 , and nearly 19% above the previous record of $87.4 billion in 2004 .

prior to 2004 , u.s. net farm income had never exceeded $61 billion ; since 2004 it has averaged almost $78 billion .

farm asset values — which reflect farm investor and lender expectations about long - term profitability of farm sector investments — are expected to rise nearly 7% in 2011 to a record $2,340 billion , following a 6% rise in 2010 .

as a result , the farm debt - to - asset ratio steadily declined from the 1998 level of 16% to a projected low of 10.4% in 2011 .

u.s. farmland values also are estimated record high in 2011 — an average acre of cropland is valued at $3,030 , up over 9% from the previous year's record .

strong farm land cash markets in 2011 suggest that land values will continue to see gains related to strong crop prices in 2012 .

in contrast to the farm economy , the general u.s. economy slowed again in 2011 , with considerable uncertainty heading into 2012 .

as a result , u.s. consumers have been very cautious in their spending behavior .

the major drivers behind the robust farm income projections have been strong u.s. agricultural exports ( including the outlook for a record $136.3 billion in 2011 , up 18% ) , and continued growth in the u.s. corn ethanol industry ( mandated by federal usage requirements and high petroleum prices ) .

this demand - led surge , aided in part by a weak dollar , has drawn down stocks for major grains and oilseeds to historically low levels in both domestic and global markets , thus supporting higher commodity prices .

international trade remains a bright spot for u.s. agriculture despite the lack of success in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations ( conducted under the auspices of the world trade organization ) .

u.s. trade officials hope to further expand export opportunities for u.s. agricultural products upon implementation of three free trade agreements ( ftas ) — with south korea , panama , and colombia — signed by the president on october 21 , 2011 .

robust economic growth in major global markets ( particularly in china ) is expected to continue to support strong demand for cotton , feed grains , oilseeds , and livestock products heading into 2012 .

meanwhile , continued growth in u.s. corn - based ethanol production and strong livestock prices are expected to support corn and other crop prices near current high levels as they compete for a fixed amount of cropland .

these high commodity prices have shut off government payments under price - contingent programs such as the marketing loan program and the counter - cyclical payments program .

as a whole , the u.s. agricultural sector remains in a strong financial position relative to the rest of the u.s. economy .

however , there is substantial regional variation .

in general , increases in feed , fuel , and fertilizer expenses will affect livestock producers more harshly than crop producers .

although cash grain farmers in the corn belt and northern plains are experiencing record revenues , livestock and poultry feeders are experiencing record - high feed costs that have narrowed profit margins .

in addition , a severe drought in the southwest that extended into the central plains and the southeast during the summer of 2011 limited grazing opportunities and hay production for cattle ranchers in the affected regions and led to substantial herd liquidation .

as a result , even if weather returns to normal in the affected regions , the livestock sector will continue to feel the effects of the drought into 2013 .

the federal government supports farm income and helps farmers manage risks associated with variability in crop yields and prices through a collection of programs .

the broader farming community often refers to the "farm safety net" as ( 1 ) farm commodity price and income support programs under title i of the 2008 farm bill , ( 2 ) federal crop insurance ( permanently authorized ) under the federal crop insurance act of 1980 , and ( 3 ) disaster assistance programs under title xii of the 2008 farm bill .

each of these three components is covered in this section and summarized in table 3 .

the congressional budget office currently estimates the total cost of farm safety net programs for fy2011 at $13.5 billion ( $5.7 billion for commodity programs , $6.3 billion for crop insurance , and $1.5 billion for disaster assistance ) .

most of the cost for the farm safety net is attributed to five crops .

in fy2011 , nearly 90% of commodity program payments and crop insurance subsidies were accounted for by corn ( 38% ) , wheat ( 19% ) , soybeans ( 16% ) , cotton ( 13% ) , and rice ( 3% ) .

for comparison , these five crops accounted for 60% of total crop receipts ( including fruits and vegetables ) and 33% of total farm receipts ( including livestock , dairy , and poultry ) .

farm support began with the 1930s depression - era efforts to generally raise farm household income when commodity prices were low because of prolonged weak consumer demand .

while initially intended to be a temporary effort , the commodity support programs survived , but have been modified away from supply control and commodity stocks management to direct income and price support payments .

federal crop insurance has expanded over the decades , with expanded commodity coverage and increased producer subsidies .

many policymakers and farmers consider federal support of farm businesses necessary for financial survival , given the unpredictable nature of agricultural production and markets .

in contrast , many environmental groups argue that subsidies encourage overproduction on environmentally fragile land .

others have long argued that farm subsidies are a market - distorting use of taxpayer dollars , or that they encourage large - scale farming at the expense of small or beginning farms .

during the past few farm bill debates , specialty crop and organic agricultural producers have argued that their sectors should occupy a larger role in farm bill policy discussions and that some of the benefits supporting major commodity producers should be extended to specialty crop and organic producers , in order to create "a broader , more equitable farm bill. .

specialty crops and organically produced commodities are not eligible for support under usda's farm commodity price and income support programs .

in some cases , however , their production may be linked with the major program crops , such as in cases where recipients of direct and counter - cyclical payments can plant crops on their base acres , including certain vegetables for processing .

however , specialty crops and organic crops are eligible for other types of usda programs and support throughout most titles of the omnibus farm bill , including , among others , programs in the nutrition , conservation , research , crop insurance , disaster assistance , and trade titles .

some other federal agencies also play important roles within these sectors .

in the farm bill , specialty crops are defined as "fruits and vegetables , tree nuts , dried fruits , and horticulture and nursery crops ( including floriculture ) . .

they comprise a major part of u.s. agriculture .

in 2007 , the value of farm - level specialty crop production totaled $42 billion , representing more than 40% of the value of u.s. crop production , yet accounting for only 3% of all harvested cropland acres .

u.s. exports of specialty crops totaled nearly $15.9 billion in 2010 , or about 15% of total u.s. agricultural exports .

in 2007 , there were 248,000 farming operations that grew fruits , tree nuts , vegetables , floriculture , and other horticultural specialties .

sales are focused in california , florida , washington , oregon , north dakota , and michigan ; however , every state has some commercial specialty crop production within its borders .

organic agriculture accounts for a small but growing share of the u.s. farming sector .

usda reports that farm sales from organic operations totaled $3.2 billion in 2008 ( about 1% of all farm - level sales in the united states ) , spanning an array of plant and animal products .

about 40% of all u.s. organic farm - level sales consist of livestock products , followed by vegetables , fruits , and field crops .

the organic trade association ( ota ) reports that organic food sales totaled $26.7 billion in 2010 , accounting for 4% of the surveyed food market .

ota also reports that u.s. exports of all organic products total about $2 billion annually .

in 2008 , there were 14,540 organic farms and ranches .

organic operations account for a total of 4.1 million acres , or about 1% of total u.s. cropland in farms .

production is focused in california , florida , washington , pennsylvania , oregon , texas , and wisconsin ; however , usda reports organic production in each u.s. state .

 ( the organic foods production act of 1990 and usda's national organic program regulations require that agricultural products labeled as "organic" originate from farms or handling operations certified by a state or private entity that has been accredited by usda. ) .

omnibus farm bills traditionally have not provided livestock and poultry producers with price and income support programs like those for major crops such as grains , cotton , and oilseeds .

instead , the livestock and poultry industries look to the federal government for leadership and support in resolving foreign trade disputes ; establishing transparent , science - based rules for importing and exporting animal products ; and reassuring domestic and foreign buyers that these products are safe , of high quality , and free from pests and diseases .

other long - standing public policy concerns include animal agriculture's obligations with respect to food safety , environmental protection , and animal welfare .

the federal government has a long history of providing credit assistance to farmers .

this intervention has been justified over time by many factors , including the presence of asymmetric information among lenders , asymmetric information between lenders and farmers , lack of competition in some rural lending markets , insufficient lending resources in rural areas compared to more populated areas , and the desire for targeted lending to disadvantaged groups such as beginning farmers , small farms , or socially disadvantaged farmers .

the agricultural lender with the greatest connection to the federal government is the farm service agency ( fsa ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

it issues direct loans to farmers who cannot qualify for regular commercial credit , and guarantees the repayment of certain loans made by other lenders .

thus , fsa is called a lender of last resort .

fsa also has statutory mandates to target loans to disadvantaged groups , and is therefore sometimes called a lender of first opportunity .

special loan pools are available to beginning farmers and socially disadvantaged groups based primarily on race and gender .

of about $240 billion in total farm debt , fsa provides about 2% through direct loans , and guarantees about another 4% - 5% of loans .

another agricultural lender with a statutory connection to the federal government is the farm credit system ( fcs ) .

it is a cooperatively owned and federally chartered private lender with a statutory mandate to serve only agriculture - related borrowers .

fcs makes loans to creditworthy farmers , and is not a lender of last resort , but is a government - sponsored enterprise ( gse ) receiving tax benefits , among other preferences , in return for restrictions on its lending base .

fcs accounts for about 40% of farm debt .

a third agricultural lender with a federal mandate is farmer mac , another gse that is privately held , and provides a secondary market for agricultural loans .

other agricultural lenders do not have a government connection .

these include commercial banks ( about 44% of market share ) , life insurance companies , and individuals , merchants , and dealers .

the statutory authority for fsa , fcs , and farmer mac is permanent , but farm bills often make adjustments to eligibility criteria and the scope of operations .

for example , the 2008 farm bill increased fsa direct lending limits per farmer , further prioritized lending for beginning and socially disadvantaged farmers , and , among other changes , created individual development accounts for beginning farmers , although the latter have yet to be funded by appropriators .

the federal government provides support for u.s. agricultural exports through three types of programs: export market development , export credit guarantees , and direct export subsidies .

legislative authorizations for agricultural trade programs are included in title iii of the 2008 farm bill .

administered by usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) , the programs are funded through the borrowing authority of usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

one of them , the market access program ( map ) , has been targeted for cuts or elimination in a number of deficit reduction proposals .

agricultural conservation began in the 1930s with a focus on soil and water issues associated with production and environmental concerns on the farm .

by the 1980s , agricultural conservation policies had broadened to include environmental issues beyond soil and water , especially environmental issues related to production ( off the farm ) .

many of the current agricultural conservation programs were enacted as part of the 1985 farm bill ( p.l .

99-198 , food security act of 1985 ) , which also included for the first time a conservation title .

these programs have been reauthorized , modified , and expanded , and several new programs have been created , primarily in subsequent omnibus farm bills .

while the number of programs has increased and techniques to address the problems are changing , the basic approach has remained unchanged — voluntary farmer participation encouraged by land rental payments , cost - sharing conservation practices , technical assistance , education , and basic and applied research .

according to the congressional budget office's march 2011 baseline , domestic nutrition programs make up nearly 80% of spending in the farm bill ( see figure 1 , above ) .

domestic nutrition assistance programs reauthorized in the farm bill include the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) , the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , and other programs .

the snap program accounts for the vast majority of the spending in title iv .

at the time of enactment , the nutrition title of the 2008 farm bill had a projected new cost of about $3 billion over five years ( fy2008-fy2012 ) and well over $9 billion over ten years ( fy2008-fy2017 ) .

the major share of this new spending was due to changes in the snap program .

most farm bill domestic nutrition assistance programs , except for the csfp , the fdpir , and the administrative and distribution - cost component of tefap , generally are treated as mandatory entitlements for budget purposes .

for snap , this means that eligibility , benefits , or other program rules must be changed in order to affect costs , although , as an appropriated entitlement , snap is limited to spending those funds that are specifically appropriated .

discretionarily funded programs in the farm bill are csfp , the administrative and distribution cost component of tefap , and the amount set aside for the fdpir .

the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , the national school lunch program , the national breakfast program , the child and adult care food program , the special milk program , and other programs located in the child nutrition act of 1966 and the russell national school lunch act are not reauthorized in the farm bill .

these programs were most recently reauthorized in december 2010 , in p.l .

111-296 , the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 .

the united states provides u.s. agricultural commodities , procured by usda , as the primary form of emergency and economic development assistance in response to food security problems in developing countries .

title iii of the 2008 farm bill reauthorized food aid programs established by the food for peace act ( formerly known as p.l .

480 , the agricultural trade and development assistance act of 1954 ) ; the food for progress act of 1985 ; the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program ( authorized in the 2002 farm bill ) ; and the bill emerson humanitarian trust .

the 2008 farm bill also established a four - year pilot program of local and regional food aid procurement projects ( lrp ) .

food for peace act title ii , emergency and private assistance programs , is the primary vehicle for u.s. international food aid .

title ii of food for peace , administered by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , has averaged about $2 billion annually over the span of the 2002 and 2008 farm bills .

title ii provides donations of u.s. agricultural commodities to respond to emergency food needs or to be used in development projects .

all other food aid programs are administered by usda's foreign agriculture service ( fas ) .

for usda - administered international food aid programs , the annual average funding between fy2008 and fy2010 was $341 million .

congress first authorized federally supported agricultural research in 1862 .

the scope of usda's agricultural research , education , and extension programs has been expanded and extended many times since then .

four agencies carry out usda's research , education , and economics ( ree ) mission: the agricultural research service ( ars ) , usda's intramural science agency , which conducts research on food and agriculture issues of national and regional importance ; the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) , its extramural science agency , which distributes federal funds to land - grant universities and other outside partners for state - and regional - level research , education , and extension activities ; the economic research service ( ers ) , which provides economic analysis of issues regarding public and private interests in agriculture , natural resources , food , and rural america ; and the national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) , which collects and publishes current national , state , and county agricultural statistics .

since 1973 , omnibus farm bills have included a rural development title .

the most recent is title vi of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

how to create and support new competitive advantage in rural areas so these areas can better compete in a global economic environment is a key issue framing current debates about the future of rural america .

the issue is evolving in the context of policymakers' understanding that current policies and programs have had a decidedly mixed record of success .

while the search for new sources of rural economic development is part of the policy equation , also increasingly appreciated is the need to develop new approaches for federal assistance to rural areas that go beyond the largely piecemeal , uncoordinated programming that has long characterized rural economic development policy .

the rural development title of farm bills generally supports ( 1 ) the infrastructure of rural areas , with traditional assistance for housing , electrical generation and transmission , water and wastewater , and community capacity , and ( 2 ) rural business creation and expansion .

in the past two farm bills , policymakers also have supported innovative and alternative business development ( eg , bioenergy , value - added production , local food production ) , and innovative mechanisms to finance it ( eg , the rural microentrepreneur assistance program ) .

pressure for such alternative approaches is expected to continue as policymakers recognize the great diversity among rural communities , with some rural areas growing and prospering , and others falling further behind as their primary industries ( including agriculture ) decline , and population outmigration continues , particularly among younger , educated residents .

interest in renewable energy has grown rapidly since late 2005 , due in large part to a strong rise in domestic and international fuel prices and a dramatic acceleration in domestic biofuel production ( mostly ethanol ) .

many policymakers view agriculture - based biofuels as both a catalyst for rural economic development and a response to growing energy import dependence .

usda renewable energy programs have been used to incentivize adoption of renewable energy projects including solar , wind , and anaerobic digesters .

however , the primary focus of usda renewable energy programs has been to promote u.s. biofuels production and use — including corn - starch - based ethanol , soybean - based biodiesel , and cellulosic ethanol .

many of the federal programs that currently support renewable energy production are outside the purview of usda and have legislative origins outside of the farm bill .

the 2002 farm bill ( farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) was the first omnibus farm bill to explicitly include an energy title ( title ix ) .

the energy title authorized grants , loans , and loan guarantees to foster research on agriculture - based renewable energy , to share development risk , and to promote the adoption of renewable energy systems .

the 2002 farm bill was followed by two major energy bills ( the energy policy act of 2005 , p.l .

109-58 ; and the energy independence and security act of 2007 , p.l .

110-140 ) , which established and expanded a national biofuels mandate along with several other renewable energy programs .

forestlands in the united states total nearly 751 million acres , about a third of all land in the country .

these lands provide wood for lumber , plywood , paper , and other materials , as well as a host of environmental and ecological services , including recreation , clean water , wildlife habitat , and more .

the federal government owns about a third of the total , and the usda forest service ( with nearly 147 million acres , 20% of all u.s. forestlands ) is the principal federal forest management agency .

in addition to administering the national forest system , the forest service provides technical and financial assistance , directly and through state forestry agencies , to non - industrial private landowners ( private owners who do not own wood processing facilities ) , who own nearly 285 million acres of u.s. forestlands ( 38% of the total ) .

four of the past five farm bills have contained separate forestry titles .

traditionally , farm bills address forestry assistance programs , but federal forest management and protection and forestry research also are within the jurisdiction of the house and senate agriculture committees .

the next farm bill may include a forestry title to modify existing programs and possibly establish new options for forestry research and forest land management and protection .

forestry assistance programs are managed primarily by the state and private forestry ( s&pf ) branch of the forest service .

funding is provided in annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts .

there are three groups of forestry assistance programs .

forest health management includes programs to survey and control forest pests and pathogens ( including invasive species ) on federal and nonfederal ( cooperative ) lands .

cooperative fire assistance includes equipment , financial , and technical assistance to states and volunteer fire departments .

cooperative forestry assistance programs include the following: forest stewardship — financial and technical assistance to states for forestry programs , with funds allocated based on priorities and assessments as required by the 2008 farm bill .

forest legacy / community open space and forest conservation — federal , state , or other acquisition of lands or easements on lands threatened with conversion to non - forestry use ( the latter program was created in the 2008 farm bill ) .

urban and community forestry — financial and technical assistance for forestry activities in urban and community settings .

economic action — financial and technical assistance for diversifying forest - dependent rural communities .

no forestry - specific cost - share assistance programs exist for forestry practices in private forests .

forestry is , however , an accepted practice for almost all farmland conservation programs .

 ( see " conservation and environment ," above. ) .

two smaller programs include international forestry and forest inventory activities .

the threat of wildfires to forests and to communities and homes in the wildland - urban interface seems to have grown .

the 2002 farm bill authorized a new community wildfire protection program , but the program has been funded only as part of state fire assistance .

in addition , many see removing excess woody biomass from overgrown forests as a way to reduce wildfire threats while providing an environmentally sound source of energy .

new programs to enhance wildfire protection might be considered in a new farm bill .

interest in producing energy from woody biomass and other renewable sources ( as discussed above ) derives from both supply and demand .

supply could come from efforts to reduce wildfire threats and to control invasive species .

demand is likely to be driven by state and federal requirements for renewable transportation fuels and possibly for electricity production .

numerous programs exist to induce or assist biomass energy production , including programs in the 2008 farm bill .

as stated in the " energy " section , above , all of these energy programs face budgetary challenges , and a new farm bill might extend , expand , alter , or terminate these programs , or possibly replace them with alternative approaches .

invasive species , typically exotic plants and animals , are increasingly displacing or harming native plants and animals in the united states and worldwide .

invasive species have been described as one of the four major threats to the nation's forests and rangelands .

options and opportunities to prevent and control the spread of invasive species , especially forest pests and especially on private forestlands , might be a farm bill issue .

forests produce many ecosystem services — carbon sequestration , clean air and water , wildlife habitats , pleasant scenery , and more — for which landowners are generally not compensated , because these services are not typically bought and sold in markets .

many interests have considered how to compensate landowners for continuing to provide these services .

one option would be to develop markets for ecosystem services .

a provision in § 2709 of the 2008 farm bill was intended to facilitate such market development .

a new farm bill might extend , expand , alter , or terminate this provision , or possibly replace it with an alternative approach such as "green payments" to directly reward farmers and other landowners for environmentally desirable practices .

