federal law requires the president to submit an annual budget to congress no later than the first monday in february .

the budget informs congress of the president's overall federal fiscal policy based on proposed spending levels , revenues , and deficit ( or surplus ) levels .

the budget request lays out the president's relative priorities for federal programs , such as how much should be spent on defense , education , health , and other federal programs .

the president's budget may also include legislative proposals for spending and tax policy changes .

president obama submitted his fy2013 budget to congress on february 13 , 2012 .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is the division of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that is responsible for administering medicare , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) among other activities .

the president's fy2013 budget includes a number of assumptions and proposed legislative changes to cms programs and activities .

the discussion below provides an overview of the president's fy2013 budget for cms .

the discussion begins with the fy2013 budget baseline ( i.e. , an estimate of spending under current laws and current policy ) for cms and explains how much the president's budget amends the baseline through assumptions and legislative proposals to arrive at the president's fy2013 budget for cms .

the president's budget estimates that under current law cms mandatory and discretionary net outlays would amount to $809.0 billion in fy2013 .

this is an increase of $61.3 billion , or 11.7% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2012 .

the president's fy2013 budget increases the baseline for medicare spending by assuming that congress will block a proposed reduction in physician payments .

the president's budget estimates this adjustment will increase cms's net outlays by $9.2 billion in fy2012 and $25.6 billion in fy2013 .

with this adjustment , cms's total net outlays are estimated to be $834.6 billion in fy2013 .

the president's fy2013 budget proposes to make a number of legislative changes to medicare , medicaid , program management , and health insurance programs .

the president's budget estimates that if these legislative proposals were implemented , cms's total net outlays would increase by $0.6 billion in fy2012 and decrease by $4.6 billion in fy2013 .

with the medicare physician payment adjustment , the estimated impact of the legislative proposals , and the estimated savings from program integrity investments ( $0.6 billion ) , the president's budget estimates cms's net outlays will be $829.4 billion in fy2013 , which is an increase of $72.3 billion , or 9.5% , over the net outlays for fy2012 .

this report summarizes the president's budget estimates for each section of the cms budget .

then , for each legislative proposal included in the president's budget , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

the explanations of the president's legislative proposals are grouped by the following program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , and health insurance programs .

at the end of each of these sections , there is a table summarizing the estimated costs or savings for each legislative proposal .

for budgetary purposes , cms is divided into the following sections: medicare , medicaid , chip , program integrity , state grants and demonstrations , health insurance programs , the center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) , and program management .

the president's budget estimates for each of these sections are summarized below .

the president's fy2013 budget contains a number of proposals that would impact the cms budget .

some are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending .

for each proposal , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

this report groups these legislative proposals by program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , and private health insurance protections and programs .

at the end of each of these sections there is a table summarizing the costs or savings for each legislative proposal .

each year , cbo conducts an analysis of the president's budget proposal .

due to differences in economic assumptions and estimates of enrollment , cbo's estimates of the impact of the president's legislative proposals differ from the administration's estimates that are included in the tables above .

the major differences between the cbo and administration estimates of the legislative proposals affecting cms are discussed below .

the most significant difference between the cbo and administration estimates for the president's budget proposal regarding cms involves the response to the statutorily mandated reduction in medicare payment rates for physicians' services .

as mentioned above , the president's budget includes an adjustment to its baseline that would not allow payments to physicians to be reduced as required under current law .

cbo estimates that this adjustment would cost $271 billion over the next 10 years , while the administration estimates that this adjustment would cost $429 billion over the next 10 years .

cbo's estimate is significantly lower than the administration's estimate because of differences in assumptions about the growth in physician spending and corresponding beneficiary premium receipts under the baseline .

cbo estimates that all other medicare changes proposed in the president's budget , including the legislative proposals for program integrity activities , would reduce medicare outlays by $276 billion over the next 10 years .

cbo's estimate is 9% lower than the administration's estimate of $303 billion in savings over the next 10 years .

most of the difference between these estimates is due to cbo having lower projections for the indexes used to calculate prices for medicare providers .

for medicaid , cbo estimates the legislative proposals in the president's fy2013 budget , including the program integrity activities , would save $66 billion over the next 10 years .

this estimate is 12% higher than the administration's estimated savings of roughly $59 billion .

there are two significant differences between the cbo and administration estimates of the medicaid proposals .

first , cbo estimates that the proposal to phase down the medicaid provider tax threshold would save $48 billion over the next 10 years , while the administration estimates that this proposal would save $22 billion .

second , cbo estimates significantly lower savings for the proposal to rebase medicaid dsh allotments .

cbo estimates that the president's proposal to accelerate the issuance of state innovation waivers would result in a net cost of $4.4 billion over the next 10 years .

however , the administration estimates that this proposal would have no budgetary impact .

