the detainee provisions passed as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( 2012 ndaa ; p.l .

112-81 ) , affirm that the authorization for use of military force ( aumf ) in response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , authorize the detention of persons captured in connection with hostilities .

the act provides for the first time a statutory definition of covered persons whose detention is authorized pursuant to the aumf .

during consideration of the detention provision , much of the debate focused on the applicability of this detention authority to u.s. citizens and other persons within the united states .

congress ultimately adopted a senate amendment to clarify that the provision is not intended to affect any existing law or authorities relating to the detention of u.s. citizens or lawful resident aliens , or any other persons captured or arrested in the united states .

this report analyzes the existing law and authority to detain , as "enemy combatants," u.s. persons , which , for the purpose of this report means persons who are generally understood to be subject to u.s. territorial jurisdiction or otherwise entitled to constitutional protections ; that is , american citizens , resident aliens , and other persons within the united states .

in june , 2004 , the supreme court handed down a series of opinions related to wartime detention authority .

in hamdi v. rumsfeld , a plurality of the court held that a u.s. citizen allegedly captured during combat in afghanistan and incarcerated at a navy brig in south carolina could be held as an enemy combatant as part of the necessary force authorized by congress after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , but that he was entitled to notice and an opportunity to be heard by a neutral decision maker regarding the government's reasons for detaining him .

the government instead reached an agreement with the petitioner that allowed him to return to saudi arabia , where he also holds citizenship , subject to certain conditions .

on the same day , the court in rumsfeld v. padilla overturned a lower court's grant of habeas corpus to another u.s. citizen in military custody in south carolina on jurisdictional grounds , sending the case to a district court in the fourth circuit for a new trial .

the vacated decision of the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit had held that the circumstance of a u.s. citizen arrested in the united states on suspicion of planning to carry out a terrorist attack there was fundamentally different from the case of a citizen captured on the battlefield overseas , and that the detention of such a citizen without trial was therefore precluded by the non - detention act , 18 u.s.c .

section 4001 ( a ) , which provides that no u.s. citizen may be detained except pursuant to an act of congress .

a plurality of the court found in hamdi that the president's detention of a u.s. citizen captured on the battlefield is not foreclosed by the non - detention act because an act of congress , the aumf , explicitly authorized such detention , but emphasized the narrow limits of the authority it was approving: the aumf authorizes the president to use "all necessary and appropriate force" against "nations , organizations , or persons" associated with the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

115 stat .

224 .

there can be no doubt that individuals who fought against the united states in afghanistan as part of the taliban , an organization known to have supported the al qaeda terrorist network responsible for those attacks , are individuals congress sought to target in passing the aumf .

we conclude that detention of individuals falling into the limited category we are considering , for the duration of the particular conflict in which they were captured , is so fundamental and accepted an incident to war as to be an exercise of the "necessary and appropriate force" congress has authorized the president to use .

the plurality went on to describe the kind of detention it had in mind was the traditional practice of detaining prisoners of war under long - standing law of war principles: further , we understand congress' grant of authority for the use of "necessary and appropriate force" to include the authority to detain for the duration of the relevant conflict , and our understanding is based on longstanding law - of - war principles .

if the practical circumstances of a given conflict are entirely unlike those of the conflicts that informed the development of the law of war , that understanding may unravel .

but that is not the situation we face as of this date .

active combat operations against taliban fighters apparently are ongoing in afghanistan .

the united states may detain , for the duration of these hostilities , individuals legitimately determined to be taliban combatants who "engaged in an armed conflict against the united states. .

if the record establishes that united states troops are still involved in active combat in afghanistan , those detentions are part of the exercise of "necessary and appropriate force," and therefore are authorized by the aumf .

justice souter , joined by justice ginsburg joined the plurality opinion to provide sufficient votes to vacate the decision below and remand the case to give hamdi an opportunity to contest his detention .

however , finding no explicit authority in the aumf ( or other statutes ) to detain persons as enemy combatants , they would have determined that 18 u.s.c .

section 4001 ( a ) precludes the detention of american citizens as enemy combatants altogether .

they rejected the theory that the detention was authorized as a necessary incident to the use of military force because "the government's stated legal position in its campaign against the taliban ... is apparently at odds with its claim here to be acting in accordance with customary law of war and hence to be within the terms of the force resolution in its detention of hamdi. .

in other words , the two justices appeared to agree in principle that the aumf could authorize the detention of prisoners of war , but took the view that the government's failure to accord the taliban detainees rights under the geneva convention vitiated that authority .

justice scalia , joined by justice stevens , dissented , arguing that "our constitutional tradition has been to prosecute [u.s. citizens accused of waging war against the government] in federal court for treason or some other crime" unless congress has suspended the writ of habeas corpus pursuant to the constitution's suspension clause , art .

i , section 9 , cl .

2 .

they viewed as "unthinkable that the executive could render otherwise criminal grounds for detention noncriminal merely by disclaiming an intent to prosecute , or by asserting that it was incapacitating dangerous offenders rather than punishing wrongdoing. .

under their view , even if the aumf did authorize detention in sufficiently clear language to overcome the prohibition in 18 u.s.c .

section 4001 ( a ) ( which , in their view , clearly it did not ) , hamdi's detention would have been unconstitutional without a proper suspension of the writ .

justice scalia described his position as pertaining only to u.s. citizens detained within the united states ( regardless of where captured ) , suggesting that only citizens who were concededly members of enemy forces may be detained as prisoners of war within the united states .

justice thomas also dissented , essentially agreeing with the government's position that the detention of enemy combatants is an unreviewable aspect of the war powers constitutionally allocated to the political branches .

he agreed that the aumf provides sufficient authority to detain enemy combatants , meaning that a majority of the court approved that position , but he would have given utmost deference to the executive branch and accorded little in the way of due process .

finally , he questioned whether other acts of war , such as bombings and missile strikes , would also be subject to due process inquiry .

although a bare majority of the court , led by chief justice rehnquist , declined to decide in padilla whether the detention authority approved in hamdi would apply to a u.s. citizen arrested in the united states , four justices who dissented on the question of jurisdiction also indicated they would have upheld the second circuit's grant of the petition on the merits .

apparently rejecting the bush administration's contention that it had the authority to detain a u.s. citizen who was alleged to be "closely associated with al qaeda" and to have "engaged in ... hostile and war - like acts , including ... preparation for acts of international terrorism" against the united states in order to extract intelligence and prevent him from aiding al qaeda , justice stevens , joined by justices souter , ginsburg , and breyer , wrote: executive detention of subversive citizens , like detention of enemy soldiers to keep them off the battlefield , may sometimes be justified to prevent persons from launching or becoming missiles of destruction .

it may not , however , be justified by the naked interest in using unlawful procedures to extract information .

incommunicado detention for months on end is such a procedure .

whether the information so procured is more or less reliable than that acquired by more extreme forms of torture is of no consequence .

for if this nation is to remain true to the ideals symbolized by its flag , it must not wield the tools of tyrants even to resist an assault by the forces of tyranny .

given justice scalia's dissent in hamdi , it appeared in 2004 that a majority of the supreme court as it was then constituted would have determined that the non - detention act precludes the detention of a u.s. citizen without trial based on an alleged association with al qaeda and participation in a terrorist plot far from any conventional battlefield , at least within the united states .

a separate majority of the same court took the view that the non - detention act does not preclude the detention of a u.s. citizen picked up on the battlefield in afghanistan , albeit apparently for different reasons .

there also appears to have been a majority on the court who believed that indefinite detention solely for the purpose of interrogation would be impermissible even where they agreed the law of war supports detention .

finally , a majority took the position that a u.s. citizen detained under the authority of the aumf would have the right to a meaningful opportunity to be heard before a neutral decision maker in order to contest the factual basis for the detention , although there was disagreement as to the precise level of due process such a hearing would be constitutionally required to provide .

a majority of the hamdi court appears to have accepted the view that , in principle , u.s. citizens who join an enemy armed force and engage in hostilities against the united states may be treated as enemy belligerents on the same basis that alien enemy belligerents may be so treated under the laws and usages of war .

it seems to follow that the same criteria and definition used to determine the status of aliens who are believed to be enemy belligerents would apply equally to u.s. citizens .

thus , there is little reason to suppose that the contours of the legal category of persons subject to detention , as it has been developed by the lower courts interpreting hamdi , by the executive branch , and most recently , by congress , will differ according to citizenship .

it may be the case that u.s. citizenship will entitle citizen - detainees to more procedural rights in contesting the factual basis for their detention than alien detainees have enjoyed .

moreover , there is no dispute that citizens detained in u.s. custody abroad may seek habeas review , and congress has not stripped the courts of jurisdiction over non - habeas cases by u.s. citizens detained as enemy belligerents , as it has done with respect to aliens , nor has it established jurisdiction in military commissions to try citizens for war crimes .

on the other hand , lower courts have applied the plurality opinion in hamdi , which decision expressly deals with the rights of a u.s. citizen - detainee , as a baseline for determining the procedural rights due to aliens detained at guantanamo in habeas proceedings , apparently without requiring proof of the existence of "exigent circumstance. .

assuming that the supreme court jurisprudence establishes that citizens accused of participating in hostilities against the united states may be treated the same as similarly situated aliens , the seemingly relaxed procedural rights and evidentiary burden applicable in the guantanamo cases may also apply to any habeas cases involving citizen - detainees .

the supreme court has not yet addressed on the merits whether an alien lawfully present in the united states can be detained under the authority of the aumf based on activity conducted there .

a noncitizen could not invoke the non - detention act , but might nevertheless be able to contest whether the government's facts support an enemy combatant designation .

after all , the hamdi plurality suggested there may be a distinction based on the fact that that case involved a capture on a foreign battlefield .

at about the same time that it issued hamdi and padilla , the court denied certiorari to review the case of ali saleh kahlah al - marri , a qatari student who had been arrested in peoria , il in late 2001 but declared an "enemy combatant" prior to trial and transferred to military custody in south carolina .

his petition for habeas corpus was dismissed for lack of jurisdiction by the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit .

both al - marri and padilla filed new petitions for habeas corpus in the fourth circuit , meaning that the issue of detention authority with respect to citizens and aliens within the united states would have to be relitigated there before the supreme court would have another opportunity to address it .

as we explain more fully below , the fourth circuit ultimately confirmed both detentions , but without establishing a conclusive test for determining which persons arrested within the united states are subject to detention under aumf authority .

supreme court review was avoided in both cases after the government filed charges against the petitioners and moved them into the civilian court system .

the only opinion left standing , that which affirmed the detention of jose padilla on grounds very different from the original allegations that had been addressed by the second circuit , does little to expand the understanding of detention authority beyond that which hamdi already established , that is , that detention is justified in the case of a person who fought alongside enemy forces against the united states on a foreign battlefield .

assuming , per hamdi , that congress intended in 2001 to authorize the use of force in compliance with the law of war , and considering that congress expressly incorporated the law of war into the detention authority in the 2012 ndaa , a survey of international law regarding such detentions may be pertinent to a determination of the detention authority preserved under the 2012 ndaa .

accordingly , this report summarizes wartime detention under international law and surveys relevant u.s. practice before returning to the fourth circuit's treatment of the padilla and al - marri cases .

the report also summarizes the case of hedges v. obama , in which plaintiffs sought an injunction against enforcement of the detention provision of the 2012 ndaa .

the law of war divides persons in the midst of an armed conflict into two broad categories: combatants and civilians .

this fundamental distinction determines the international legal status of persons participating in or affected by combat , and determines the legal protections afforded to such persons as well as the legal consequences of their conduct .

combatants are those persons who are authorized by international law to fight in accordance with the law of war on behalf of a party to the conflict .

civilians are not authorized to fight , but are protected from deliberate targeting by combatants as long as they do not take up arms .

in order to protect civilians , the law of war requires combatants to conduct military operations in a manner designed to minimize civilian casualties and to limit the amount of damage and suffering to that which can be justified by military necessity .

to limit exposure of civilians to military attacks , combatants are required , as a general rule , to distinguish themselves from civilians .

combatants who fail to distinguish themselves from civilians run the risk of being denied the privilege to be treated as prisoners of war if captured by the enemy .

the treatment of all persons who fall into the hands of the enemy during an international armed conflict depends upon the status of the person as determined under the four geneva conventions of 1949 .

under these conventions , parties to an international armed conflict have the right to capture and intern enemy soldiers as well as civilians who pose a danger to the security of the state , at least for the duration of hostilities .

the right to detain enemy combatants is not based on the supposition that the prisoner is "guilty" as an enemy for any crimes against the detaining power , either as an individual or as an agent of the opposing state .

pows are detained for security purposes , to remove those soldiers as a threat from the battlefield .

the law of war encourages capture and detention of enemy combatants as a more humane alternative to accomplish the same purpose than by wounding or killing them .

enemy civilians may be interned for similar reasons , when found on the territory belonging to or occupied by a belligerent , although the law of war does not permit them to be treated as lawful military targets .

as citizens of an enemy country , they may be presumed to owe allegiance to the enemy .

the law of war traditionally allowed for their internment and the confiscation of their property , not because they are suspected of having committed a crime or even of harboring ill will toward the host or occupying power but , rather , they are held in order to prevent their acting on behalf of the enemy and to deprive the enemy of resources it might use in its war efforts .

congress has delegated to the president the authority , during a declared war or by proclamation , to provide for the restriction , internment or removal of enemy aliens deemed dangerous .

the supreme court has upheld internment programs promulgated under the alien enemy act .

this form of detention , like the detention of pows , is administrative rather than punitive , and thus no criminal trial is required .

the detaining power may punish enemy soldiers and civilians for crimes committed prior to their capture as well as during captivity , but only after a fair trial in accordance with the relevant convention and other applicable international law .

the foregoing describes the law that applies in the case of international armed conflict , that is , armed conflict between two states , as defined by the geneva conventions .

non - international armed conflict is governed by common article 3 of the geneva conventions and additional protocol ii ( "ap ii" ) , or at least those parts of ap ii that reflect customary international law ( the united states has not ratified ap ii ) .

common article 3 does not recognize a distinction between combatant and civilian status , and neither expressly permits nor prohibits detention .

rather , it provides minimal protections for those who fall into the hands of one of the parties to the armed conflict .

some international legal scholars believe that detention is permitted in non - international conflicts to at least the same extent that it is practiced in international armed conflicts , while others argue that specific authority under domestic law is necessary to authorize and define the scope of permissible detention during a non - international armed conflict .

another view might be that the rules applicable to international armed conflict , as customary international law , apply to non - international armed conflicts that meet the threshold for a belligerency under the international law of war , while any sort of contention that does not rise to such a level falls outside the law of war and is governed by domestic law only ( in compliance with the state's obligations under international human rights law ) .

in any event , the survey of u.s. practice presented below appears to establish that statutory authority in addition to a declaration of war has been seen as necessary to permit wartime detention within the united states , at least insofar as the preventive detention of civilians or unprivileged belligerents are concerned .

the following sections give a brief treatment of the history of the internment of individuals who are deemed "enemies" or determined to be too dangerous to remain at liberty during a war or national emergency .

a survey of the history reveals that persons who are considered likely to act as an enemy agent on u.s. territory traditionally have been treated as alien enemies rather than prisoners of war or "enemy combatants" by the military , even when the individuals were members of the armed forces of enemy nations , although in the latter case they might also be tried by military commission or court - martial , if accused of a crime .

persons acting within the territory of the united states on behalf of an enemy government who were not part of its armed forces , including american citizens accused of spying or sabotage , have been tried in federal court .

individuals captured on the battlefield abroad have been handled in accordance with government regulations interpreting the law of war .

for the most part , it appears that u.s. practice has followed a traditional understanding of international law , in which the formal relationship between states , or perhaps between a state and a breakaway portion of its territory controlled by a government that no longer recognizes its authority , plays a seemingly crucial role .

during war , a person's formal association with the opposing government or armed forces was seen to have bearing on how the law applied .

while alien enemies and invading armies were seen to enjoy no ( or at least very little ) protection under domestic law , those with merely personal sympathy toward the enemy or animosity toward the government continued to enjoy such protection .

for that reason , persons falling into the first category could be interned as a wartime measure without any demonstration of personal hostility on their part , while the validity of restrictive measures taken against other persons were assessed in terms of necessity and adequacy of due process .

at the same time , the first category of persons enjoyed some protection under international law , including , for example , privileged belligerents could not be tried as criminals for belligerent acts that did not violate the law of war .

hamdi establishes that the aumf authorizes the detention of persons captured during the course of hostilities , including those who are u.s. citizens , but left to lower courts to decide the scope of detention authority .

the supreme court has not since the hamdi decision elaborated on the scope of detention authority .

after the supreme court declined to resolve the case of jose padilla on the merits and denied certiorari with respect to ali saleh al - marri , an alien whose case had been rejected by the seventh circuit , both cases headed to the fourth circuit to begin litigation anew .

in signing the 2012 ndaa into law , president obama stated that his administration does not intend to detain indefinitely u.s. citizens pursuant to the detention authority in section 1021 .

however , given that the conflict may last beyond his term and that the 2012 ndaa appears to mandate at least temporary military detention for some non - u.s. citizens , it is possible that the supreme court has not issued its last word on "enemy combatants" and preventive detention as a means to prosecute hostilities authorized by the aumf .

lower courts that have addressed questions the supreme court left unanswered have not achieved a consensus on the extent to which congress has authorized the detention without trial of u.s. persons as "enemy combatants," and congress has not so far clarified its intent .

if hamdi stands for the proposition that u.s. citizens may be detained under the same circumstances that make noncitizens amenable to law - of - war detention , regardless of location , then the guantanamo cases may provide sufficient legal precedent for detaining similarly situated persons within the united states .

if , on the other hand , historical precedent has any bearing on the interpretation of the state of the law and authorities regarding detention of u.s. persons under the law of war , as preserved by section 1021 ( e ) of the 2012 ndaa , it seems difficult to conclude that the aumf should be read to imply the authority to detain such persons unless they are part of the armed forces of a belligerent party to an armed conflict .

congress has on occasion exercised the authority to permit the detention of civilians without trial based on the risk they are deemed to pose to national security , but if a declaration of war alone has not sufficed to trigger that authority , it seems unlikely that an authorization to use force would be presumed to confer it .

