the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) is a proposed regional free trade agreement ( fta ) under negotiation between the united states and 11 other countries .

current participants include australia , brunei , canada , chile , japan , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , peru , singapore , the united states , and vietnam .

participation in the negotiations has grown over time with canada and mexico joining in late 2012 and japan , the most recent country to participate , joining in july 2013 .

the proposed agreement's ability to attract and incorporate new members will likely affect the ultimate global significance of its regional platform and the new trade rules the agreement may come to embody .

congress has a major role in the negotiation and implementation of ftas .

throughout the negotiating process , congress may conduct oversight hearings and consultations with u.s. trade negotiators , providing members an opportunity to oversee and influence the development of the final tpp .

congress may also establish u.s. trade negotiating objectives as part of its granting of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) to the executive branch .

congress would also have to consider and approve implementing legislation before a final fta could enter into force .

the united states has a number of objectives in the proposed tpp agreement .

these include achieving a comprehensive and high standard regional fta that eliminates and reduces trade barriers and increases opportunities for u.s. trade and investment ; allowing the united states to play a role in developing a broader platform for trade liberalization , particularly throughout the asia - pacific region ; and providing the united states with an opportunity to establish new rules on emerging trade issues , such as regulatory coherence , supply chain management , state - owned enterprises , and increasing trade opportunities for small - and medium - sized businesses .

this report focuses primarily on u.s. economic interests in the tpp agreement .

it provides a comparative economic analysis of the countries currently negotiating the tpp and describes the u.s. trade flows with these countries at the bilateral level and in relation to the countries' economic linkages with the rest of the world .

it also provides information on the existing trade agreements of tpp countries .

as such , this report aims to serve as an introduction to the economic relationship these countries have , both individually and collectively , with the united states .

tpp participants belong to various multilateral , regional , and bilateral trade and economic agreements .

for example , all tpp countries are members of the world trade organization ( wto ) , with vietnam joining most recently in 2007 .

in addition , tpp countries have a number of bilateral and regional ftas in effect , of varying degrees , some of which include other tpp negotiating partners .

the united states , for example , has ftas with 20 countries including 6 tpp participants ( australia , canada , chile , mexico , peru , and singapore ) .

in total , there are more than 180 preferential trade agreements among asia - pacific countries , most of which do not include the united states .

the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , as well as certain stakeholder groups , view the proposed tpp fta as an opportunity for the united states to address this rapid rise in preferential trade agreements , with a goal of ensuring that u.s. goods and services remain competitive in the region and that the united states plays a central role in developing a framework for future regional free trade negotiations .

given the potential for future expansion in tpp membership , supporters contend that the ability to influence the strength and coverage of the agreement at the beginning stage may be particularly advantageous .

this section examines trade and investment flows into and out of tpp countries as well as their tariff rates .

given the variation in geography , population , and economic development among tpp countries , the type and quantity of trade and investment varies greatly from country to country .

additionally , existing tariff structures among the tpp countries highlight the variation in their openness to trade and may identify some potential difficulties as well as opportunities in liberalizing trade between such diverse countries .

the analysis and description that follows depends on the quality and scope of the relevant data .

hence , the most comprehensive examination is on merchandise trade .

the proposed trans - pacific partnership fta would be a significant fta for the united states and could eventually become the platform for a broader asia - pacific free trade area , an area that encompasses 40% of the world's people and over half of global production .

tpp would be the largest u.s. fta based on trade flows , and with the entry of japan , a significant share of u.s. - tpp trade is not currently covered by an fta .

due to the great diversity among the tpp participants , there may be challenges in achieving a comprehensive and high standard agreement .

tpp countries vary in terms of population , economic development , and geography .

in goods and services trade , canada is the top u.s. partner among tpp countries , with mexico and japan as the next largest partners in most categories .

in terms of fdi flows , japan was the largest u.s. partner among tpp countries in 2013 .

australia , malaysia , and singapore are the other top u.s. partners in merchandise trade among tpp countries , and australia and singapore are also major u.s. partners in services trade and investment flows among tpp countries .

vietnam , given its significant population and quickly growing economy , may hold the greatest potential for increased economic relations with the united states moving forward .

malaysia , mexico , chile , and peru also represent growing economies that have populations above 20 million .

chile , peru , and mexico's potential for increased u.s. economic exchange due to the tpp , however , may be somewhat lessened given their existing ftas with the united states .

