the u.s. constitution establishes two methods by which presidents may appoint officers of the united states: either with the advice and consent of the senate , or unilaterally "during the recess of the senate. .

these two constitutional provisions have long served as sources of political tension between presidents and congresses , and the same has held true since president obama took office .

this tension is illuminated by president obama's difficulty in obtaining senate confirmation of nominations for the directorship of the newly - established bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb or bureau ) and members of the national labor relations board ( nlrb or board ) .

president obama formally nominated richard cordray to be the first director of the cfpb on july 18 , 2011 .

in may 2011 , 44 senators signed a letter to the president stating that they would oppose the confirmation of any nominee to serve as cfpb director until substantive changes to the structure of the bureau were enacted into law .

on october 6 , 2011 , the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ( senate banking committee ) approved cordray's nomination for a full vote of the senate .

however , on december 8 , 2011 , the senate fell seven votes shy of the 60-vote threshold necessary to reach cloture and move to a vote on the nomination .

the nlrb , an agency with certain powers to investigate and adjudicate unfair labor practices , consists of up to five officials who are to be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate .

however , there have been periods during the presidencies of both george w. bush and obama in which the board has had vacancies , including a period of more than two years in which the nlrb operated with only two members .

in a 2010 decision , new process steel , l.p. v. national labor relations board , the u.s. supreme court ruled that the national labor relations act prevents the nlrb from exercising rulemaking powers without having three or more acting members .

in 2010 , the nlrb had operated with a quorum of three or more members ; however , by august 2011 , there were only three members remaining , the minimum number of members required to establish a quorum .

the nlrb was slated to lose one member by the end of the first session of the 112 th congress .

therefore , in an effort to prevent board membership from dropping below the minimum quorum required for the nlrb to fully conduct business , president obama nominated terrence f. flynn , sharon block , and richard f. griffin jr. to be board members .

however , the senate did not confirm any of the nominees before the third member's term expired .

following senate inaction , the president reportedly considered making recess appointments should the senate go into recess .

however , the senate , at various times during the 112 th congress , has held "pro forma" sessions , which are intended , at least in part , to prevent the existence of a senate recess sufficient to permit the president to exercise his constitutional authority to unilaterally appoint officers .

these pro forma sessions typically are governed by unanimous consent agreements of the senate that prohibit the chamber from conducting any formal business .

the pro forma sessions generally have been held every three or four days , and typically consist of a single senator gaveling in the session and , shortly thereafter , gaveling the session out .

on december 17 , 2011 , the senate adopted a unanimous consent agreement that scheduled a series of pro forma sessions to occur from december 20 , 2011 , until january 23 , 2012 , with brief recesses in between .

the unanimous consent agreement established that "no business" would be conducted during the pro forma sessions and that the second session would begin at 12:00 p.m. , january 3 , 2012 .

on january 4 , 2012 , despite the periodic pro forma sessions of the senate , the president , asserting his authority under the recess appointments clause , announced his intent to appoint cordray to serve as the first cfpb director and block , griffin jr. , and terrence f. flynn , to be members of the nlrb .

the appointments occurred in the time between pro forma sessions on january 3 and january 6 , 2012 .

the president's actions have proven to be contentious .

in addition to their impact on relations between the executive and legislative branches , these appointments also raise a number of significant legal questions regarding the scope of the president's authority under the recess appointments clause and the statutory authorities these individuals may exercise — questions that may spark litigation .

this report analyzes the legal issues associated with the president's exercise of his recess appointments clause power on january 4 , 2012 .

to set the framework of our discussion , the report begins with a general legal overview of the recess appointments clause .

this is followed by an analysis of two legal principles , standing and the political question doctrine , which may impede a reviewing court from reaching the merits of a potential legal challenge to the appointments .

the examination of these justiciability issues is followed by an analysis of the constitutional validity of the appointments ; potential statutory restrictions on a recess appointee's authority to exercise the powers of the cfpb ; and how actions taken by the recess appointees may be impacted by a court ruling that the appointments are unlawful .

the u.s. constitution explicitly provides the president with two methods of appointing officers of the united states .

first , the appointments clause establishes that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for and which shall be established by law. .

second , the recess appointments clause authorizes the president to "fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate , by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session. .

during the meetings of the constitutional convention , there was no debate on the recess appointments clause .

however , in light of the constitutional text and historical pronouncements , it is generally accepted that the recess appointments clause was designed to foster administrative continuity by enabling the president to ensure unfettered operation of the government during periods when the senate was not in session and , therefore , unable to perform its advice and consent function .

the inherent ambiguities of the recess appointments clause , such as the interpretation of the phrases "vacancies that may happen" and "recess of the senate," have primarily received formal consideration from the executive branch in the form of attorneys general opinions , with only periodic attention from the courts and congress .

some interpretive questions surrounding the clause are generally regarded as settled .

for example , through interpretation and practice , a "recess" for purposes of the recess appointments clause encompasses both the inter - and intrasession recesses of the congress .

while there have been varying opinions about the duration of an intrasession recess sufficient for the president to make a recess appointment , the shortest duration in the modern era for an intrasession recess appointment has been 10 days .

in addition , it is generally understood that the commission of a recess appointee expires at the sine die adjournment of the senate's "next session. .

in practice , an individual receiving an intersession appointment would serve until the end of the following session .

however , an individual receiving an intrasession appointment — for example , during the traditional august recess of a first session of congress — would serve until the end of the following session , that is , the end of the second session .

as an intrasession recess appointment during the second session of the 112 th congress , president obama's january 4 appointments could serve until the end of the first session of the 113 th congress .

furthermore , as a constitutional matter , a recess appointee possesses the same legal authority as a confirmed appointee .

in upholding the president's authority to make a recess appointment of an article iii judge , the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit ( 11 th circuit ) stated: the constitution , on its face , neither distinguishes nor limits the powers that a recess appointee may exercise while in office .

that is , during the limited term in which a recess appointee serves , the appointee is afforded the full extent of authority commensurate with that office .

similarly , a federal district court explained: there is nothing to suggest that the recess appointments clause was designed as some sort of extraordinary and lesser method of appointment.… in the absence of persuasive evidence to the contrary , it is therefore not appropriate to assume that this clause has a species of subordinate standing in the constitutional scheme… .

there is no justification for implying additional restrictions not supported by the constitutional language .

congress has , however , attempted to dissuade the president from making recess appointments through legislation .

for example , congress has passed legislation that restricts certain recess appointees from receiving salaries .

given the historical interpretation of the recess appointments clause and the historical use of its authority , the president's appointments of cordray , flynn , block , and griffin jr. during a three - day recess between pro forma sessions raises a number of significant legal questions that may lead to judicial challenge .

however , prior to assessing the merits of any challenge , a reviewing court would first consider a number of preliminary questions of justiciability — including whether the plaintiffs who have brought the claim have standing and whether the asserted claims present matters appropriately resolved by a court .

an extended preliminary discussion of these justiciability questions is necessary because they may have relevance to many of the underlying legal questions posed by the recess appointments clause , the president's recent actions thereunder , and the operation of the statutory authorities exercised by the recess appointees in this case .

although the supreme court has established a number of "justiciability" doctrines to ensure that a claim is properly before a court , concerns relating to standing and the political question doctrine appear to present the most likely hurdles to judicial resolution of any challenge to the president's appointments .

the standing doctrine asks whether the particular plaintiff has a legal right to a judicial determination on the merits before the court , while the political question doctrine asks whether the claim presented is inappropriate for judicial review .

if a court determines that a plaintiff lacks standing or that the nature of the questions presented precludes review , the court will dismiss the claim , leaving the status quo undisturbed .

if a reviewing court determines that a plaintiff challenging the appointments of cordray , flynn , block , or griffin jr. has met all elements of justiciability , the court may proceed to assess the merits of the suit .

the primary issue before a court would be whether the appointments were made in compliance with the strictures of the recess appointments clause , which provides the president with the "power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate. .

prior to proceeding to a consideration of this question , a brief recitation of the unique factual circumstances underlying the president's january 4 recess appointments may be helpful .

the senate , on december 17 , 2011 , adopted a unanimous consent agreement that scheduled a series of pro forma sessions to occur every few days from december 20 , 2011 , until january 23 , 2012 .

the unanimous consent agreement expressly established that "no business" would be conducted during the pro forma sessions .

the agreement also provided that the second session of the 112 th congress would commence with a pro forma session at 12:00 p.m. on january 3 , 2012 , and that a subsequent pro forma session would be held on january 6 , 2012 .

on january 4 , 2012 , between these two pro forma sessions , the president , asserting his recess appointments clause powers , announced his intent to appoint cordray to serve as the first cfpb director and block , griffin jr. , and flynn , to be members of the nlrb .

while it appears well established that the senate was in an intrasession recess following the conclusion of the january 3 rd pro forma session that convened the second session of the 112 th congress , it is not clear how to measure that intrasession recess and whether it was sufficient to trigger the president's power under the recess appointments clause .

the senate was either in one of a series of short recesses created by the pro forma sessions , or in a single intrasession recess of 20 days — spanning from january 3 rd to january 23 rd .

the length of the recess may be of great importance , as it appears that no president , at least in the modern era , has made an intrasession recess appointment during a recess of less than 10 days .

the president has asserted that pro forma sessions are not meaningful sessions of congress for purposes of the recess appointments clause and , therefore , cannot interrupt a longer recess .

under this reasoning , the president's january 4 recess appointments were consistent with established historical precedent as they were made during a 20-day recess .

critics , however , assert that the pro forma sessions are meaningful sessions of congress and , therefore terminate a recess .

under this reasoning , the president's recess appointments broke from established historical precedent , as they were made during a recess of only three days .

these unique facts raise at least two significant , and mostly unresolved constitutional questions .

first , may congress utilize pro forma sessions to interrupt the duration of an otherwise continual intrasession recess so as to prevent a recess appointment ? .

second , is there a minimum number of days for which the senate must be out of session before a president may constitutionally exercise his recess appointment power ? .

the following section now examines each of these questions in turn .

assuming , arguendo , that the president's appointment of richard cordray is constitutional , questions remain as to whether , and to what extent , the specific statutory language of the consumer financial protection act ( cfp act ) restricts cordray's powers .

to address these questions , this report first provides a general description of the cfpb .

it then analyzes the provisions of the cfp act that provide the secretary of the treasury ( secretary ) certain powers to perform the functions of the cfpb until a director is appointed , which is followed by an analysis of the impact that the president's recess appointment may have on both cordray's and the secretary's cfpb authorities .

with the legal uncertainty surrounding the president's recess appointments of cordray , flynn , block , and griffin jr. , it seems prudent to review how decisions made and actions performed by the cfpb and nlrb under the direction of these individuals would be treated if a court determined that their appointments were unconstitutional .

the de facto officer doctrine "confers validity upon acts performed by a person acting under the color of official title even though it is later discovered that the legality of that person's appointment or election to office is deficient. .

therefore , even if a reviewing court were to invalidate the appointment of an officer , the de facto officer doctrine could be applied to limit the remedies available to the plaintiffs .

the purpose of the doctrine is to maintain stability , prevent a disruption of the status quo caused by the overturning of accepted decisions , and facilitate the orderly functioning of the government despite technical defects .

the supreme court , however , has recognized that the doctrine is applied most often in cases where an appointment is challenged based on a "merely technical" statutory defect .

in cases that hinge on more than mere technicalities , such as cases involving a "challenge to the constitutional validity" of an appointment or a statutory challenge that "embodies a strong policy concerning the proper administration of judicial business," courts have declined to apply the doctrine .

additionally , several circuit courts have explicitly rejected application of the doctrine when a constitutional challenge is presented .

it seems unlikely that a court would choose to apply the de facto officer doctrine in a case challenging the cfpb and nlrb recess appointments .

any challenge to the recess appointments will likely raise substantial constitutional questions based on issues of separation of powers and the interpretation of the recess appointments clause .

therefore , it appears this case would fall under the court's statement in ryder v. united states , that a "timely challenge to the constitutional validity" of an appointment warrants a "decision on the merits of the question and whatever relief may be appropriate if a violation indeed occurred. .

this principle was exemplified in buckley v. valeo , where plaintiffs successfully argued that the appointment of four members of the federal election commission by congress , rather than the president , violated the appointments clause .

the court did not explicitly apply the de facto officer doctrine , since it both invalidated the appointments and granted the plaintiffs their requested declaratory and injunctive relief .

however , even without relying on the de facto officer doctrine , the court still "summarily" held that the commission's past actions remained valid and did not provide further explanation .

more recently , following a finding that the nlrb lacked authority to issue decisions with only two board members , the court in new process steel v. nlrb granted the plaintiff relief by vacating and remanding its adjudication to the nlrb .

in new process steel , the court did not even address the continued validity or possible precedential value of the decisions made by the two - member board .

although the court's statement in ryder means a plaintiff likely may be granted relief if a court invalidated the cfpb and nlrb appointees , the future consequences of such an invalidation remain uncertain .

the unique facts underlying the president's january 4 , 2012 , recess appointments raise a number of unresolved constitutional questions regarding the scope of the recess appointments clause .

however , the clause itself contains ambiguities , and with a lack of judicial precedent that may otherwise elucidate the provision , it is difficult to predict how a reviewing court would define the contours of the president's recess appointment authority .

if the president's recess appointments are challenged , it appears the most likely plaintiffs to satisfy the court's standing requirements would be a private individual or association who , following the appointments , has suffered an injury as a result of some discrete action taken by the cfpb or nlrb .

were the court to proceed to the merits of the challenge , the primary question presented would likely be whether the president made the january 4 recess appointments "during a recess of the senate. .

that determination may hinge on whether the senate's pro forma sessions were adequate to interrupt an otherwise continuous recess .

although there are several approaches a court could take in evaluating the impact of the sessions , whether the president is constitutionally authorized to make a recess appointment would also depend on how a court chooses to define a "recess" for purposes of the recess appointments clause .

aspects of both of these determinations , which appear to involve questions of separation of powers and the internal proceedings of the senate , may potentially be deemed to involve political questions inappropriate for judicial review and better resolved by the president and congress .

finally , even if the recess appointments are considered constitutionally valid , it appears likely that questions may be raised as to director cordray's authority .

however , given the potential constitutional concerns that could be associated with an interpretation of the cfp act that restricts the authorities delegated to a recess appointee as opposed to a senate - confirmed appointee , it is likely that a reviewing court would avoid a construction that prevents cordray from exercising the full authorities of his office .

