for decades , federal policymakers and state administrators of governmental assistance programs , such as the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grants ( formerly aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) ) , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) , the section 8 housing choice voucher program , and their precursors have expressed concern about the "moral character" and worthiness of beneficiaries .

beginning in the 1980s , the federal government imposed restrictions on the receipt of certain governmental benefits for individuals convicted of drug - related crimes as one component of the broader "war on drugs. .

for example , the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 made individuals who have three or more convictions for certain drug - related offenses permanently ineligible for various federal benefits .

a provision in the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 explicitly authorizes states to test tanf beneficiaries for illicit drug use and to sanction recipients who test positive .

in part prompted by tight state and federal budgets and increased demand for federal and state governmental assistance resulting from precarious economic conditions , some policymakers have shown a renewed interest in conditioning the receipt of governmental benefits on passing drug tests .

for example , in february 2012 , the president signed into law an amendment to the social security act that authorizes states to condition the receipt of certain unemployment compensation benefits on passing drug tests .

additionally , lawmakers in a majority of states reportedly proposed legislation in 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , and / or 2014 that would require drug testing beneficiaries of governmental assistance under certain circumstances , while at least 12 state governments over that time have enacted such legislation .

federal or state laws that condition the initial or ongoing receipt of governmental benefits on passing drug tests without regard to individualized suspicion of illicit drug use may be subject to constitutional challenge .

constitutional challenges to suspicionless governmental drug testing most often focus on issues of personal privacy and fourth amendment protections against "unreasonable searches. .

to date , two state laws requiring suspicionless drug tests as a condition to receiving governmental benefits have sparked litigation .

the u.s. supreme court has not rendered an opinion on such a law ; however , the court has issued decisions on drug testing programs in other contexts that have guided the few lower court opinions on the subject .

these supreme court opinions also likely will shape future judicial decisions on the topic .

to effectively evaluate the constitutionality of laws requiring suspicionless drug tests to receive governmental benefits , this report first provides an overview of the fourth amendment .

it then reviews five supreme court decisions that have evaluated government - administered drug testing programs in other contexts and provides an analysis of the preliminary lower court opinions directly on point .

the report concludes with a synthesis of the various factors that likely will be important to a future court's assessment of the constitutionality of these laws , which also may guide policymaking on the subject .

the fourth amendment protects the "right of the people" to be free from "unreasonable searches and seizures" by the government .

this constitutional stricture applies to all governmental action — federal , state , and local — by its own force or through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .

governmental conduct generally will be found to constitute a "search" for fourth amendment purposes where it infringes "an expectation of privacy that society is prepared to consider reasonable...." the supreme court , on a number of occasions , has held that government - administered drug tests are searches under the fourth amendment .

therefore , the constitutionality of a law that requires an individual to pass a drug test before he may receive federal benefits likely will turn on whether the drug test is reasonable under the circumstances .

whether a search is reasonable depends on the nature of the search and its underlying governmental purpose .

reasonableness under the fourth amendment generally requires individualized suspicion , which frequently takes the form of a warrant that is based on probable cause .

however , the supreme court has recognized an exception to these general requirements "when special needs , beyond the normal need for law enforcement , make the warrant and probable - cause requirement impracticable," and the government's needs outweigh any "diminished expectation" of privacy invaded by a search .

in instances where the government argues that there are special needs to support suspicionless searches , courts determine whether such searches are reasonable under the circumstances by assessing the competing interests of the government conducting the search and the private individuals who are subject to the search .

the supreme court has assessed the constitutionality of governmental drug testing programs in a number of contexts .

five opinions are especially relevant to the question of whether a mandatory , suspicionless drug test for the receipt of governmental benefits would be considered an unreasonable search in violation of the fourth amendment .

each of these decisions , skinner v. railway labor executives association , national treasury employees union v. von raab , vernonia school district v. acton , board of education of independent school district no .

92 of pottawatomie county v. earls , and chandler v. miller , is analyzed in turn .

two state laws that established mandatory , suspicionless drug testing programs as a condition to receiving tanf benefits have been challenged on fourth amendment grounds .

the federal district court ruling in marchwinski v. howard , which was affirmed by the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) as a result of an evenly divided en banc panel , involved a michigan program that began in the late 1990s .

this decision was delivered at the preliminary stages of litigation and was not based on a complete evidentiary record .

in the other case , lebron v. secretary , florida department of children and families , a three - judge panel of the court of appeals for the eleventh circuit unanimously affirmed a district court's ruling that a mandatory drug testing law in florida is unconstitutional .

 ( the state of florida chose not to appeal the eleventh circuit's ruling to the u.s. supreme court. ) .

future courts that review similar drug testing programs may look to these decisions for guidance , and they may be useful for lawmakers reviewing proposed legislation that requires individuals to pass drug tests in order to qualify for or maintain governmental benefits .

based on the case law analyzed above , state or federal laws that require drug tests as a condition of receiving governmental benefits without regard to an individualized suspicion of illicit drug use may be subject to constitutional challenge .

drug tests historically have been considered searches for the purposes of the fourth amendment .

for searches to be reasonable , they generally must be based on individualized suspicion unless the government can show a special need warranting a deviation from the norm .

however , governmental benefit programs like tanf , snap , unemployment compensation , and housing assistance do not naturally evoke the special needs that the supreme court has recognized in the past .

the implementation of governmental assistance programs and the receipt of their benefits do not raise similar public safety concerns as those at issue in skinner and von raab .

in implementing these programs , the government also does not clearly act as tutor or guardian for minors , as the court considered important in earls and vernonia .

finally , the evidence in lebron failed to show a pervasive drug problem in the subset of the population subjected to suspicionless testing that strengthened the government's interests in earls and vernonia .

thus , if lawmakers wish to pursue the objective of reducing the likelihood of taxpayer funds going to individuals who abuse drugs through drug testing , legislation is less likely to run afoul of the fourth amendment if it only requires individuals to submit to a drug test based on an individualized suspicion of drug use , for example by providing that only those tanf applicants whom administrators have a "reasonable cause to believe" use illegal drugs be drug tested .

additionally , the way drug testing programs are implemented can affect a court's constitutional analysis of the program .

for instance , until a subsequent administrative rulemaking promulgated in response to issues raised in the district court's preliminary injunction order , florida's section 414.0652 program required positive drug test results to be shared with government officials outside of the tanf program , such that the information ultimately could be made available to law enforcement officials .

as a result , prior to the administrative rulemaking , applicants who failed drug tests under the florida program also could have been subject to criminal drug investigations or investigations of child abuse , in addition to losing their tanf benefits .

this information sharing increased the level of intrusion into the privacy interests of tanf applicants more than if the results were kept confidential to all but the administrators of the tanf program , who had a legitimate need to know the information .

in contrast , the testing programs that complied with the fourth amendment at issue in von raab , earls , and vernonia limited the number of people who had access to the test results , prohibited the results from being passed to law enforcement officials , and restricted the negative consequences of failing a drug test to the specific activities the testing was designed to address ( eg , school extracurricular activities ) .

although they may not have been determinative , these factors reduced the privacy intrusion of the plaintiffs and seem to have played a role in the court's balancing test evaluation .

therefore , governmental drug testing procedures that restrict the sharing of test results and that limit the negative consequences of failed tests to the assistance program in question likely would be on firmer constitutional ground .

