a retrospective of house rules changes since the 110 th congress is the second of two reports on rules changes adopted by the house at the beginning of a new congress .

by practice , the majority party organizes the house .

the majority elects the house's speaker , chairs its committees , holds majorities on its committees , selects its officers , and manages its legislative agenda .

one of the majority's prerogatives is writing the house's rules and using its majority status to effect the chamber's rules on the day the new house convenes .

although each new house largely adopts the chamber rules that existed in the previous congress , each new house also adopts changes to those rules .

it is a feature of the house , but not of the senate , that it adopts rules at the convening of each congress .

the first report in this series , a retrospective of house rules changes from the 104 th congress through the 109 th congress , examined the sources of the extensive rules changes made when republicans won the majority in the house after 40 years of democratic control and presented the republicans' critique of democratic management of the house .

it then grouped the changes made in rules resolutions from the six congresses in which the republicans organized the house into five broad areas — committees , chamber and floor , budget legislation , administration of the house , and ethics standards .

these five broad areas were further subdivided , with the changes grouped by subject or by congress and explained .

the democratic critique of republican management of the house during these six congresses was covered in that report .

this second report in the series picks up with the new democratic majority in the 110 th and 111 th congresses and the republican majority in the 112 th , 113 th , 114 th and 115 th congresses ( the congresses convening in 2007 , 2009 , 2011 , 2013 , 2015 , and 2017 , respectively ) .

it first presents the democratic critique of republican management of the house during the 104 th through the 109 th congresses ; the republican critique of democratic management of the house during the 110 th and 111 th congresses ; and democratic amendments proposed to republican rules packages in the 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses .

the report then groups changes made in rules resolutions from the 110 th through the 115 th congresses into five broad subject areas — committees , chamber and floor , budgetary legislation , administration of the house , and ethics standards .

these five broad areas are again further subdivided , with the changes grouped by subject or congress , and explained .

the two principal parts of this report reflect its two principal purposes .

the first part analyzes the critique by democrats of republican management of the house through the 109 th congress , the critique by republicans of democratic management of the house in the 110 th and 111 th congresses , and democratic policy differences with the republican majority presented during rules debates in the 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses .

in drafting house rules when democrats took the majority in the 110 th congress and republicans in the 112 th congress , each party drew on its critique .

the purpose of this part of the report is to examine these sources of house rules changes .

the second part of the report organizes changes made in the six rules resolutions , and briefly explains the changes in language more readily understood than the language of the rules resolutions .

these changes were included in the rules resolutions adopted at the beginning of the 110 th through the 115 th congresses , separate orders adopted in conjunction with the rules resolutions , and speakers' policy announcements made at the convening of each of these congresses .

the major topical headings for this part of the report are as follows: " rules changes affecting committees " " rules changes affecting the chamber and floor " " rules changes affecting budgetary legislation " " rules changes affecting the administration of the house " " rules changes affecting ethics standards " each of these major headings is further subdivided by topic or by congress .

the purpose of this part of the report is to catalogue and briefly explain by topic — regardless of the location of a topic in one or more rules — specific changes to house rules affecting committees or the house floor in the 110 th through the 115 th congresses .

changes affecting budget legislation , house administration , and ethics are arranged by congress .

this report supplements the official cumulation of rules changes , the house rules and manual .

this volume , printed in each congress to reflect adoption of a rules resolution , contains the provisions of house rules .

for each rule , it also contains the house parliamentarian's notes describing changes to the rule ( or to specific clauses within a rule ) and decisions of presiding officers and the house based upon the rule .

rules in the house rules and manual are arranged by rule number .

citations in this report are generally only to the clause of a rule at the time a change was made ; rules numbers are stable from congress to congress and clause numbers are also generally stable .

changes to the numbering of clauses , paragraphs , and subparagraphs may be found in the parliamentarian's notes .

this report does not describe all of the actions taken during each congress that effected permanent and temporary organizational , procedural , administrative , and other changes in the operation of the house .

because the report's purpose is to catalogue the changes made at the convening of a new house , it examines all rules changes and separate orders in the biennial rules resolutions and in the speaker's biennial announcement of the speaker's policies interpreting or implementing the rules where the speaker has discretion .

in addition to changes made through rules resolutions , changes to rules and procedures are also made through orders and freestanding legislation , as provisions of bills or resolutions , and in report language on legislation and in joint explanatory statements accompanying conference reports .

legislative branch appropriations bills and budgetary legislation contain organizational , procedural , and other changes that are temporary or permanent .

 ( references to selected freestanding bills and resolutions are provided in footnotes in this report. ) .

so - called fast - track or expedited house procedures are included in legislation that otherwise addresses a policy matter .

democratic caucus and republican conference rules and decisions have also had an impact on how specific house rules ( such as rules on suspension of the rules and on committee assignment limits ) are implemented .

in a few instances in this report , changes made by means other than a house rules resolution are described , where necessary to understand changes made in one or more rules resolutions .

in the course of its daily proceedings , the house also adopts special rules and unanimous consent agreements that can adapt its rules for the consideration of one or more measures , proceedings on one or more days , or in another way affect the house's conduct of its affairs .

between the 110 th and 115 th congresses , some committees' names were changed .

in this report , the names of committees appear as they existed in the specific congress referenced .

in footnotes of this report , congressional r ecord references through the 112 th congress are to the bound volumes of the record .

references from the 113 th congress forward are to the daily edition of the record .

the democratic critique of the republicans' management of the house during the republican majority ( 104 th congress ( 1995-1997 ) through the 109 th congress ( 2005-2007 ) ) was principally based on two broad concerns .

the first — ethics — was a theme throughout the time republicans held the majority , and democrats moved quickly when they took majority control in the 110 th congress to change ethics rules and pass new ethics laws .

the second — legislative management of the house — was most fully expressed in the 109 th congress , although democrats made incremental rather than extensive rules changes when they held the majority in the 110 th and 111 th congresses .

democratic control of the house in the last four years of the 21 st century's first decade was brief compared to democratic control before the 104 th congress and to republican control from the 104 th congress through the 109 th congress .

democratic leaders nonetheless established patterns of managing the house that republicans critiqued , campaigned on , and eventually responded to when they claimed the majority in the 112 th congress .

in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2009 ) , republicans sought through two procedural means to change the special rule ( h.res .

5 ) providing for consideration of the rules resolution ( h.res .

6 ) .

first , they proposed an amendment to the special rule , which was not in order once the previous question was moved .

the amendment proposed to write into house rules the legislative components of the democrats' new house principles , as explained above .

second , republicans offered a motion to commit the rules resolution in order to add three prohibitions on special rules that were intended to protect changes republicans had made during their majority .

these prohibitions would have disallowed special rules from waiving the automatic yeas and nays on appropriations measures , measures increasing federal income tax rates , and concurrent resolutions on the budget ; the requirement for a three - fifths vote on a measure increasing federal income tax rates ; and the disallowance of retroactive federal income tax rate increases .

in the 111 th congress ( 2009-2011 ) , republicans again sought to preserve in house rules some of the changes they had made in house rules during their majority .

they offered a motion to commit the rules resolution ( h.res .

5 ) to retain term limits on committee chairs , which the democratic rules resolution proposed to eliminate .

the republicans' motion would also have struck changes to the house rule concerning the motion to recommit proposed in the democratic rules resolution .

republicans' principal critique during the 110 th and 111 th congresses concerned the majority leadership's limiting of opportunities for member input in the manner in which democratic leaders managed the house floor , a criticism democrats had also made of republican legislative management of the house during the republican majority .

republicans criticized the number of bills ( or legislative texts ) that were brought to the floor without committee consideration , the limited number of amendments allowed under structured rules , the number of closed rules , use of procedures that obviated the opportunity to offer the motion to recommit , and the replacement of conference consideration by amendments between the houses .

republicans also criticized the rules committee's democratic majority for their procedural implementation of the majority leadership's legislative strategy: they have rewritten much of the major legislation passed by this congress , sometimes in the middle of the night .

they engineered the exclusion of opposing viewpoints .

they steered around the regular legislative process to support a majority driven by partisan concerns .

when the democratic leadership in 2009 moved to end the consideration of general appropriation bills under open special rules or the open amendment process allowed by house rules , the event triggered additional republican criticism of democrats' legislative management of the house .

they argued that a "central tenet of the [appropriations process] was that every member would have the opportunity to bring their issue before the house…. .

republicans also complained regularly on the house floor of receiving legislative proposals at the last minute .

in addition , both democratic and republican members introduced resolutions to change house rules for the purpose of increasing transparency and adherence to regular order in the legislative management of the house .

republican leaders looked ahead as the 2010 elections drew near to describe how they might manage the house should their party be the majority .

in speaking to the american enterprise institute for public policy research , republican leader john a. boehner proposed a return to the house's regular order for developing and considering legislation: allow more floor debate and amendments , with a presumption that legislation will be considered under an open rule ; make committee - reported legislation the legislative vehicle for floor debate and amendment ; follow house layover rules for legislation ; and require committees to give sufficient notice of measures to be marked up , to webcast proceedings and post transcripts online , and to promptly post online amendments adopted and votes cast .

leader boehner observed in his speech: woodrow wilson once said that 'congress in session is congress on public exhibition , while congress in its committee rooms is congress at work. .

if wilson went from committee room to committee room today , he might take that statement back .

because the truth is , much of the work of committees has been co - opted by the leaderships .

in too many instances , we no longer have legislators ; we just have voters .

similarly , republican whip eric cantor wrote about the centrality of committee work: the legislative agenda ought to reflect the importance of hearings and oversight .

setting aside specific time each week for committees to meet without interruption from floor activities ... would provide a protected , regular time for committees to conduct their important business .

in addressing "transparency" in committee proceedings , republican leader boehner drew on his experience as a committee chair: at education and workforce , we operated with a set of transparency rules that encouraged deliberation and limited problems: first , we gave at least three days' notice on all bills .

actually , we normally went above and beyond this standard , giving about a week's notice on each bill , but three days was the rule .

that gave members plenty of time to gain an appropriate depth of knowledge and scrub each bill for potential landmines .

the 2010 elections again resulted in a switch in majority in the house , beginning with the 112 th congress ( 2011-2013 ) .

in response to the republican rules package for the new congress ( h.res .

5 ) , democrats proposed an amendment to the rules resolution , which could not be offered after the previous question was moved .

this amendment would have overturned the rules resolution provision exempting the extension of certain tax laws from the operation of the statutory pay - as - you - go act .

the ranking minority member - designate of the budget committee argued: [t]his plan guts the existing pay - as - you - go rule that limits mandatory spending and tax breaks that add to our deficits .

it also creates a mechanism to do an end run against the pay - as - you - go law recently signed by president obama that will limit increases in our national debt .

… [t]he rule being proposed … eliminates provisions that say you can't add to the deficit by creating special interest tax breaks .

the proposal before us eliminates that limitation .

a democratic member offered a motion to commit the house rules resolution to add a requirement that a member make a decision on participation in the federal employees health benefits program within 15 days of taking office and that the member's choice be publicly disclosed ; the motion was defeated .

earlier , after the rules resolution had been called up , the delegate from the district of columbia made a motion to refer the resolution to a select committee to study the constitutionality of the provision deleting delegates' voting rights in the committee of the whole from house rules .

the house voted to table the motion .

unlike the democratic critiques in the 104 th through 109 th congresses , the republican critique in the 110 th and 111 th congresses , and the democrats' proposed rule changes in the 112 th congress , the democrats responded to the republican rules package in the 113 th congress ( h.res .

5 ) by proposing amendments to the rules package that related to potentially different policy stances of the two parties rather than to changes in the proposed rules .

on behalf of her democratic colleagues , the democratic floor manager of the rules resolution , rules committee ranking minority member louise slaughter , urged the house to defeat the previous question motion when it was offered so that the minority could propose an amendment to the rules resolution .

the amendment would have made in order the consideration of a joint resolution containing an amendment to the u.s. constitution to overturn the supreme court decision in citizens united and other court cases to allow congress and the states to limit political contributions .

representative slaughter argued: in the years since the supreme court handed down its ruling in the citizens united case , unlimited amounts of money from billionaires and hidden special interests have flooded our elections .

led by secret political spending that is hidden from public view , wealthy special interests have tried to buy our airwaves , to fund outrageously expensive campaigns , and to launch dishonest political attacks to persuade the outcome of countless elections .

... [t]his amendment would finally remove the unlimited and untracked political donations from our electoral system .

the democrats' proposed amendment could not be offered after the previous question was moved .

thereafter , a democratic member offered a motion to commit the house rules resolution in order to include an amendment to it to reduce waiting times in voting lines and to promote early voting opportunities .

the motion to commit with the amendment was rejected .

the question was then taken on the rules resolution and the resolution was agreed to .

earlier in the day , as in the 112 th congress , after the rules resolution had been called up , the delegate from the district of columbia made a motion to refer the resolution to a select committee to study the denial in house rules of delegates' voting rights in the committee of the whole .

the house voted to table the motion .

in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2017 ) , democrats again responded to the republican rules package ( h.res .

5 ) by proposing amendments to it that related to potentially different policy stances of the two parties rather than to changes in the proposed rules .

on behalf of her democratic colleagues , the democratic floor manager of the rules resolution , rules committee ranking minority member louise slaughter , urged the house to defeat the previous question motion when it was offered so that the minority could propose an amendment to the rules resolution .

the amendment would have made in order house consideration of a bill to "modify the rules relating to inverted corporations and to transfer the resulting revenues to the highway trust fund" to make additional money available for infrastructure spending .

representative slaughter explained the amendment thus: it is time to stop rewarding companies that move overseas and , instead , use those dollars to create good - paying jobs here at home and rebuild our nation's crumbling infrastructure .

by closing this loophole and ending the so - called tax inversions , we would raise an estimated $33.6 billion to invest in our roads , railways , and bridges which are falling apart all over the country .

the democrats' proposed amendment could not be offered after the previous question was moved .

in the course of the rules debate , however , democratic members , including democratic leaders , spoke about specific economic policy legislation that they would propose in the 114 th congress .

after the previous question had been moved and debate thereby ended , a democratic member offered a motion to commit the house rules resolution in order to include an amendment making it in order for the house to consider the ceo - employee paycheck fairness act .

the text of this measure , included in the motion to commit , limited corporate deductions for executive compensation with the purpose of addressing "wage stagnation. .

the motion to commit with the amendment was rejected .

the question was then taken on the resolution and the resolution was agreed to .

earlier in the day , once the rules resolution had been called up , delegate eleanor holmes norton made a motion to refer the resolution to a select committee to study the failure of house rules to provide delegates' voting rights in the committee of the whole .

the house voted to table the motion .

over the course of the preceding three congresses , with republicans as the majority party in the house , democrats consistently complained about the number of closed and structured special rules brought to the floor and about specific democratic amendments not made in order for floor consideration .

during the 114 th congress , during debate on some of the special rules reported by the rules committee , democratic members also argued against bifurcated rules and in favor of the consideration of other public policy matters or legislation .

rules committee ranking minority member louise slaughter reiterated this criticism during debate on the 115 th congress rules resolution ( h.res .

5 ) , concluding by saying , "we invite you to bring regular order back to this house and to bring back the barrel of ideas. .

a number of democrats argued against three rules changes made in the rules resolution .

the first change , which generated a number of remarks , allowed the sergeant at arms to levy a fine against a member who breached house decorum with use of an electronic device and , further , added specific conduct that would be considered disorderly and subject to referral to the ethics committee .

 ( see , below , " decorum in the chamber: conduct and electronic devices ." ) .

the republican majority included the change in the rules resolution in response , at least in part , to democratic members' 25-hour "sit - in" on the house floor , spanning june 22-23 , 2016 .

with house cameras turned off during recesses , the participating members used social media and live - streaming to publicize the sit - in , the purpose of which was to demand votes on anti - gun violence legislation following the 49-person massacre in an orlando nightclub on june 12 .

democratic members argued that the change unconstitutionally allowed an officer of the house to punish a member , lacked due process protections , abridged members' rights to debate , and sought to impose a "gag rule" on members seeking action on legislation supported by many citizens but opposed by majority leadership .

once debate on the rules resolution concluded and the previous question had been ordered , representative john lewis offered a motion to commit the rules resolution to strike this change from it .

the motion to commit was rejected .

another change that generated a number of remarks was a standing order that initially appeared as a standing order in the house rules resolution for the 112 th congress and in budget resolutions in the two succeeding congresses .

 ( see , below , " 112th congress " and " 115th congress " under " rules changes affecting budgetary legislation ." ) .

the standing order included in the 115 th congress rules resolution contained an exemption from the standing order that would affect legislation to repeal or reform the patient protection and affordable care act and the health care and education affordability reconciliation act .

democrats attacked the policy implications of the exemption .

they argued that this exemption would allow repeal or reform of the health care law to be done without regard to an expected several - trillion - dollar impact on the federal deficit and that repeal would take away health coverage from many people and drive up premiums for all , harm medicare recipients in a number of ways , and adversely affect the solvency of medicare .

ranking member slaughter announced during debate that she would offer an amendment to the rules resolution , urging members to defeat the previous question so that she could offer the amendment .

the amendment would have added a new paragraph to rule xxi ( "restrictions on certain bills" ) .

the amendment would have prohibited the house from considering a bill , joint resolution , amendment , or conference report that adversely affected health benefits in one of seven ways or that reduced taxes for very wealthy taxpayers or increased taxes for 80% of the population that was comparatively the least wealthy .

representative slaughter explained , "[i]f we defeat the previous question , i will offer an amendment to the resolution that would establish a point of order against any legislation that would undo the requirements of the affordable care act...." the house ordered the previous question , stymieing the offering of the amendment .

the third change also appeared in the rules resolution as a standing order .

the change reintroduced the holman rule , which had been deleted from house rules in 1983 .

the rule allows legislation on an appropriations bill when the effect of the amendment is to "retrench expenditures. .

 ( see , below , " 115th congress " under " rules changes affecting budgetary legislation ." ) .

democrats argued that the rule allows the majority party to circumvent the legislative process in order to "fire or cut the pay" of individual federal employees or groups of employees .

following debate and disposition of the previous question motion and the motion to commit , the house adopted the rules resolution .

earlier in the day , once the rules resolution had been called up on the house floor , delegate eleanor holmes norton made a motion to refer the resolution to a select committee to study the failure of house rules to provide delegates' voting rights in the committee of the whole .

the house voted to table the motion .

this section identifies changes made to the committee system on opening day of the 110 th , 111 th , 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses , pursuant to the resolutions adopting amendments to the rules of the house and establishing separate orders , and pursuant to the speaker's announcements .

rules , sections of rules , and speakers' policy announcements appear when a change occurs .

the section is organized around three topics: ( 1 ) structure and organization , including committee chairmanships and committee assignments , committee jurisdiction , and subcommittees ; ( 2 ) procedure , including committee meetings , committee reports , oversight , and voting ; and ( 3 ) staff and funding .

the 110 th ( 2007-2009 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2011 ) congresses were organized by the democrats ; the 112 th ( 2011-2013 ) , 113 th ( 2013-2015 ) , 114 th ( 2015-2017 ) , and 115 th ( 2017-2019 ) congresses were organized by the republicans .

this section identifies changes made to operations of the house floor on the opening day of 110 th , 111 th , 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses , pursuant to the resolutions amending the rules of the house and establishing separate orders , and pursuant to the speaker's policy announcements .

rules , sections of rules , and speakers' policy announcements appear when a change occurs .

the 110 th ( 2007-2009 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2011 ) congresses were organized by the democrats ; the 112 th ( 2011-2013 ) , 113 th ( 2013-2015 ) , 114 th ( 2015-2017 ) , and 115 th ( 2017-1019 ) congresses were organized by the republicans .

the use of closed and structured special rules has been central to the minority party's critique of the majority's floor management for nearly four decades , but the type of special rule used to govern house proceedings for a specific piece of legislation ( and therefore the degree of deliberation on the house floor ) is largely a matter of majority desires , not of standing house rules .

the house through changes to its standing rules , nonetheless , allows or prohibits specified provisions in special rules .

rules changes in the 110 th through 115 th congresses affecting the chamber and floor have sought to enhance the integrity of proceedings in addressing matters such as admission to the chamber , earmarks , and voting .

rules changes have also addressed consideration of budgetary legislation , which are discussed in this section and the next section .

finally , during the 114 th congress , the house elected a new speaker on october 29 , 2015 .

speaker john a. boehner resigned the speakership effective with the election of a new speaker and resigned from the house , effective october 31 , 2015 .

in addressing the house immediately prior to being sworn in as speaker , representative ryan sought to set a tone for house proceedings .

he said , the committees should retake the lead in drafting all major legislation .

if you know the issue , you should write the bill .

let's open up the process .

let people participate , and they might change their mind... .

in other words , we need to return to regular order .

this section of the report explains rules and separate orders related to budgetary legislation that were included in the rules resolutions for the 110 th through the 115 th congresses .

rules , sections of rules , and speakers' policy announcements appear when a change occurs .

five separate orders that were common to two or more of these congresses are shown in table 1 .

other sources of change to the consideration of budgetary legislation , such as the concurrent resolution on the budget that is often a source of permanent or temporary changes in the budget process , have not been analyzed .

other process changes may have been included in appropriations acts and other freestanding legislation ; those changes are not discussed in this report .

the 110 th ( 2007-2009 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2011 ) congresses were organized by the democrats ; the 112 th ( 2011-2013 ) , 113 th ( 2013-2015 ) , 114 th ( 2015-2017 ) , and 115 th ( 2017-2019 ) congresses were organized by the republicans .

this section of the report explains rules and separate orders related to the administration of the house that were included in the rules resolutions for the 110 th , 111 th , 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses .

rules , sections of rules , and speakers' policy announcements appear when a change occurs .

many administrative changes also took place with the exercise of authority delegated to the committee on house administration and to house officers , by order of the speaker , through entities such as the house office building commission , and in legislation such as the legislative branch appropriations bills .

with few exceptions , these changes are not discussed here .

the 110 th ( 2007-2009 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2011 ) congresses were organized by the democrats ; the 112 th ( 2011-2013 ) , 113 th ( 2013-2015 ) , 114 th ( 2015-2017 ) , and 115 th ( 2017-2019 ) congresses were organized by the republicans .

the 110 th congress , in particular , was the source of numerous additions and changes to ethics rules and laws .

this report analyzes the rules , special orders , and speaker's announcements at the convening of a congress and not all of the actions taken during the 110 th , 111 th , 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , or 115 th congress .

rules , sections of rules , and speakers' policy announcements appear when a change occurs .

 ( for changes affecting the organization of the ethics committee , see " structure and organization " under " rules changes affecting committees " above. ) .

the 110 th ( 2007-2009 ) and 111 th ( 2009-2011 ) congresses were organized by the democrats ; the 112 th ( 2011-2013 ) , 113 th ( 2013-2015 ) , 114 th ( 2015-2017 ) , and 115 th ( 2017-2019 ) congresses were organized by the republicans .

changes made by democrats after they took majority control of the house in the 110 th congress and by republicans after they took majority control in the 112 th congress reflected , in part , critiques of the other party's management of the house .

democrats emphasized changes to ethics rules and laws in their new majority in the 110 th congress , and republicans emphasized changes to legislative procedures in their new majority in the 112 th congress .

both parties addressed budget policymaking , in both rules changes and separate orders .

the jack abramoff scandal in particular put on public trial the interactions between lobbyists on the one hand and members and congressional staff on the other .

the new majority in the 110 th congress responded with many changes to house ethics rules and with new law .

calls during the 111 th congress for more transparency generally and for more time to review legislation to be brought to the floor led to changes in the house's rules in the 112 th congress , such as posting in electronic format the legislative text to be considered on the house floor , and to changes in the house's legislative management , such as some open or modified open rules and some structured rules that allowed more amendments and a new schedule that included some five - day work weeks with regular week - long district work periods .

most standing rules , however , did not change , at all or substantially , when democrats or republicans became the majority , because the rules reflected decades of experience with majority control of the house .

rules facilitate the majority's organization and operation of the house ; they do not dictate to party leaders and others how to run the house — their policy goals or procedural and political strategy — or determine what outcomes can be achieved .

rules changes do not necessarily enable a majority to pass legislation , to keep all the party's members together , to work smoothly with the minority , to achieve the same outcomes as the other body , or to either deliver on or counteract voter sentiments .

in managing the house in the new millennium , each party's majority needed to accommodate an assertive range of perspectives among its members , and to balance the need to govern with the demand of an emboldened minority to be heard .

consequently , the number of open — and modified open — special rules decreased and the number of structured rules increased , a third day for the consideration of legislation by suspension of the rules was added , fewer days were spent in session , more competition over jurisdiction between committees occurred , a number of measures passed by the house could not pass the senate , and convening conferences between the chambers declined in favor of resolving differences through amendments between the houses .

the motion to recommit was used to broadcast a message as much as to offer an alternative .

the majority leadership's influence over committee agendas and its role in drafting or redrafting of major legislation to be considered on the floor continued to increase .

on the one hand , party leadership has increased its control of committees and committee agendas , for example , by leadership's control of the selection of chairs and ranking minority members .

on the other hand , there has been less political overlap between the parties so that leaders may need to look exclusively within their own caucus or conference to build a majority on key votes , and leaders are better positioned than committee chairs to know what legislative provisions will create those majorities .

the churning in the house's membership has also contributed to leadership's influence over legislation .

turnover brings new energy and ideas to the house , and reflects "an immediate dependence on , and an intimate sympathy with , the people" that "frequent elections ... [secure]," as madison explained about the nature of the house of representatives in the federalist papers ( no .

52 ) .

so much turnover in such a large body as the house , however , favors the centralizing efforts of leadership .

during the 109 th congress and in the 2006 election , 60 new members were elected .

during the 110 th congress and in the 2008 election , 67 new members were elected .

during the 111 th congress and in the 2010 election , 105 new members were elected .

during the 112 th congress and in the 2012 election , 75 new members were elected .

high turnover continued in the elections for and during the 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses so that , midway through the first session of the 115 th congress , the median length of service in the house was just over three terms completed — more than half of all representatives were sworn in in the current decade , in 2011 or later .

the work of a representative has also continued to evolve , which , in turn , has meant members of the house have favored efficiency and decisionmaking in floor proceedings so that they have time for their committee work , campaign fund raising , and representational work .

the latter has expanded with the ubiquity of information technology , whereby most members now participate in several social media platforms and must respond rapidly to developments within a relentlessly continuous news cycle .

members also want to maximize the representational time they spend in their districts meeting with constituents , participating in district events , and attending to their political interests , which will include home - state redistricting in conjunction with the 2020 census .

the washington - district schedule put in place in the 112 th , 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses has allowed members time to visit schools , work sites , local government offices , and other places in their districts during those places' regular business hours .

regardless of the cumulative rules changes in the house since the 104 th congress , the house remains one of the two independent political institutions of congress , designed to be so by the framers .

interest balances interest , as noted in the federalist papers ( no .

10 ) , and unless there is majority political will — not necessarily a party majority but a majority of members of each house — to take an action , such as make a specific law , that action will not happen .

one role of congress is to make law , but its larger role is to winnow the proposals about what should be law — because some proposals are bad ideas or lack public support or offend a constituency or cost too much or are impractical or are for some other reason unable to generate the needed majorities .

chamber rules allow opportunities for all members to participate at all stages of the legislative process , in both chambers , building on the framers' system .

looking ahead to the 116 th congress and beyond , rules changes are likely to be incremental rather than extensive with either a democratic or republican majority .

a package of rules changes presented by the majority party would take into consideration the size and composition of the party majority .

the changes would need to balance that fact , and protect minority prerogatives , against the need to govern .

a house majority party would also need to consider majority control of the senate as it contemplates a rules package .

the house majority party might also contemplate the party arrangements and the effectiveness of the president and congress over the past 30 years .

president reagan began with a republican senate and democratic house and ended with a democratic congress .

president george h.w .

bush held office with a democratic congress .

president clinton entered office with a democratic congress and served most of his two terms with a republican congress .

president george w. bush served through 2006 with only a republican congress , except for a portion of the 107 th congress when democrats controlled the senate .

president obama enjoyed democratic control of both houses of congress for two years , but faced a republican house and narrower democratic senate majority in the next years , before republicans controlled both chambers in the 114 th congress .

president trump began his presidency with republican control of both chambers .

presidents have succeeded and failed with their major policy initiatives under each arrangement .

both parties in the house gave attention to their party rules in the 114 th and 115 th congresses , which were intended to open the parties to more voices and perspectives in party decisionmaking .

many members in the democratic caucus are organizing under the "progressive" banner and many members in the republican conference are organizing under the "very conservative" banner , but there are other groups and many viewpoints within both parties .

for members and congress watchers alike seeking to understand the congressional environment , being attentive to the parties' organization and decisionmaking is vital .

the rules of the house do not exist to achieve a specific legislative result .

they are available to all members and to any majority or minority .

many factors besides party control , and the party's use of rules , affect the congressional environment .

to look back in history , speaker thomas bracken reed could be said to have created the modern , majority - minority house with his rulings , but he could not have contemplated how a very strong speaker like joseph cannon would use the speakership to dominate the house .

the corrections calendar was announced with great fanfare when it was created in 1995 ; it had long been moribund when it was terminated in the rules package for the 109 th congress .

the consideration of legislation under suspension of the rules was a minor , relatively infrequent procedure 40 years ago ; now motions to suspend the rules are in order mondays , tuesdays , wednesdays , and , when allowed by special rule , other days of house sessions .

the congressional budget act of 1974 called for two budget resolutions each year ; the procedure was impractical and hugely time consuming and was abandoned .

the house rules — the common language of the house — are very important components of governance , and they exist for all members and all majorities and minorities to use .

