as part of a larger scheme to regulate drugs and other controlled substances , federal law prohibits the cultivation , distribution , and possession of marijuana .

no exception is made for marijuana used in the course of a recommended medical treatment .

indeed , by categorizing marijuana as a schedule i drug under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , the federal government has concluded that marijuana has "no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states. .

yet 18 states and the district of columbia have decriminalized medical marijuana by enacting exceptions to their drug laws that permit individuals to grow , possess , or use marijuana for medicinal purposes .

in contrast to the complete federal prohibition , these 19 jurisdictions see medicinal value in marijuana and permit the drug's use under certain circumstances .

such inconsistencies in federal and state law would generally evoke the constitutional principle of preemption — potentially resulting in a conclusion that because the states permit conduct that the federal government has expressly prohibited , such laws are void as in conflict with the "supreme law of the land. .

this , however , has not been the case .

state laws that exempt from state criminal sanctions the cultivation , distribution , or possession of marijuana for medical purposes have generally not been preempted by federal law .

this unique interplay between state and federal law has led to a seemingly incongruous situation in which both the federal criminal prohibition on marijuana and state medical marijuana exemptions coexist .

accordingly , a resident of california who uses marijuana for medical purposes in compliance with california law is nonetheless simultaneously in violation of federal law and potentially subject to prosecution by federal authorities .

such prosecutions , however , are relatively rare .

the federal government has limited resources to draw upon in investigating and enforcing federal drug laws .

as a consequence , the obama administration has formally suggested that it will not prosecute individuals who use medicinal marijuana in a manner consistent with state laws .

the legal anomaly that defines the use of medical marijuana in the united states raises a number of important constitutional questions — some of which have been answered by the u.s. supreme court , but many of which remain unresolved .

this report will review the federal government's constitutional authority to enact the federal criminal prohibition on marijuana ; highlight certain principles of federalism that prevent the federal government from mandating that states participate in enforcing the federal prohibition ; consider unresolved questions relating to the extent to which state authorization and regulation of medical marijuana are preempted by federal law ; and assess what obligations , if any , the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) has to investigate and prosecute violations of the federal prohibition on marijuana .

prior to considering the significant constitutional questions associated with the interplay between state and federal laws in the context of medical marijuana , the following section provides a description of the csa and a brief discussion of common characteristics found within the wide variety of state medical marijuana laws that have been enacted across the country .

the unique inconsistencies between federal and state approaches to medical marijuana give rise to a series of important constitutional questions .

first , is it within congress's power to prohibit the production , possession , and distribution of marijuana ? .

second , to what extent can the federal government direct states to adopt similar laws or enforce the federal prohibition ? .

third , to what extent are state attempts to authorize and regulate medical marijuana preempted by federal law ? .

and finally , what obligation , if any , does doj have to enforce the federal prohibition ? .

the legal status of state laws respecting the use of medical marijuana remains ambiguous .

although state laws that merely exempt qualified users of medical marijuana from state prosecution have consistently survived preemption challenges , state laws that affirmatively authorize and regulate medical marijuana may pose a more serious "obstacle" to the accomplishment of federal objectives .

notwithstanding the many unresolved questions of preemption , this interplay between state and federal law has prompted a unique legal result .

while an individual may be able to possess , distribute , or cultivate marijuana for limited purposes under state law , that same conduct remains a criminal offense under federal law .

for example , operators of licensed marijuana dispensaries — which may represent legitimate licensed business ventures under state law — are subject to felony prosecutions under federal law at any time .

thus , it appears that it is generally the discretionary restraint of the federal government , in addition to the necessity to prioritize limited resources , that brings some modicum of stability to the interplay between state medical marijuana laws and the federal prohibition on the production , possession , and distribution of marijuana .

