m ore than half of business income is generated by sole proprietorships , partnerships , and s corporations .

businesses that choose one of these organizational forms are often referred to as "pass - throughs" because the income they earn passes through the company to its owners without triggering a business - level tax .

pass - through owners then pay taxes on their share of the business's income according to the individual income tax rates .

in contrast , the income of c corporations is taxed once at the corporate level according to the corporate tax system , and then a second time at the individual - shareholder level .

the fact that pass - throughs are responsible for more than half of business income is important because recent tax reform discussions have included the possibility of lowering the tax burden on these businesses .

proponents suggest that lowering taxes on pass - throughs may increase investment , output , and employment .

on the other hand , lower taxes on pass - throughs could have important consequences on the income distribution and progressivity of the tax system , incentives to characterize labor income as business income , and federal tax revenues .

this report uses a nationally representative sample of individual tax returns to analyze who earns pass - through income .

the report begins with examining who earns pass - through income generally .

the analysis then summarizes the distribution of pass - through income for each type of organization .

recent tax reform proposals are then presented , followed by a review of several considerations that congress may find useful as it continues to debate tax reform .

approximately 28.7 million ( or one in five ) taxpayers reported pass - through business income ( or loss ) totaling more than $687 billion in 2011 .

among those earning pass - through income , the average amount reported was $26,011 .

these figures exclude capital gains income from pass - throughs and farming income .

this section analyzes the distribution of pass - through income by adjusted gross income ( agi ) .

when useful and possible , the analysis also distinguishes between sole proprietorship , partnership , and s corporation income , as well as active and passive income .

figure 1 shows the distribution of pass - through income by several agi groups .

a more detailed distribution , along with the distribution of tax returns reporting pass - through income , may be found in table a - 1 of the appendix .

taxpayers with an agi of $100,000 or greater earned 84% of pass - through income , while accounting for roughly 23% of returns reporting pass - through income .

conversely , taxpayers with agi less than $100,000 earned about 16% of pass - through income , but accounted for 77% of returns with pass - through income .

a significant proportion of pass - through income was concentrated among upper - income earners .

taxpayers with an agi over $250,000 , for example , received 63% of pass - through income , but accounted for just over 6% of returns reporting such income .

those with an agi in excess of $1 million earned about 32% of pass - through income , while filing roughly 1% of all returns reporting pass - through income .

table 1 displays the distribution of pass - through income by business type .

the distribution shows that sole proprietorship income was more evenly distributed across income groups than partnership and s corporation income .

partnership net income was more concentrated among upper income individuals with nearly all of it accruing to taxpayers with agi in excess of $100,000 , including nearly 48% accruing to those with agi over $1 million .

nearly all of s corporation income was also earned by taxpayers with an agi over $100,000 , but a greater share of s corporation income than partnership income was earned by those with an agi over $1 million — about 52% .

table 1 also shows a concentration of net losses for partnerships and s corporations at the lower end of the income distribution .

pass - through income and losses are one component of agi .

thus , if a taxpayer relies primarily on a partnership or s corporation for income , and the business realizes losses , the taxpayer's agi will likely be negative .

there are several scenarios which could explain the losses .

a portion of these losses may be due to start - up businesses that are experiencing losses .

it is also possible that a portion of these losses are due to failing businesses , both new and old .

lastly , some of the losses may be attributable to temporary business disruptions experienced at particular firms .

without more detailed data on the businesses associated with these losses , however , it is difficult to know for certain .

partnership and s corporation income can be separated into active and passive income .

the distinction between the two can be important because passive activity loss rules generally prevent passive losses from offsetting active income .

additionally , active income is exempt from the 3.8% net investment tax that was enacted as part of health care reform , but not imposed until the 2013 tax year .

active income is income resulting from active participation in a business , whereas passive income is income from a business in which the taxpayer did not materially participate .

a business partner involved in the day to day management and operations of the business , for example , would earn active income , while a silent partner who has no involvement in the business outside of possibly financial commitments would earn passive income .

sole proprietorship income is not distinguished in the data used in this analysis .

most sole proprietors , however , will be actively involved in their business ( since they are sole owner ) suggesting that the overwhelming majority of sole proprietor income is active .

figure 2 displays the distribution of active and passive income for partnerships and s corporations .

active income accounts for 76% of partnership income and 90% of s corporation income .

conversely , 24% of partnership income and 10% of s corporation income is passive .

a significant share of passive income from either business type is concentrated among higher income individuals ( see table a - 2 in the appendix ) .

recent tax reform discussions have included lowering the tax rates and tax burden on pass - through income .

most recently , the majority party leaders of the house and senate , along with the trump administration , issued the "unified framework for fixing our broken tax code" on september 27 , 2017 , which proposes limiting the maximum tax rate on pass - through income to 25% .

the house republican conference's "better way" tax reform blueprint , released on june 24 , 2016 , also proposes limiting the tax rate to 25% , but indicates that the lower rate will only apply to active pass - through income .

both proposals also include other changes that could potentially affect pass - throughs , such as the tax treatment of depreciable assets and business interest , as well as the restriction or repeal of other business deductions and credits .

because there is a great deal of uncertainty over exactly how these other changes may be implemented , the considerations presented below are reviewed within the context of reducing the tax rates and the general tax burden on pass - through income .

attention thus far appears to be primarily focused on the effect reducing taxes on pass - through income could have on the economy's performance , both in the short - run and long - run , the progressivity of the tax system , and small businesses .

however , tax experts have also pointed out that the rate reduction could change the incentive for individuals to characterize labor income as business income .

additionally , there is the longer standing question of why the tax code treats businesses differently based on whether they are organized as a pass - through or c corporation , and what effect that has on the complexity of the tax system .

this section discusses each of these issues in turn .

lowering the maximum statutory tax rate on pass - through income would likely stimulate investment in the short - run .

the rate reduction , however , may not stimulate as much new investment as other changes that have been discussed as part of tax reform .

for example , both the unified framework and the better way propose allowing businesses to expense new investments .

expensing may be more stimulative , or at least better targeted , than a rate reduction since expensing would benefit new investments relatively more than rate reductions .

a rate reduction would benefit all pass - through income and thus provide a windfall gain for old investments .

the longer - run effect on the economy from a rate reduction is less clear .

this is particularly true if deficits are predicted to increase .

increased deficits may lead to higher future interest rates as the government competes with the private sector for financing .

additionally , policymakers in the future may grow concerned over the sustainability of deficits and raise taxes in response .

a rise in interest rates or taxes could curtail or offset any positive effect from a tax rate reduction for pass - throughs or tax reform more generally .

still , without more details about the overall reform , it is difficult to determine more precisely what the impact would be in the short - run or the long - run from any changes .

while lowering the tax burden on pass - through income could potentially stimulate the economy , particularly in the short - run , it may also reduce the progressivity of the tax code .

as previously stated , 62% of pass - through income was earned by taxpayers with an agi over $250,000 , and 32% was earned by individuals with an agi in excess of $1 million .

the distributions of partnership and s corporation income were more heavily skewed to the upper end of the income distribution .

as a result , the benefit from lowering taxes on pass - through income is likely to accrue predominately to upper - income individuals .

this would cause the tax system to become less progressive , all else equal .

reducing the tax burden on pass - throughs seems to be partly driven by the assumption that pass - throughs and small business are synonymous .

the data show that this is not the case ; the majority of all businesses are small .

for example , in 2011 , more than 99% of both pass - throughs and c corporations had less than 500 employees , which is the most common employment - based threshold used by the small business administration .

additionally , large firms are responsible for a non - trivial share of pass - through employment .

about 24% of employees at pass - throughs worked at firms with more than 500 employees in 2011 , which is more than the share who were employed at firms with 10 or fewer employees .

if the goal of a particular tax policy is to assist small businesses , then basing the policy on a measure of firm size rather than legal form of organization may enhance its effectiveness .

tax professionals have expressed concern that lowering the tax rate on pass - through business income may encourage some individuals to recharacterize the nature of their income to reduce their taxes .

the unified framework and the better way both propose a maximum tax rate of 25% on pass - through business income .

however , the unified framework would tax labor income at a maximum rate of at least 35% , and the better way would tax labor income at rate up to 33% .

by taxing business income at a lower rate than labor income , employee - owners of pass - throughs may characterize labor income as business income to take advantage of the lower tax rate .

additionally , some individuals may create pass - through businesses through which to direct their compensation so as to benefit from the lower tax rate .

the unified framework and better way plan recognize this potential challenge but do not lay out detailed steps that would be taken to prevent the recharacterization of income .

arguably , a comprehensive tax reform would address the discrepancy that exists in the taxation of corporate and non - corporate businesses .

it is well known that this is not an easy task , but reducing the tax burden on pass - through income alone would not address this discrepancy or the inequity and inefficiencies that exist because two otherwise identical businesses are taxed differently because of their legal structure .

additionally , a rate reduction on pass - through ( or corporate ) income by itself does little to simplify the tax treatment of businesses .

the majority of the complexity in the tax system is the result of special tax incentives such as exclusions , credits , and deductions .

while policymakers have expressed a desire to pare back business tax incentives in exchange for a rate reduction there have not been any detailed proposals to do so during the most recent round of tax reform debates .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) has not provided official revenue estimates for the unified framework or better way proposals as of the date of this writing .

the tax policy center ( tpc ) , however , has conducted a preliminary analysis of the unified framework .

the tpc has estimated that the proposal to limit the tax rate on pass - through income to 25% would generate a revenue loss of $769.6 billion over ten years .

the tpc has also estimated that the rate reduction contained in the better way proposal would lose $412.8 billion over ten years .

the difference in estimates is explained in part by the fact that the tpc assumed that under the better way proposal , characterization of labor income as pass - through income would not occur , whereas it did not make such an assumption for their analysis of the unified framework .

the tax foundation also analyzed the better way plan and found that the rate reduction on pass - through income would cost $515 billion over ten years using a "static" modeling approach , and $388 billion over ten years using a "dynamic" modeling approach .

dynamic revenue estimates incorporate economic feedback effects that can result in a portion of a tax rate reduction's static cost being offset by greater economic activity and thus greater tax revenues .

the tpc also constructed a dynamic estimate for the better way plan , but not for individual provisions .

as the date of this writing the tax foundation had not estimated the cost of the unified framework nor has the tpc conducted a dynamic analysis .

it is important to emphasize that with any estimates made thus far by outside groups they must be interpreted with caution .

because detailed legislative language has not been released , estimators made assumptions about missing details needed to estimate the draft proposals .

changing these assumptions to reflect currently unavailable plan details would likely change revenue estimates , perhaps significantly .

