u.s. interests in the western hemisphere are diverse , and include economic , political , security and humanitarian concerns .

geographic proximity has ensured strong economic linkages between the united states and the region , with the united states being the major trading partner and largest source of foreign investment for many countries .

free trade agreements ( ftas ) have augmented economic relations with many countries in the region , including mexico , chile , peru , central america , and the dominican republic .

latin american nations , primarily mexico and venezuela , supply the united states with almost one - third of its imported crude oil .

the western hemisphere is also the largest source of u.s. immigration , both legal and illegal , with geographic proximity and economic conditions being major factors driving migration trends .

curbing the flow of illicit drugs from latin america and the caribbean has been a key component of u.s. relations with the region and a major interest of congress for almost two decades , and in recent years has included close security cooperation with mexico as that country struggles to combat drug trafficking and related violence .

with the exception of cuba , the region has made enormous strides in terms of democratic political development over the past two decades , but the rise of undemocratic practices in several countries , especially venezuela , has been a u.s. concern .

the united states has often taken the lead in responding to natural disasters in the region , as was demonstrated once again in the aftermath of haiti's catastrophic 2010 earthquake .

pope benedict xvi visited cuba from march 26-28 , 2012 , the first papal visit since the visit of pope john paul ii in 1998 .

the pope's visit coincided with the 400 th anniversary of our lady of charity ( la virgen de caridad del cobre ) , the patron saint of cuba .

after a trip to mexico , the pontiff's visit to cuba began in the eastern city of santiago , where he celebrated mass in the plaza of the revolution , and visited the shrine of our lady of charity in the town of el cobre outside santiago .

the pope then traveled to havana , where he celebrated an outdoor mass in the plaza of the revolution and also met with church and cuban government officials .

while the purpose of the pope's visit was pastoral ( some 60% to 70% of cubans are catholic ) , the trip also highlighted the increased social and political profile of the catholic church in cuba and its efforts in recent years to influence the cuban government .

cuba's catholic church became more openly critical of the cuban government in 1993 when cuban bishops issued a pastoral letter opposing limitations on freedom , excessive surveillance by state security , and imprisonment and harassment of dissidents .

for many observers , the bishops' statement reflected a new era in which the church would be more openly critical of the government .

pope john paul elevated archbishop of havana jaime ortega to the position of cardinal in 1994 , which raised the profile of the church in cuba .

since then , ortega has been widely commended for reinvigorating the cuban catholic church — the role of caritas cuban , the church's social assistance agency , has expanded throughout cuba under ortega .

cuban bishops have not refrained from speaking out on the need for change in cuba , and church publications have become a way for the church to broaden the debate in cuba on social and economic problems facing the country .

beginning in 2010 , the cuban catholic church under cardinal ortega took on a prominent role in engaging with the cuba government over political prisoners .

this led to the release of more than 125 prisoners , with the majority going to spain .

in anticipation of pope benedict's visit , the cuban government pardoned almost 3,000 prisoners in late december 2011 , although only seven were reported to be political prisoners .

today , there are reported to be at least 50 prisoners sanctioned for political reasons , although the government has continued to harass and intimidate dissidents and human rights activists with thousands of short - term detentions .

the death of imprisoned hunger striker wilman villar mendoza on january 19 , 2012 , again focused world attention on cuba's continuing poor human rights situation .

during his march 2012 trip to cuba , pope benedict urged cubans during his homily in santiago "to build a renewed and open society , a better society , one more worthy of humanity , and which better reflects the goodness of god. .

in havana , the pope invoked 19 th century cuban priest father felix varela ( a candidate for sainthood ) as someone who offers a "path to a true social transformation ... to form virtuous men and women in order to forge a worthy and free nation. .

emphasizing reconciliation , the pope asserted that "cuba and the world need change , but this will occur only if each one is in a position to seek the truth and chooses the way of love , sowing reconciliation and fraternity. .

at the end of his visit , in reference to u.s. economic sanctions , the pope criticized "restrictive economic measures , imposed from outside the country," as an "unfair burden to the cuban people. .

some cuban dissidents , as well as some in the cuban american community , criticized the pope for not more forcefully confronting the cuban government during his visit .

the pope did not meet with any dissidents or human rights activists during his visit or speak out about the increased government harassment surrounding his visit .

as a result , some in the dissident community felt the church lost credibility as a result of the pope's visit .

other dissidents , however , emphasize the record of the cuban catholic church in supporting political prisoners and their families and for the support provided to the ladies in white .

they point to the church's role in opening space for increased public dialogue , including criticism of the government , on economic and social issues , through church publications .

the visit of pope benedict could provide the church with more space to speak out on significant economic , social , and political issues facing the country .

given that the catholic church is cuba's largest independent civil society group , it is likely that it will continue to have a significant voice as cuba confronts economic and political change in the years ahead .

on april 14-15 , 2012 , 30 of the western hemisphere's 34 democratically elected leaders gathered in cartagena , colombia for the sixth summit of the americas .

the summits of the americas , which have been held periodically since 1994 , serve as opportunities for the hemisphere's leaders to engage directly with one another and discuss issues of collective concern .

the theme of the cartagena summit was "connecting the americas: partners for prosperity," and its official agenda focused on how physical integration and regional cooperation can assist the countries of the hemisphere in addressing the challenges of poverty and inequality , citizen security , natural disasters , and access to technology .

the hemisphere's leaders were unable to establish a consensus vision for the region and failed to produce a summit declaration as a result of several contentious issues that overshadowed the official agenda .

two issues that often divide the united states from other countries in the region , engagement with cuba and u.s. - backed antidrug policies , were discussed extensively .

all of the leaders present — with the exceptions of president obama and prime minister harper of canada — reportedly voiced support for cuba's inclusion at the next summit of the americas , which is scheduled to be held in panama in 2015 .

on drug policy , the hemisphere's leaders agreed to commission a study from the organization of american states ( oas ) analyzing the results of current efforts and exploring new approaches that may be more effective .

they also agreed to establish a new regional body to help coordinate efforts to combat transnational organized crime .

with regards to the official agenda , the hemisphere's leaders issued a list of 47 commitments involving individual and cooperative efforts to reduce poverty and inequality , improve citizen security , mitigate the effects of natural disasters , integrate physical infrastructure , and expand access to information and technology .

president obama's actions at the cartagena summit suggest he intends to maintain the current direction of u.s. policy toward the region .

he reiterated his pledge from the previous summit to seek partnerships of equality and mutual respect , but remained firmly opposed to changes in u.s. policies concerning cuba and illicit drugs .

likewise , the new initiatives he introduced appear to be relatively limited in scale .

the small business network of the americas initiative , for example , is designed to foster an interconnected network of business development centers to strengthen connections between the region's businesses and increase entrepreneurs' access to financing .

similarly , the women's entrepreneurship in the americas initiative will utilize public - private partnerships to strengthen the skills and capacities of women entrepreneurs , as well as increase their access to financing and markets .

as part of a third initiative , usaid's innovation fund of the americas will solicit proposals and finance projects to find , test , support , and scale cost - effective solutions to the hemisphere's development challenges .

on july 1 , 2012 , mexico held federal ( presidential and legislative ) elections .

turnout reached record levels as 63% of eligible voters cast their ballots .

mexico's federal electoral institute ( ife ) conducted the elections with the oversight of the federal electoral tribunal , which must certify the results by september 6 , 2012 .

while some election observers assert that vote - buying and other irregularities marred the electoral process , observers from the organization of american states generally praised ife's handling of the elections .

as predicted , the centrist institutional revolutionary party ( pri ) that governed mexico from 1929 to 2000 retook the presidency after 12 years of rule by the conservative national action party ( pan ) and won a plurality in the senate and chamber of deputies .

pri / green ecological party ( pvem ) candidate enrique peña nieto , a former governor of the state of mexico , won the presidential election , albeit by a smaller margin than polls had forecast .

peña nieto captured 38.2% of the vote , followed by andrés manuel lópez obrador of the party of the democratic revolution ( prd ) with 31.6% , josefina vázquez mota of the pan with 25.4% , and gabriel quadri of the national alliance party ( panal ) with 2.3% .

the relatively narrow margin of peña nieto's victory , coupled with the fact that lópez obrador has challenged the election results before the electoral tribunal , could complicate the transition period .

and , while pan president felipe calderón has pledged to work with the incoming administration , his party has joined the prd in calling on authorities to investigate whether the pri used any illicit finances to fund peña nieto's campaign .

peña nieto is to take office for a six - year term on december 1 , 2012 .

polls predicted that the pri might also capture a simple majority in one or both chambers of the mexican congress , a feat not accomplished since 1994 .

the pri and the allied pvem party failed to capture a simple majority in either house .

as a result , the pri will have to form cross - party coalitions in order to pass key reforms , particularly those requiring constitutional amendments .

the pri will most likely find support from the panal and possibly the pan , which lost seats in the chamber but retained a powerful bargaining position .

the prd - led coalition , which will now have more seats in the chamber than the pan and remains the third - largest force in the senate , could complicate some reform efforts , including those aimed at increasing private participation in the energy sector , a key priority for peña nieto .

some members of congress may be concerned that the leadership changes resulting from the july 1 , 2012 , mexican elections will significantly impact u.s. - mexican relations , particularly now that the party controlling the presidency has changed .

however , few analysts are predicting that the transition from pan to pri rule will result in seismic shifts in bilateral relations .

during the campaign , enrique peña nieto sought to reassure u.s. policy makers that a pri administration would continue to combat organized crime , while also striving to reduce violence in mexico .

he also expressed support for increased bilateral and trilateral ( with canada ) economic and energy cooperation .

since the elections , peña nieto has said that he is committed to "having an intense , close relationship of effective [security] collaboration measured by results" with the united states .

president obama has congratulated peña nieto on his victory and assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs roberta jacobson has said that u.s. officials "look forward to working with him" after he takes office .

for additional background , see crs report r42548 , mexico's 2012 elections , by [author name scrubbed] .

in venezuela's october 7 , 2012 presidential race , president chávez won reelection by a margin of 11% , receiving 55.07% of the vote compared to 44.31% for opposition candidate henrique capriles , according to the national electoral council .

chávez received almost 8.2 million votes , about 1.6 million more than capriles , who received almost 6.6 million votes .

president chávez won all but two of venezuela's 23 states , including a very narrow win capriles's home state .

unlike the last presidential election in 2006 , venezuela did not host international observer missions .

instead , two domestic venezuelan observer groups monitored the vote .

most reports indicate that election day was peaceful with only minor irregularities .

a white house spokesman , while acknowledging differences with president chávez , congratulated "the venezuelan people on the high level of participation , as well as on what was a relatively peaceful process. .

a state department official added "that the views of the more than 6 million people who voted for the opposition should be taken into account going forward. .

credited with running an effective well - organized campaign that increased the strength of a unified opposition , capriles accepted defeat and congratulated president chávez , but also maintained that being president entails "working to solve the problems of all venezuelans. .

capriles said that he would continue to serve the venezuelan people .

for the opposition , the election showed a significant strengthening of support – it received about 2.2 million more votes than in the last presidential election in 2006 , and its share of the vote grew from almost 37% in 2006 to 44% in 2012 .

if capriles had won the presidency , he would have faced a national assembly still dominated by chávez supporters since the country's next legislative elections are not due until september 2015 .

without legislative support , he would have faced difficulty in making significant policy changes .

for the united states , however , an opposition victory would likely have reduced tensions in bilateral relations and allowed potential progress in the key areas of anti - drug and counterterrorism cooperation .

for president chávez , the election was his fourth presidential victory .

it affirmed his longstanding popular support as well as support for his government's array of social programs that have helped raise living standards for many venezuelans .

in his victory speech , president chávez congratulated the opposition for their participation and civic spirit and pledged to work with them .

at the same time , however , the president vowed that venezuela would "continue its march toward the democratic socialism of the 21 st century. .

with chávez's reelection , it is likely that there will be a deepening of statist economic policies , and some fear that there will be continued erosion of democratic institutions and practices .

under president chávez , it is likely that relations with the united states will continue to be strained as the government continues to espouse an anti - u.s. agenda and close relations with iran .

on the other hand , venezuela's role in supporting colombia's peace process and its increased counternarcotics and security cooperation with colombia could lead to an easing of tension in some aspects of u.s. - venezuelan relations .

post - e lection developments: venezuela's political future became increasingly uncertain when president chávez announced on december 8 , 2012 that his cancer had returned , and that he supported vice president nicolás maduro as his successor if he were unable to continue to lead the country .

several days later , chávez returned to cuba for surgery that was described as complicated .

chávez had undergone significant treatment in cuba for two bouts of cancer in 2011 and earlier in 2012 .

venezuela's constitution ( article 233 ) calls for new elections within 30 days if chávez died before being sworn into office in january 2013 or if he died or had to leave office permanently in the first four years of his new term .

venezuela's opposition would then have another opportunity to compete at the polls , and would be advantaged by not having chávez on the ballot .

in such a scenario , however , sympathy for chávez could also engender support for a chavista candidate aiming to protect chávez's legacy and programs .

for additional background , see crs report r40938 , venezuela: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

