sourcing policy refers , generally , to determining which sector — public ( government ) or private — will perform an agency's function ( s ) .

both federal employees and contractor employees have valid roles to play in performing the work of the federal government .

this combined workforce is known as a blended workforce .

determining which sector will perform which functions , including determining when federal employee performance is , or should be , required can be challenging , however .

efforts to address this issue , and related questions , have been the subject of the federal government's sourcing policy since at least the 1950s .

sourcing policy is not so much a product of coordinated planning and implementation as it is an amalgamation of statutory provisions , policy letters , administrative directives , and guidance issued by various presidential administrations .

sourcing policy has been at the root of contentious debates , which may complicate the somewhat murky picture .

this brief overview of the report is provided to assist in navigating the subject of sourcing policy .

sourcing policy encompasses two major strains .

delving into the history of sourcing policy is necessary for understanding the strain that emerged in the 1950s , and for providing context for the strain that emerged during president barack obama's administration .

the latter strain has not necessarily displaced , or replaced , the former strain , though it might not always be clear to outside observers what actions agencies are taking , or are expected to take .

the complexity might be due , at least in part , to the ad hoc fashion in which sourcing policy has evolved and the mix of government documents involved .

the strain that emerged first , with the issuance of three bureau of the budget ( bob ) bulletins in the 1950s , emphasizes governmental reliance on the private sector for the provision of goods and services .

an unwritten corollary of this strain of sourcing policy has been that certain functions performed by federal employees may be subjected to public - private competition .

a competition determines whether the incumbent workforce would continue to perform the work , or the agency would award a contract to a private company to perform the work .

circular a - 76 , which was issued initially in 1966 , continued this policy of governmental reliance on the private sector and provides guidance and procedures for carrying out public - private competitions .

the office of management and budget has published five revisions to the circular .

the current circular ( or revision ) was released in may 2003 .

generally , the term introduced by the administration of president george w. bush — competitive sourcing — is associated with this strain of sourcing policy .

throughout the history of sourcing policy , only certain functions have been eligible for public - private competitions .

beginning with the bureau of the budget bulletins published during the eisenhower administration , only agency functions identified as commercial may be subjected to public - private competitions .

any agency function designated as governmental ( or , later , inherently governmental ) must be performed by federal employees .

with the continued emphasis on governmental reliance on the private sector finding expression in a "[g]overnment policy [that] has favored contracting for goods and services rather than providing them in - house," the commercial / inherently governmental dichotomy and the focus on public - private competitions sufficed for a number of years .

as the needs of the government expanded over the years , however , contracting for services grew , both in terms of the amount spent on contracts and the types of services provided by contractors .

notably , the federal government's short - term and long - term responses to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , involved a significant growth in service contracting .

the federal government invaded afghanistan and then iraq ; added a new department tasked with safeguarding the homeland ; and embarked upon a raft of new initiatives and programs involving , for example , intelligence , transportation security , and cybersecurity .

determining who should do the work of the federal government became more challenging as , for example , certain practices were called into question ( eg , using companies to conduct passenger screening at airports ) ; controversy swirled around some events that involved private security contractors ( eg , private security guards reportedly shot iraqi civilians in 2007 ) ; and concerns surfaced that , in the rush to expand its capabilities , the federal government was at risk of having contractor employees perform inherently governmental work .

thus , the second strain of sourcing policy that has emerged focuses on ensuring that the federal government has the best , or most appropriate , mix of federal employees and contractor employees .

the obama administration , through guidance issued by the office of management and budget , refers to this strain as multi - sector workforce management .

unlike competitive sourcing , the multisector workforce management strain relies chiefly ( though not entirely ) on an expanded typology of functions and associated guidance to determine who — federal employees or contractor employees — should perform which agency functions .

additions to the existing typology ( commercial functions and inherently governmental functions ) are critical functions and functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions .

according to the obama administration's guidance , multi - sector workforce management was devised to ensure that agencies' reliance on contractors is not excessive .

restated , this strain focuses on ensuring that agencies , not contractors , perform inherently governmental functions , and that agencies retain control over their mission and operations .

this report begins with a history of sourcing policy that focuses on the terms commercial and inherently governmental , and the policy of government reliance on the private sector .

the following section examines the two strains of sourcing policy: competitive sourcing and multi - sector workforce management .

the juxtaposition of the bush administration's competitive sourcing initiative and the obama administration's multi - sector workforce management effort aids in understanding different , yet potentially complementary , facets of sourcing policy .

policy issues that may be of interest to the 112 th congress are also discussed .

the introduction of multi - sector workforce management , combined with the issuance of policy letter 11-01 and the enactment of a statutory provision requiring agencies to develop insourcing guidelines , represents , perhaps , a new chapter in sourcing policy .

it remains to be seen how this strain of sourcing policy , which is predicated on safeguarding the government's missions and operations , might mesh with the longstanding policy of governmental reliance on the private sector .

however , as the federal government addresses budgetary constraints and policy challenges , continued congressional and executive engagement in sourcing policy is anticipated .

the following is a list of selected government documents related to sourcing policy , arranged in chronological order .

u.s. bureau of the budget , "commercial - industrial activities of the government providing products or services for governmental use," bulletin no .

55-4 , january 15 , 1955 .

u.s. bureau of the budget , "commercial - industrial activities of the government providing products or services for governmental use," bulletin no .

57-7 , february 5 , 1957 .

u.s. bureau of the budget , "commercial - industrial activities of the government providing products or services for governmental use," bulletin no .

60-2 , september 21 , 1959 .

u.s. bureau of the budget , "policies for acquiring commercial or industrial products and services for government use," circular no .

a - 76 , march 3 , 1966 .

u.s. bureau of the budget , "policies for acquiring commercial or industrial products and services for government use," circular no .

a - 76 ( revised ) , august 30 , 1967 .

u.s. office of management and budget , "acquiring of commercial or industrial products and services needed by the government ; policy revision," 44 federal register 20556-20563 , april 5 , 1979 .

 ( this is the march 29 , 1979 , revision of circular a - 76. ) .

u.s. office of management and budget , "issuance of omb circular no .

a - 76 ( revised ) 'performance of commercial activities'," 48 federal register 37110-37116 , august 16 , 1983 .

 ( this is the august 4 , 1983 , revision of circular a - 76. ) .

office of federal procurement policy , "inherently governmental functions," policy letter 92-1 , september 23 , 1992 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / procurement_policy_letter_92-01 / .

p.l .

105-270 , federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act , at http: / / www.congress.gov / cgi - lis / togpo / http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / pkg / plaw - 105publ270 / pdf / plaw - 105publ270.pdf .

u.s. office of management and budget , "performance of commercial activities," circular no .

a - 76 , august 4 , 1983 ( revised 1999 ) , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / omb / assets / omb / circulars / a076.pdf .

sean o'keefe , deputy director , u.s. office of management and budget , "performance goals and management initiatives for the fy 2002 budget," memorandum m - 01-15 , march 9 , 2001 , p.1 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / omb / assets / omb / memoranda / m01-15.pdf .

u.s. office of management and budget , "performance of commercial activities," circular no .

a - 76 ( revised ) , may 29 , 2003 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / omb / assets / omb / circulars / a076 / a76_incl_tech_correction.pdf .

p.l .

110-417 , duncan hunter national defense authorization act , fy2009 .

 ( §321 required , among other things , the office of management and budget to develop a single consistent definition of "inherently governmental." ) .

president barack obama , "government contracting," memorandum to the heads of executive departments and agencies , march 4 , 2009 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / the_press_office / memorandum - for - the - heads - of - executive - departments - and - agencies - subject - government / .

peter r. orszag , director , u.s. office of management and budget , "managing the multi - sector workforce," july 29 , 2009 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / omb / assets / memoranda_fy2009 / m - 09-26.pdf .

office of federal procurement policy , "work reserved for performance by federal government employees," 75 federal register 16188 , march 31 , 2010 , at http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / pkg / fr - 2010-03-31 / pdf / 2010-7329.pdf .

 ( proposed policy letter ) office of federal procurement policy , "publication of the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) policy letter 11-01 , performance of inherently governmental and critical functions," 76 federal register 56227 , september 12 , 2011 , at http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / pkg / fr - 2011-09-12 / pdf / 2011-23165.pdf .

 ( final policy letter ) section 2.101 ( b ) of title 48 of the code of federal regulations .

 ( this section contains a definition of inherently governmental . ) .

subpart 7.5 of title 48 of the code of federal regulations .

