one question often asked after the supreme court's decision in citizens united v. fec , which struck down prohibitions in the federal election campaign act ( feca ) on corporations using their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures and electioneering communications , is whether businesses may deduct the amounts spent on these activities .

independent expenditures are communications "expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate" that are not coordinated with any candidate or party .

electioneering communications are broadcast , cable , or satellite transmissions that refer to a clearly identified federal candidate and are aired within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

post - citizens united , corporations may now use their general treasury funds to make these expenditures directly , as well as to contribute to entities ( eg , super pacs , trade associations , and 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) groups ) that engage in these types of activities .

notably , the federal ban on corporate contributions to political candidates and parties remains in effect .

section 162 ( a ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) allows a deduction for "ordinary and necessary" business expenses .

however , section 162 ( e ) generally prohibits taxpayers from deducting campaign and lobbying expenditures as a business expense .

specifically , section 162 ( e ) , which has existed long prior to citizens united , disallows a deduction for amounts paid or incurred in connection with influencing legislation ( including bills , constitutional amendments , and public referenda and initiatives ) through communication with a member or employee of a legislative body or a government official or employee who participates in formulating legislation ; participation or intervention in any political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to a candidate for public office ; attempts to influence the general public with respect to elections , legislative matters , or referenda ; and any direct communication with a covered executive branch official in an attempt to influence his or her official actions or position .

there are exceptions for local legislation and qualifying small amounts .

thus , when determining whether an expenditure is deductible , the first question is whether it qualifies as an "ordinary and necessary" business expense .

an expense is generally treated as "ordinary" if it is not a capital expenditure and "necessary" if it is appropriate for carrying on a trade or business or in the production of income .

if the expenditure meets this criteria , then the question becomes whether section 162 ( e ) disallows the deduction .

absent section 162 ( e ) , whether a campaign - related expenditure could qualify as an ordinary and necessary business expense would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case .

the following discussion analyzes whether any such expenditure could actually be deducted in light of section 162 ( e ) .

some have suggested that the supreme court's analysis in citizens united might raise questions about whether irc section 162 ( e ) is constitutional .

the arguments appear to be that the tax laws cannot disallow a deduction for activities that the supreme court has held are protected speech or provide beneficial tax treatment to only some types of speech ( eg , non - political business speech , the expenditures for which may be deductible ) .

as discussed below , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of a provision similar to section 162 ( e ) , and it is not clear citizens united would impact that analysis .

congress has broad powers to tax under the constitution .

in general , tax distinctions and classifications are constitutionally permissible so long as "they bear a rational relation to a legitimate governmental purpose. .

the rational basis standard is a low level of review by a court .

in the tax context in particular , courts typically show great deference in recognition of "the large area of discretion which is needed by a legislature in formulating sound tax policies. .

at the same time , not all exercises of congress's taxing power receive such deference .

sometimes , tax provisions are subject to higher levels of scrutiny .

for example , tax provisions based on the content of speech are , like non - tax provisions , subject to strict scrutiny .

a provision subject to this highest level of scrutiny must be necessary to serve a compelling government interest and be narrowly drawn to achieve that end .

this is a heavy burden for the government to meet .

the decision by congress to deny a deduction for certain business expenses , while allowing a deduction for others , appears to be well within its broad taxing powers and subject to minimal review by a court .

as the court has explained , deductions of trade or business expenses "may , to be sure , be disallowed by specific legislation , since deductions , are a matter of grace and congress can , of course , disallow them as it chooses. .

it might , nonetheless , be argued that a more rigorous analysis should apply when , as here , a deduction is disallowed for expenditures related to the exercise of a constitutional right .

however , the supreme court has held there is no requirement for the federal government to subsidize the constitutional rights of taxpayers .

in cammarano v. united states , the court upheld the validity of a tax regulation ( in effect prior to irc section 162 ( e ) ) that disallowed a business deduction for lobbying expenditures .

the taxpayers had been denied a deduction for amounts paid to a professional organization to lobby against a state initiative that would have had dire consequences for their business .

they argued the disallowance violated the first amendment , relying on a previous case , speiser v. randall .

in speiser , the court had struck down a state property tax exemption that required taxpayers to take a loyalty oath on the grounds that the state's tax administration procedures did not afford adequate due process .

in striking down the provision that was clearly "aimed at the suppression of dangerous ideas," the court emphasized its chilling effect on the proscribed speech and equated it to a fine for engaging in that type of speech .

in cammarano , the court rejected the claim that speiser was controlling , reasoning that the nondiscriminatory disallowance of a deduction for lobbying expenditures was different because , unlike the provision in speiser , it was not intended to suppress dangerous ideas .

instead , the court explained , the taxpayers "are not being denied a tax deduction because they engage in constitutionally protected activities , but are simply being required to pay for those activities entirely out of their own pockets , as everyone else engaging in similar activities is required to do under" the tax laws .

the court further explained that the disallowance "express[ed] a determination by congress that since purchased publicity can influence the fate of legislation which will affect , directly or indirectly , all in the community , everyone in the community should stand on the same footing as regards its purchase so far as the treasury of the united states is concerned. .

in a subsequent case , regan v. taxation with representation of washington , the court addressed a similar issue in upholding the federal tax law that limits the lobbying of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations to "no substantial part" of their activities .

the court rejected the argument that the limitation infringed on the organization's first amendment rights .

rather , the court , noting it had held in cammarano that the first amendment does not require the federal government to subsidize lobbying , explained that "congress has merely refused to pay for the lobbying out of public moneys" and stated that it "again reject[s] the notion that first amendment rights are somehow not fully realized unless they are subsidized by the state. .

the above subsidization analysis would seem to apply to section 162 ( e ) , which is similar to the regulation at issue in cammarano .

using such an analysis , a court would likely find section 162 ( e ) to be constitutional .

it is not clear that citizens united changes this conclusion .

the court's holding in citizens united does not expressly address the constitutionality of section 162 ( e ) .

any argument that the decision suggests section 162 ( e ) might be an unconstitutional burden on free speech appears debatable in light of the subsidization rationale expressed in cammarano .

in other words , it is not at all clear the holding in citizens united that the government may not ban corporations from engaging in certain political speech requires the government to subsidize that speech .

furthermore , there might be some question as to the extent to which a court would extend the citizens united analysis , in which the court found the government's anti - distortion , anti - corruption , and shareholder protection concerns insufficient to support the ban on corporate political speech , to section 162 ( e ) , which does not prohibit speech or distinguish among taxpayers based on corporate status .

thus , until a court speaks to the issue , it seems premature to conclude that section 162 ( e ) is unconstitutional based on citizens united .

