since the enactment of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) in 2010 , religious institutions have raised concerns regarding the applicability of certain statutory provisions that would require the coverage of health services to which religious organizations may object .

specifically , health plans offered by employers and health insurers must cover certain recommended preventive health services without cost sharing ( eg , charging a co - payment or deductible ) to patients for such services .

following enactment of aca , the u.s .

departments of health and human services ( hhs ) , labor , and treasury issued interim final regulations that required coverage for a range of preventive services .

the resulting rules and related guidance included coverage of contraceptive methods .

this requirement has generated controversy and debate involving religious groups who oppose contraception based on their religious beliefs .

hhs , labor , and treasury have issued final rules to exempt certain religious employers from complying with the requirement that health plans include contraceptive services .

however , the controversy has intensified over the scope of the exemption , which appears to apply to churches , but potentially not other religiously affiliated institutions such as universities , hospitals , and social service providers .

this report will analyze the legal implications for the preventive services requirements and the potential penalties faced by religious organizations that do not comply with the rule .

it also examines proposed legislative options and examples of religious exemptions in existing state and federal law .

aca , as amended , greatly expanded the scope of federal regulation over health insurance provided through employment based group health coverage , as well as coverage sold in the individual insurance market .

federal health insurance standards created by aca require , among many other things: an extension of dependent coverage to age 26 if such coverage is offered ; the elimination of preexisting condition exclusions ; a bar on lifetime annual limits on the dollar value of certain benefits ; and a prohibition on health insurance rescissions except under limited circumstances .

section 2713 of the public health service act ( phsa ) , as added by aca and incorporated under section 715 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) and section 9815 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) , requires group health plans and health insurance issuers that offer group or individual health insurance coverage to provide coverage for certain preventive health services without imposing any cost sharing requirements .

section 2713 ( a ) ( 4 ) indicates that such services will include "with respect to women , such additional preventive care and screenings ... as provided for in comprehensive guidelines supported by the health resources and services administration...." following the enactment of aca , hhs commissioned the institute of medicine ( iom ) to recommend preventive services that should be considered in the development of comprehensive guidelines .

the iom made its recommendations in a july 19 , 2011 report .

among the iom's recommendations was coverage of "the full range of food and drug administration - approved contraceptive methods , sterilization procedures , and patient education and counseling for women with reproductive capacity. .

on august 1 , 2011 , hhs , labor , and treasury ( the departments ) published guidelines based on the iom's recommendations .

the guidelines are supported by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) .

interim final regulations that address the coverage of preventive health services were first published in the federal register on july 19 , 2010 .

on august 3 , 2011 , in response to comments received about these regulations , an interim final rule that amended the july 19 , 2010 regulations was published .

most notably , the interim final rule provides hrsa with the authority to exempt "religious employers" from the preventive health services guidelines "where contraceptive services are concerned. .

a definition for the term "religious employer" was added by the interim final rule: [a] "religious employer" is an organization that meets all of the following criteria: ( 1 ) the inculcation of religious values is the purpose of the organization ; ( 2 ) the organization primarily employs persons who share the religious tenets of the organization ; ( 3 ) the organization serves primarily persons who share the religious tenets of the organization ; and ( 4 ) the organization is a nonprofit organization as described in section 6033 ( a ) ( 1 ) and section 6033 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) ( i ) or ( iii ) of the internal revenue code of 1986 , as amended .

this definition was criticized by some for being so narrow that many religious institutions that provide health , educational , or charitable services would likely not be considered religious employers for purposes of the exemption .

the departments received over 200,000 comments on the amended interim regulations , with some commenters urging a broader definition for the term "religious employer. .

on february 15 , 2012 , the departments published final rules on the coverage of contraceptive services .

the final rules provide for the adoption of the definition established in the august 3 , 2011 interim final rule .

in response to those who urged a broader exemption that would include religiously affiliated employers that may not qualify as "religious employers" under the definition , the departments noted: a broader exemption ... would lead to more employees having to pay out of pocket for contraceptive services , thus making it less likely that they would use contraceptives , which would undermine the benefits [of requiring coverage of contraceptive services without cost sharing] .

at the same time , however , the departments provided for a temporary enforcement safe harbor for non - exempted , nonprofit organizations with religious objections to contraceptive coverage .

during the safe harbor , the departments plan to develop and propose changes to the final regulations that would accommodate these nonprofit organizations: specifically , the departments plan to initiate a rulemaking to require issuers to offer insurance without contraception coverage to such an employer ( or plan sponsor ) and simultaneously to offer contraceptive coverage directly to the employer's plan participants ( and their beneficiaries ) who desire it .

under this approach , the departments will also require that , in this circumstance , there be no charge for the contraceptive coverage .

in guidance issued by hhs , the agency explained that the temporary enforcement safe harbor will be in effect until the first plan year that begins on or after august 1 , 2013 .

the guidance indicates that organizations that meet all of the following criteria will not be subject to enforcement action for failing to provide contraceptive coverage in a group health plan that it establishes or maintains: ( 1 ) the organization is organized and operates as a non - profit entity .

 ( 2 ) from february 10 , 2012 onward , contraceptive coverage has not been provided at any point by the group health plan established or maintained by the organization , consistent with any applicable state law , because of the religious beliefs of the organization .

 ( 3 ) the group health plan established or maintained by the organization provides to participants notice , as prescribed in the guidance , that states that contraceptive coverage will not be provided under the plan for the first plan year beginning on or after august 1 , 2012 .

 ( 4 ) the organization self - certifies that it satisfies the aforementioned criteria and documents its self - certification in accordance with procedures prescribed in the guidance .

finally , the guidance maintains that the department of labor and the department of the treasury will also not take any enforcement action against an organization that complies with the conditions of the temporary enforcement safe harbor .

one of the most controversial issues related to the final rules is whether the exemption for religious employers comports with established principles that protect the religious freedom of churches and other religiously affiliated organizations .

both constitutional and statutory rules govern whether an exemption would be required and what the scope of that exemption may be .

the first amendment's religion clauses serve as a guarantee that individuals and entities will neither be required to act under a prescribed religious belief ( the establishment clause ) , nor be prohibited from acting under their chosen religious beliefs ( the free exercise clause ) .

the religious freedom restoration act of 1993 ( rfra ) requires that federal actions that substantially burden religious exercise must have a compelling governmental interest and be narrowly tailored to meet that interest .

courts have generally held that religious exemptions are not constitutionally required for laws and regulations that do not specifically target religious exercise .

however , such exemptions may be enacted by congress or promulgated by an agency as a matter of public policy .

thus , religious exemptions to requirements for health benefits coverage are generally regarded as permissible , but not required .

employers that object to contraceptives coverage requirements and do not qualify for an exemption may refuse to offer the required coverage .

while aca does not expressly include enforcement tools , such as judicial review or penalties , that may be imposed for violating the preventive health services requirement , this requirement was added to the phsa and incorporated into erisa and the irc , and it seems that enforcement may be carried out through mechanisms in those statutes .

furthermore , employers who do not cover contraceptives may face potential liability under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , as some courts have indicated that denying coverage may constitute sex discrimination .

bills that would exempt individuals and entities with religious objections from the coverage of contraceptive and sterilization services have been introduced in the house and senate .

the proposed legislation would amend section 2713 of the public health service act to exempt individuals and entities from requirements related to contraceptive or sterilization service if those individuals and entities have a religious objection to such services .

the bill states no guideline or regulation issued pursuant to subsection ( a ) ( 4 ) , or any other provision of the patient protection and affordable health care act , or the amendments made by that act ( p.l .

110-148 ) , shall — ( a ) require any individual or entity to offer , provide , or purchase coverage for a contraceptive or sterilization service , or related education or counseling , to which that individual or entity is opposed on the basis of religious belief ; or ( b ) require any individual or entity opposed by reason of religious belief to provide coverage of a contraceptive or sterilization service or to engage in government - mandated speech regarding such service .

the proposed exemption provided in the bill is very broad .

it would apply to individuals and entities , regardless of their affiliation with a religious institution , the purpose or mission for which they are organized , or the religious nature of the business or operations of the entity .

religious exemptions already existing in federal law for religious organizations generally require that organizations seeking exemption demonstrate at least some of these characteristics in order to qualify .

the breadth of the exemption , as discussed earlier in this report , is a matter of congressional discretion .

it seems that the groups apparently omitted from the current rule's exempted employers , that is , universities and hospitals , would be covered by this exemption .

on the other hand , an exemption with few parameters may allow an unintended range of employers to avoid compliance with the coverage requirements .

as courts have noted , a broad exemption may allow the religious beliefs of an employer to be imposed on employees who do not share those beliefs .

it should also be noted that widely applicable exemptions may be seen to undermine the goals of the original legislation .

the respect for rights of conscience act would amend aca to exempt health plans from the mandatory preventive services coverage rule with respect to any item or service , if covering that item or service would violate the religious beliefs or moral convictions of the group health plan issuer , group health plan sponsor , or any other entity offering the plan .

it does not appear that this exemption would be limited to only those religious employers that meet explicitly enumerated criteria , as is currently required .

for example , if the respect for rights of conscience act were enacted , it is likely that a hospital or university affiliated with a church would be exempt from covering prescription contraceptives if such coverage conflicted with the teachings of that church , even though the hospital or university would not qualify as a religious employer under the final rules of the departments .

in the case of health plans on the individual market , plans would also be exempt if coverage of the relevant items or services would be contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of the purchaser or beneficiary of the health plan .

for example , if a self - employed individual who had no objection to prescription contraceptives sought an individual policy to cover herself and her family , the health plan would still not be required to cover prescription contraceptives if such coverage were contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of another member of her family covered under the policy .

however , this provision would only be applicable to plans offered in the individual market .

consequently , a plan offering group coverage would not appear to be exempt from covering a particular item or service solely because an individual covered by the plan had religious or moral objections to the coverage of that particular item or service ; to be considered exempt , the group health plan would also need to show that the issuer , plan sponsor , or other entity offering the plan objected to covering the item or service .

the respect for rights of conscience act would also affect coverage requirements imposed as part of the essential health benefits ( ehb ) package , designated by the secretary of hhs .

beginning in 2014 , current law requires health insurance issuers to ensure that coverage offered in the individual or small group market includes coverage of all ehbs .

additionally , plans must cover all ehbs in order to be sold through the american health benefit exchanges , and to be eligible for the premium subsidies offered to households with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty level .

if enacted , the respect for rights of conscience act would permit health plans to avoid any coverage requirement imposed as an ehb , if providing coverage of the item or service would be contrary to the religious beliefs or moral convictions of the health plan , the sponsor of the health plan , or another entity offering the plan .

as with the final rules , health plans in the individual market would also be able to decline to cover items or services to which the purchaser or beneficiary of the plan objects .

in addition to the protections for health plans described above , the respect for rights of conscience act includes conscience protections for health care providers .

specifically , it would prohibit any provision in title i of aca from being construed to require a health care provider to provide , participate in , or refer for any specific item or service that is contrary to the provider's religious beliefs or moral convictions .

the respect for rights of conscience act would also provide an explicit private right of action to enforce the rights of refusal that would be created by the bill .

the federal courts would be given jurisdiction to hear such actions , and to award all forms of legal or equitable relief , specifically including temporary or permanent injunctive relief , declaratory relief , damages , costs , and attorneys' fees .

suits may be brought by the attorney general of the united states , or any other person having standing to complain of a violation .

as discussed above , a refusing health plan would not be subject to penalties for failing to provide ehbs or required preventive services under the final rules .

however , the respect for rights of conscience act does allow some financial consequences to fall on refusing health plans .

specifically , if a health plan declines to cover a required service , based on a religious or moral objection , the secretary of hhs may issue regulations or other guidance to ensure that such plans maintain an aggregate actuarial value that is at least equivalent to health plans that do not exclude coverage of those items .

under such authority , the secretary of hhs might require that a health plan that refused to cover prescription contraceptives reduce the deductibles or co - pays applicable to services that are covered in order to provide the same actuarial value as plans that cover prescription contraceptives .

a number of religious exemptions have been enacted to legislative mandates , both in the context of state requirements for contraceptive coverage and other unrelated contexts .

these may be useful in congress' consideration of whether to grant a statutory exemption to the preventive health services requirements .

section 1402 ( g ) ( 1 ) of the irc provides an exemption from self - employment income tax for individuals with certain religious objections to insurance coverage .

it also provides the basis for the exemption from the individual coverage requirement in the aca .

the section 1402 ( g ) ( 1 ) exemption applies if the individual seeking exemption: is a member of a recognized religious sect or division thereof and is an adherent of established tenets or teachings of such sect or division by reason of which he is conscientiously opposed to acceptance of the benefits of any private or public insurance which makes payments in the event of death , disability , old - age , or retirement or makes payments toward the cost of , or provides services for , medical care.... alternatively , section 702 of title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 provides an exemption from the prohibition against religious discrimination in employment decisions .

it has been replicated in other nondiscrimination legislation , for example , the americans with disabilities act .

section 702 applies to: a religious corporation , association , educational institution , or society with respect to the employment [i.e .

hiring and retention] of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation , association , educational institution , or society of its activities .

however , the terms religious corporation , association , educational institution , or society are not defined , and there is no definitive standard in judicial decisions to determine whether an organization qualifies for the exemption .

the supreme court declined to review a case that would have provided an opportunity to announce a uniform standard in 2011 .

however , lower courts have considered several factors when deciding whether an organization qualifies for the exemption: ( 1 ) the purpose or mission of the organization ; ( 2 ) the ownership , affiliation , or source of financial support of the organization ; ( 3 ) requirements placed upon staff and members of the organization ( faculty and students if the organization is a school ) ; and ( 4 ) the extent of religious practices in or the religious nature of products and services offered by the organization .

these examples are generally available exemptions , such that any member of any religious organization with the beliefs described in the provision would qualify , and do not state specific religious groups with which objectors must be associated .

the supreme court has held that these models are constitutionally permissible .

twenty - eight states have enacted laws which have been interpreted to require insurers to cover contraceptives in the same way as other prescription drugs may be covered .

these states have adopted varying approaches to define the scope of entities that may be exempt from the mandates based on religious or moral objections .

table 1 provides a description of the definition used in each state with a contraceptive mandate .

these definitions can be separated into four general categories , although there are variations among the states within each category .

first , nine of the 28 states with some form of a contraceptive mandate provide no explicit exemption based on religious or moral objections .

however , in many instances , the mandate may be avoided by refraining from offering prescription drug coverage generally , or by seeking regulation under erisa .

second , eight of the remaining 19 states that do exempt some religious entities define the scope of exempt religious entities using some variation of a multi - pronged test , requiring some or all of the following criteria to be met: 1 .

the entity's purpose must be the inculcation of religious values ; 2 .

the entity primarily must employ members of the same religion ; 3 .

the entity primarily must serve members of the same religion ; and 4 .

the entity must be a church , an integrated auxiliary of a church , a convention or association of churches , or engaged in the exclusively religious activities of any religious order under section 6033 of the irc .

this multi - pronged definition resembles the definition adopted in the final rules , which requires all four prongs to be satisfied .

three of these eight states , california , new york , and oregon , also require all four prongs to be met in order to qualify as exempt from the respective state contraceptive coverage mandate on the grounds of a religious objection .

the remaining five states ( arizona , arkansas , hawaii , michigan , and north carolina ) only require two or three of these criteria , in different combinations , to be met .

for example , arizona does not require an entity's purpose to be the inculcation of religious values in order to be exempt , while north carolina does not require exempt entities to serve primarily members of the same religion .

in the third category are six states ( connecticut , new jersey , maine , massachusetts , rhode island , and west virginia ) which use definitions that incorporate the definition of "church" under the federal income contributions act ( fica ) .

the fica definition includes churches , conventions or associations of churches , or elementary or secondary schools which are controlled , operated , or principally supported by a church or by a convention or association of churches .

finally , five states ( delaware , maryland , missouri , nevada , and new mexico ) provide an exemption for religious employers or entities , but do not further define what a religious entity is or provide a specific test to be used .

