autism spectrum disorder ( asd ) and autism are general terms for a group of developmental disabilities that cause impairments in social skills and communication , and are often characterized by certain atypical behaviors .

autism spectrum disorders include autistic disorder , asperger disorder , and pervasive developmental disorder - not otherwise specified .

these conditions have overlapping symptoms that differ in terms of onset , severity , and nature .

asds are referred to as "spectrum disorders" because they encompass a range of behaviorally defined conditions .

the complex nature of these conditions creates diagnostic challenges ; there are no consistent genetic or biologic markers to facilitate diagnosis .

autism has been linked to abnormal biology and chemistry in the brain ; however , the cause or causes of these abnormalities remain unknown .

according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , as many as 1 in 110 eight - year - olds currently have an autism spectrum disorder , with boys affected more than four times as often as girls .

this represents an increase from past autism rates , and has generated public interest in the causes of autism .

the increased prevalence has also focused attention on the demand for effective treatment and support services for individuals with these conditions .

in addition , some have questioned whether the current rates of asd reflect increased awareness and diagnosis , a true increase in the incidence of asd , or a combination of these factors .

for many , autism is a lifelong illness whose symptoms often manifest before age three .

autistic children and adults generally display a unique set of symptoms , but common traits associated with autism include difficulty talking , repeated behaviors , and aversion to loud noises .

asd impedes an individual's communication skills , making it difficult to learn or to integrate socially .

there are no medical treatments for autism itself ; however , medications and behavioral therapy can help mitigate certain symptoms .

while there is currently no known cause or cure for autism , research to determine the cause or causes may identify risk factors , some of which may be modifiable .

other studies may determine optimal methods of screening and diagnosis , identify the most effective mental and behavioral health therapies , and find the best medical treatments for individuals with asd .

the federal government has a role in the financing ( through medicaid and state children's health insurance programs ) and delivery ( through funding of developmental disabilities programming in schools , title v maternal and child health funding , and other sources ) of treatment for asd .

the number of cases and their appropriate diagnosis and treatment affect federal and state expenditures .

as such , congress has shown interest in financing research on asd prevalence , causes , and optimal treatment for individuals with asd .

this interest in asd surveillance and research has been demonstrated through inclusion of autism research provisions in the children's health act ( cha , p.l .

106-310 ) in 2000 , enactment of the combating autism act in 2006 ( caa , p.l .

109-416 ) , and the recent enactment of the combating autism reauthorization act ( cara , p.l .

112-32 ) by the 112 th congress .

this report presents an overview of the caa and cara , department of health and human services ( hhs ) funding and activities under the caa and cara , other federal activities related to autism , and selected issues for congress .

the precursor to the caa was the children's health act of 2000 ( cha ) , which addressed a number of child health issues .

title i of the cha authorized the secretary of hhs ( the secretary ) to conduct certain activities relevant to autism and developmental disabilities .

it established funding for autism surveillance at cdc and established the national center on birth defects and developmental disabilities .

under the cha , the national institutes of health ( nih ) was authorized to expand and intensify its autism research efforts and to establish centers of excellence for autism research .

the cha also established an autism coordinating committee to coordinate research within nih , and authorized funds for hhs to establish and implement an information and education campaign for health care providers and the general public .

enacted in 2006 and subsequently reauthorized by the combating autism reauthorization act of 2011 , the caa is intended to address growing concern about the increasing prevalence of autism spectrum disorders , and to stimulate research into possible autism causes and treatments .

it authorized funding from fy2007 through fy2011 for autism research , screening , early intervention , and education .

cara reauthorized this funding through fy2014 .

the caa authorizes the secretary to expand , intensify , and coordinate existing asd research activities ; to expand surveillance and epidemiological research ; to increase awareness of asd ; and to provide access to screening and early intervention services .

it authorizes expanded research activities at nih , and created the interagency autism coordinating committee ( iacc ) to coordinate all federal autism research efforts ( this expanded the mission of the autism coordinating committee described above ) .

at cdc , the caa authorizes surveillance and establishes asd awareness programs .

at the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , the caa authorizes expanded federal efforts in autism education , early detection , and intervention .

the caa also required a report to congress on implementation and progress four years after enactment , which was provided to congress on january 7 , 2011 .

cara requires a report to congress two years after enactment .

the following sections summarize the programs and funding authorized under the caa and subsequently reauthorized by cara .

funding for caa programs was authorized through fy2011 ; the combating autism reauthorization act ( cara ) , which extends funding at current levels through fy2014 , was signed into law on september 30 , 2011 .

cara authorizes appropriations through fy2014 for caa activities , but does not include funding or authorizations for an expansion of research and / or other services as some autism advocates had requested .

table 1 presents authorizations of appropriations for the provisions of the caa and cara .

the table includes authorizations of appropriations from fy2007 through fy2014 .

table 2 provides details of funding for caa activities , as reported by hhs .

full - year appropriations for fy2013 have yet to be enacted and therefore are not included in table 2 .

however , the six - month fy2013 cr ( p.l .

112-175 , signed into law on september 28 , 2012 ) provided funding at fy2012 levels , increased by 0.612% .

as such , the funding levels for fy2013 are estimates .

for caa activities , fy2012 funding totaled $237 million .

funding for fy2013 activities is estimated at $238 million , a $1 million increase .

caa authorizations and funding are presented in two separate tables because funding for autism - related activities is not specifically limited to the authorizations shown in table 1 , and may be more or less in a given year .

in addition , agencies typically do not have disease - specific budget lines .

autism - related activities may also be funded at cdc and nih through general authorizations .

the information on agency level spending in table 2 is compiled from the moyer report , a report published by the hhs office of the assistant secretary for financial resources .

the moyer report presents information as reported by the agencies on spending for selected diseases and conditions , including autism .

federally funded autism research not authorized under the caa , including activities carried out by the departments of defense and education , is discussed below in the section " other federal activities related to autism research . .

the activities carried out by cdc , hrsa , and nih under the caa are summarized below .

as discussed previously , cdc focuses on surveillance and epidemiological research , nih on basic science and research coordination , and hrsa on autism education , detection , and early intervention .

for further detail on agencies' autism - related activities and publications , refer to the iacc's report to congress on activities related to autism spectrum disorder and other developmental disabilities under the combating autism act of 2006 .

federal funding for autism research is not limited to the combating autism act , and is supported by the department of defense and the department of education in addition to hhs .

many of the stakeholders in the iacc do not receive funding under the caa , but through their participation in autism research , these stakeholders have an interest and a guiding role .

following is a brief description of the autism - related research activities of the other federal participants in the iacc .

in 2010 , the iacc conducted an analysis of autism research spending by private and federal entities that are represented on the iacc .

analysts found that private entities funded 24% of autism research in the united states in 2009 , while the federal government funded 76% .

the report also gauged the relevance of the funded projects to the topic areas that were identified in the iacc strategic plan .

these objectives for 2009 were ( 1 ) when should i be concerned ? .

 ( 2 ) how can i understand what is happening ? .

 ( 3 ) what caused this to happen and can it be prevented ? .

 ( 4 ) which treatments and interventions will help ? .

 ( 5 ) where can i turn for services ? .

 ( 6 ) what does the future hold , particularly for adults ? .

 ( 7 ) what other infrastructure and surveillance needs must be met ? .

the vast majority ( 95% ) of asd research aligned with research questions in the iacc strategic plan , with the largest proportion of research focused on the causes and prevention of asd .

research on access to asd - related services and lifespan issues received the least amount of funding .

during caa enactment and reauthorization , several issues were highlighted , some of which are of general interest to congress when deciding whether to support disease - specific legislation .

specifically , concerns were raised about barriers to data sharing and confidentiality across state and federal government entities ; the coordination of surveillance and research , across both agencies and diseases ; and the pros and cons of congress directing funding to specific diseases ( or groups of diseases ) .

these concerns apply not only to autism research policy , but can be applied broadly to any disease - specific legislation , and the consequent policy decisions may affect access to care and treatment for individuals with autism .

coordination of research and sharing of the resulting data is an ongoing interest of congress .

researchers call for accurate case estimates in order to study common characteristics of autistic individuals and potential risk factors for autism .

federal and state - funded programs provided through health care providers and schools must provide certain services for individuals with asd , and need accurate estimates to anticipate the need for those services .

however , enumerating autism cases for researchers , health care providers , and schools has presented an ongoing challenge at the state , local , and federal levels .

during the reauthorization process , some members of congress raised the concern that continuing to pass disease - specific legislation allows congress to prioritize one disease ( or group of diseases , in this case developmental disabilities ) over another , and that priority - setting should be left to the agencies that perform the research .

the issue of prioritizing one developmental disability over another has also been raised among researchers and families of children with developmental disabilities and other conditions .

advocates for cara argued that allowing authorization of these programs to lapse would interrupt the progress made under the caa .

autism services research , such as the development and adoption of new screening tools and implementation of best practices in autism therapy , has effects on both health care cost and coverage decisions made at the government and individual level .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) includes provisions that may affect coverage for individuals with autism , including prohibitions on the cancellation of coverage by an insurer due to a preexisting condition , elimination of lifetime caps on insurance benefits and annual limits on coverage , and eligibility for tax subsidies to assist low - and middle - income individuals in the purchase of coverage from state health insurance exchanges .

in addition , medicaid eligibility will be broadened to include single adults .

the long - range impact of health reform on individuals with asd ( specifically , the coverage of recommended treatments for asd ) is unknown .

