congress has generally broad authority to impose requirements upon the federal procurement process ( i.e. , the process whereby agencies obtain supplies and services from the private sector ) .

one of the many ways in which congress has exercised this authority is by enacting measures intended to promote contracting and subcontracting with "small businesses" by federal agencies .

among other things , these measures ( 1 ) declare a congressional policy of ensuring that a "fair proportion" of federal contract and subcontract dollars are awarded to small businesses ; ( 2 ) establish government - wide and agency - specific goals for the percentage of contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses ; ( 3 ) require or authorize agencies to conduct competitions in which only small businesses may compete ( i.e. , set - asides ) , or make noncompetitive awards to them in circumstances when such awards could not be made to other businesses ; and ( 4 ) task the small business administration ( sba ) and officers of the procuring agencies with reviewing and helping to restructure proposed procurements so as to maximize opportunities for small business participation .

small business contracting and subcontracting are complicated topics , in part , because numerous statutes — implemented by multiple agencies and subject to interpretation by multiple judicial and other tribunals — require or authorize particular actions by federal agencies .

the small business act of 1958 , as amended , is key among these authorities .

however , other statutes also play a prominent role , especially where the activities of particular agencies are concerned .

in addition , while some provisions of the small business act are implemented by sba , other provisions authorize or require actions by any "procuring activity. .

moreover , most of these statutes leave at least something to the discretion of the agency tasked with implementing the statute , which means that regulations are also significant authorities governing federal contracting with small businesses .

the sba has promulgated regulations implementing the small business act .

however , other regulations implementing the act have been promulgated by the federal acquisition regulatory council ( far council ) .

the far council has also promulgated regulations implementing other statutory authorities , as have individual agencies .

further , these statutes and regulations are regularly subject to interpretation by various judicial and other tribunals , including sba's office of hearings and appeals ( oha ) , for eligibility for small business contracting programs , and the government accountability office ( gao ) , for certain other questions that do not involve such eligibility .

understanding this legal framework is arguably important not only for its own sake , but also because congress frequently enacts or proposes legislation that responds to agency regulations or judicial and other decisions .

this report provides an overview of the various legal authorities governing small business contracting and subcontracting , as well as the relationship between them .

it also explains the roles of the sba , procuring activities , oha , gao , and other tribunals in implementing and construing the law governing federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses .

 ( see also table a - 1 . ) .

the report begins with the statutory authorities , then discusses the regulations implementing these statutes , and concludes by discussing the various judicial and other tribunals whose decisions regularly construe small business statutes and regulations .

a companion report , crs report r43573 , federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses: legislation in the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , describes measures that members of the 113 th congress have enacted or proposed in response to particular issues pertaining to small business contracting and subcontracting .

over the years , congress has enacted numerous statutes intended to encourage federal agencies to contract or subcontract with small businesses .

the small business act of 1958 , as amended , is arguably the primary such statute , but other statutes also govern contracting with small businesses .

congress has broad authority to enact legislation in this area because the government has generally been seen to "enjoy[] the unrestricted power to produce its own supplies , to determine those with whom it will deal , and to fix the terms and conditions upon which it will make needed purchases. .

however , the u.s. constitution does impose a few limits upon congress's power in this regard , most notably by guaranteeing all persons equal protection of the law .

equal protection issues arise most frequently with contracting preferences based on race or gender .

race and gender are "suspect classifications," which means that the government must demonstrate that any programs that classify individuals on this basis are narrowly tailored to further a compelling government interest , in the case of race - conscious programs ; or are substantially related to important government objectives , in the case of gender - conscious programs .

because most small business statutes leave at least something to the discretion of the agency tasked with implementing them , regulations promulgated by agencies also play a significant role in federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses .

sba regulations , which implement the small business act , generally apply .

however , depending upon circumstances , the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and / or various agency - specific regulations may also apply .

agencies' power to promulgate regulations intended to promote contracting or subcontracting with small businesses is more limited than congress's authority in this regard , although it can still be quite broad depending upon the context .

the agency must have been delegated authority to promulgate the regulation by congress , and the regulation itself must correspond to the statute if "congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. .

if congress has not directly spoken to the precise question , the agency can have considerable discretion , and a regulation implementing the agency's governing statute will generally be upheld by judicial or other tribunals so long as it is "based upon a permissible construction of the statute. ' .

however , there are certain things that congress has effectively prohibited agencies from doing , by regulation or otherwise , where contracting is concerned .

arguably the foremost among these is establishing a new set - aside program for small or other businesses .

a key obstacle to the creation of such programs by regulation is the competition in contracting act ( cica ) of 1984 , which generally requires that agencies obtain "full and open competition through the use of competitive procedures" unless other procedures are expressly authorized by statute .

because cica defines "full and open competition" to mean that "all responsible sources are permitted to submit bids or competitive proposals on the procurement," it would appear to bar agencies from implementing set - asides — which are competitions in which only certain responsible firms may compete — unless they have express statutory authority to do so .

the statutes and regulations governing contracting and subcontracting with small businesses are regularly subject to interpretation by the federal courts and other tribunals , whose decisions can have considerable effect upon the law in these areas .

the 2008 decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit in rothe development corporation v. department of defense illustrates this .

in rothe , the court struck down a statute authorizing the department of defense ( dod ) to apply a 10% "price evaluation adjustment" to the offers of small disadvantaged businesses on the grounds that congress lacked a strong basis in evidence for concluding that there was discrimination on the basis of race within the defense industry when it re - authorized this program in 2006 .

although other provisions of law had prohibited dod from granting price evaluation adjustments in every fiscal year since 1998 , the rothe decision was nonetheless significant because it resulted in sba delaying implementation of the set - aside program for women - owned small businesses so that it could "review[] the relevance of the standard for disparity studies discussed in" rothe .

congress also re - enacted certain preferences for minority - serving institutions of higher education that the district court , to which the federal circuit remanded the case in rothe , had struck down on the grounds that they were "contingent" upon the provision authorizing price evaluation adjustments .

in addition , in october 2014 , the obama administration amended the far to repeal the regulations governing the price evaluation adjustment authority struck down in rothe .

depending upon the context , various courts and other tribunals have issued decisions that significantly affect federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses .

key among these tribunals is sba's office of hearings and appeals ( oha ) , which was established in 1983 to hear "protests" of , or challenges to , particular firms' eligibility for assistance under the small business act .

its decisions generally address the appropriate naics codes for particular procurements ; whether particular firms qualify as small ; and whether particular firms are otherwise eligible for the 8 ( a ) program or other small business contracting programs .

while these decisions generally focus upon specific procurements or firms , they often articulate standards that are applied broadly in determining size or status , such as the seven - part test commonly used in determining when a subcontractor is an "affiliate" of a firm .

this test is significant because , when firms are found to be affiliates , their annual receipts or number of employees are generally combined when determining whether each firm is small or other than small for purposes of the small business act ( eg , if firms a and b are found to be affiliates , the number of firm a's employees are added to the number of firm b's employees when determining whether firm a is small ) .

oha does not hear protests regarding the award , or proposed award , of federal contracts , as discussed below .

conversely , the government accountability office ( gao ) , which is one of the primary forums to hear the latter types of protests , expressly disclaims jurisdiction over "small business administration issues," such as those heard by oha .

where questions of small business law unrelated to the size or status of particular firms are concerned , other judicial and / or other tribunals play a role .

gao and the u.s. court of federal claims , along with the procuring agencies , have jurisdiction to hear "bid protests," or challenges to the award or proposed award of federal contracts .

decisions in such bid protests can play an arguably important role in interpreting the various statutes and regulations governing federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses , such as happened in 2008-2010 when gao and the court of federal claims construed the small business act , as it then existed , as giving set - asides for hubzone small businesses "precedence" over set - asides for other small businesses .

subsequently , gao construed the veterans benefits act as removing va's discretion to procure supplies or services through the federal supply schedules when a set - aside for veteran - owned small businesses could be used , an interpretation which , some suggested , could have resulted in veteran - owned small businesses receiving an additional $3 billion in federal procurement dollars annually .

however , the court of appeals for the federal circuit recently reached a different conclusion , upholding a lower court decision which had found that the relevant statute was ambiguous and that va's interpretation was entitled to deference .

va had provided , in the prologue to certain regulations implementing the veterans benefits act , that supplies or services which could potentially be obtained from veteran - owned small businesses may be purchased through the federal supply schedules .

such differences of opinion between gao and the court of federal claims are relatively unusual .

these tribunals generally agree in their interpretations of various procurement laws and regulations .

however , the court's decisions are legally binding upon executive branch agencies , while gao's are not .

gao is a legislative branch agency , and the "separation of powers" doctrine precludes it from dictating the conduct of executive branch agencies .

gao can only make "recommendations" in its bid protest decisions , although these recommendations are highly influential and typically adopted by the procuring agencies .

the federal district courts currently do not have jurisdiction to hear bid protests .

however , they may hear certain questions related to small business contracting and subcontracting that do not arise in connection with a procurement or proposed procurement .

thus , the federal district and appellate courts have heard suits ( 1 ) seeking to compel disclosure under the freedom of information act ( foia ) of forms tracking prime contractors' compliance with their subcontracting plans ; ( 2 ) asserting that particular agency actions are contrary to federal law and , thus , violate the administrative procedure act ( apa ) ; and ( 3 ) alleging liability under the false claims act for fraudulent subcontracting plans or reports .

in addition , at least one federal district court has found that it has jurisdiction to hear challenges to agency insourcing determinations brought by small businesses .

