in march 2010 , the 111 th congress passed the patient protection and affordable care act as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 .

jointly referred to as the affordable care act ( aca ) , the aca expands medicaid eligibility , increases access to health insurance coverage , expands federal private health insurance market requirements , requires the creation of health insurance exchanges to provide individuals and small employers with access to insurance , and in some instances , mandates the provision and purchasing of health insurance .

following the enactment of the aca , state attorneys general and others brought several lawsuits challenging various provisions of the aca on constitutional grounds .

one of these cases included a federalism challenge to the aca's expansion of medicaid eligibility .

this case , national federation of independent business ( nfib ) v. sebelius , addressed the issue of whether withholding medicaid reimbursement to a state unless that state complies with the expansion of its medicaid program exceeds congress's enumerated powers under the spending clause and violates the tenth amendment .

in nfib , the court held that the withdrawal of all medicaid funds from the states for failure to comply with the expansion of the program did violate the tenth amendment , but that withholding of just the funds associated with that expansion raised no significant constitutional concerns .

medicaid is an entitlement program that finances the delivery of certain health care services to a specific population .

medicaid is financed jointly by the federal and state governments , and states choose whether or not to participate .

currently all 50 states participate .

if a state chooses to participate , it must follow federal rules in order to receive federal reimbursement that offsets most of the state's medicaid costs .

it should be noted , however , that a number of these requirements may be waived , with approval from the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

in general , medicaid expansion under the aca: ( 1 ) increases medicaid eligibility by raising the income criteria for certain people ; ( 2 ) adds both mandatory and optional benefits to medicaid ; ( 3 ) increases the federal matching payments for certain groups of beneficiaries and for particular services provided ; ( 4 ) provides new requirements and incentives for states to improve quality of care and to encourage more use of preventive services ; and ( 5 ) makes a number of other medicaid program changes .

the most significant of these changes amends a section of federal law outlining what states must offer in their medicaid coverage plans .

starting in 2014 , states were to be required to cover adults under age 65 ( who are not pregnant and not already covered ) with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( "fpl" ) .

this is a significant change because previously the medicaid act did not set a baseline income level for mandatory eligibility .

thus , many states currently do not provide medicaid to childless adults and cover parents only at much lower income levels .

failure to comply with such expansion could , in theory , result in the withholding of all medicaid reimbursements to the states , including payments for persons previously covered by the medicaid program .

the federal government predicted that if all states chose to participate in the medicaid expansion , enrollment would increase by approximately 16 million by the end of the decade .

to finance the expansion , the federal government calculated that its share of medicaid spending would increase by $434 billion by 2020 , and state spending would increase by at least $20 billion over the same time frame .

other estimates suggest that both federal and state costs could be higher .

the constitutional challenge to the medicaid expansion in nfib was that , under the spending clause and the tenth amendment , states would be coerced into paying for the increased medicaid requirements , as the failure to comply with these increased medicaid requirements might result in the federal government withholding all medicaid funding .

the argument was bolstered by the states noting that medicaid represents 40% of all federal funds that states receive ; that the majority of states receive more than $1 billion in medicaid funding each year ; and that this number is projected to increase under the aca .

the states argued that the withdrawal of this aid would have a dramatic effect on the ability of the states to provide health care to their populations , and that the states had no choice but to comply with the medicaid expansion provisions .

in nfib , the supreme court reviewed a decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit ( eleventh circuit ) regarding a challenge to the medicaid expansion .

in its opinion , the eleventh circuit considered a spending clause / tenth amendment "coercion" challenge to the medicaid expansion provisions of the aca , and rejected it .

first , the court noted the difficulty of distinguishing persuasion and coercion .

the eleventh circuit also noted that after dole , the court had never devised a test to ascertain when financial pressure would lead to coercion , which had led many appeals courts to hold that the doctrine was not a viable defense to spending clause legislation .

the eleventh circuit did , nonetheless , proceed to analyze whether the aca medicaid expansion had passed the point where "pressure turns into compulsion," and found that those provisions were not unduly coercive under dole .

the court relied on a variety of factors .

first , the medicaid - participating states were warned from the beginning of the medicaid program that congress reserved the right to make changes to the program , and since that time congress had made numerous amendments to the program .

second , most of the cost of the medicaid expansion will be borne by the federal government until 2016 , after which states will gradually become responsible for up to 10% of the increase .

third , the court noted that the states would have nearly four years from the date the bill was signed into law to decide whether they will continue to participate in medicaid , or , if they declined to do so , to develop a replacement program in their own states .

finally , the court noted that , under the medicaid act , hhs need not withhold all medicaid funding to a state refusing to comply with the expansion , but it may withhold only a portion of such funding .

the supreme court reversed the eleventh circuit , and held that the threat of withholding all medicaid funding for failure to comply with the aca medicaid expansion was coercive , and so it violated the tenth amendment .

the supreme court went on to hold , however , that to the extent that enforcement of the aca medicaid expansion through withdrawal of existing medicaid funds was unconstitutional , that the remedy was to sever that enforcement mechanism .

based on both an explicit statutory severability clause and on discernment of congressional intent , the court held that the congress would have wanted the aca medicaid expansion to go forward .

thus the court limited withholding of funds for failure to serve the expanded medicaid population to withholding of those new funds , effectively making state participation in the medicaid expansion voluntary .

as noted , the supreme court in dole had identified two important factors in evaluating whether a congressional spending condition should be struck down under the tenth amendment – relatedness and coercion .

the nfib decision seemed to have most explicitly focused on the issue of coercion , but strains of relatedness permeate the opinion .

this is seen most clearly in the concern expressed by the court as to whether the states , upon entering the original medicaid program , had been given sufficient notice of the possibility that such a significant expansion of the program might be imposed as a condition of participation .

the specific question accepted for consideration by the supreme court in nfib was whether the aca "violates basic principles of federalism" by "coerc[ing]" states into accepting "onerous conditions" in violation of dole .

it should also be noted that the court granted argument on this issue despite the fact that the eleventh circuit upheld the medicaid expansion ; that no other circuit has struck down these provisions ; and that no similar spending provisions have been previously invalidated under the coercion theory .

justice roberts did not suggest that the decision in nfib was inconsistent with prior supreme court cases , although it can be argued that the cursory analysis of relatedness and coercion in dole were elaborated significantly by his opinion , and may have been in some ways modified .

further , as will be discussed later , it would appear that coercion and relatedness were treated as separate factors by the court in dole .

in nfib , however , the concepts appear to have become closely intertwined , so that in some contexts , relatedness and coercion must be considered together , not separately .

this latter approach is not inconsistent with unconstitutional conditions cases in non - state contexts .

where conditions associated with a governmental benefit have been challenged by a private person or entity , the "fit" of the benefit condition to the stated governmental purpose has been considered to increase concerns regarding coercive governmental behavior .

for instance , in nollan v. california coastal commission , the owners of beachfront property in california sought a permit to demolish a bungalow and replace it with a three - bedroom house .

the permit was granted subject to the condition that the owners record an easement allowing the public to cross their property in order to reach the beach .

the permit condition was challenged as a taking of property without the just compensation required by the constitution .

the california government argued that the new construction would increase blockage of the view of the ocean , creating a psychological barrier to beach access , and that the easement was necessary to counter this effect .

the court , however , evaluated whether the condition in question , providing "physical access," served the purpose put forward as the justification for the prohibition , since the remedy for losing visual "access" to the beach was to provide the more significant physical "access" to the beach .

thus , the court found that , at least in the takings context , there must be a close "fit" between the purpose of the regulation and the burden imposed , and that the conditioning of the permit in this manner was unconstitutional .

the successful federalism challenge to medicaid expansion under the aca in the case of nfib required the supreme court to address whether states are being "coerced" into compliance with the expanded state requirements by the threat of withholding existing medicaid reimbursements .

this "coercion" test , articulated in south dakota v. dole in 1987 , had never been applied by the supreme court or the lower federal courts to strike down a federal statute , and had been so little developed by the court that most federal courts of appeals had simply rejected similar challenges with little analysis .

it is unclear , however , whether nfib has significantly changed the dole analysis , or whether the combination of factors that led to the court's decision to limit how the aca medicaid expansion would be enforced is likely to be repeated .

as noted , justice roberts' decision in nfib seems to contemplate the existence of several types of grant conditions: 1 ) conditions directly related to the expenditure of federal funds ; 2 ) conditions related to the policy goals underlying grant ; 3 ) conditions related to the goals of a "new and independent" grant program ; and 4 ) grant conditions not related to the policy goals of the underlying grant .

categories 1 , 2 and 4 ( direct , indirect , and unrelated conditions ) are derived principally from prior case law , while category 3 ( new and independent programs ) appears to be the principal focus of nfib .

prior case law holds ( and nfib confirms ) that if a grant condition is directly related to the expenditure of federal funds in a state program or activity , then the condition is constitutional under the spending clause .

second , if the grant condition is generally related to the policy goals of the underlying grant , then , under dole and nfib , withdrawal of all program funds would , in most foreseeable cases , be constitutional under the spending clause and the tenth amendment .

however , if the grant condition is attached to a new and independent program ; the government threatens the funding of an existing program ; and the withholding of federal funding represents a significant portion of a state's budget , then that condition may be unconstitutionally coercive under the tenth amendment .

finally , if a grant condition is unrelated to the general policy goals of the underlying grant , then it is most likely unconstitutional under the spending clause .

thus , to the extent that a coercion remains relevant after nfib , it would appear to apply principally where there is an existing program , and states are mandated to adopt a new and independent program at the risk of the state losing the existing funds .

in this case , a court will need to consider whether the loss of funds for failure to adopt this new and independent program is coercive .

justice roberts did not identify a standard to determine what level of funding withholding would be coercive , although he did conclude that withdrawal of federal program funds which represents 10% of an average state's budget constituted a "gun to the head" and was a form of "economic dragooning. .

how courts are to consider grant withdrawals below 10% , however , is not addressed by the roberts opinion , and justice roberts declined to speculate where such a line would be drawn .

finally , to the extent that such a new and independent program is found to be coercively mandated , then a court would need to fashion a remedy .

in justice roberts' opinion , the tenth amendment remedy was not to strike down the "new and independent programs" ( the aca medicaid expansion ) , but to disallow the threat of withholding existing funds ( medicaid ) .

based on both an explicit statutory severability clause and on discernment of congressional intent , the court held that congress would have wanted to preserve the authority to withhold funds from the expanded medicaid population for failure to comply with its conditions .

this ultimately had the effect of allowing the aca medicaid expansion to go forward , but effectively made state participation voluntary .

