functions that federal law and policy require to be performed by government personnel , not contractor employees , are known as "inherently governmental functions. .

such functions have been a topic of interest in recent congresses , in part , because of questions about sourcing policy ( i.e. , whether specific functions should be performed by government personnel or contractor employees ) .

there have also been questions about the various definitions of inherently governmental function given in federal law and policy and , particularly , whether the existence of multiple definitions of this term may have resulted in contractor employees performing functions that should be performed by government personnel .

previously , the 110 th congress had tasked the office of management and budget ( omb ) with reviewing existing definitions of inherently governmental function to determine whether such definitions are "sufficiently focused" to ensure that only government personnel perform inherently governmental functions or "other critical functions necessary for the mission of a federal department or agency" ; developing a "single consistent definition" of inherently governmental function that would address any deficiencies in the existing definitions , reasonably apply to all agencies , and ensure that agency personnel can identify positions that perform inherently governmental functions ; developing criteria for identifying "critical functions" that should be performed by government personnel ; and developing criteria for identifying positions that government personnel should perform in order to ensure that agencies develop and maintain "sufficient organic expertise and technical capacity" to perform their missions and oversee contractors' work .

partly in response to this charge , omb , through the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) , issued policy letter 11-01 on september 12 , 2011 .

as explained below , policy letter 11-01 adopts the definition of inherently governmental function given in the federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act of 1998 , rather than creating a new definition .

however , policy letter 11-01 does establish two tests for identifying inherently governmental functions , as well as defines a critical function as one "that is necessary to the agency being able to effectively perform and maintain control of its mission and operations. .

this report surveys the definitions of inherently governmental function given in policy letter 11-01 , the fair act , and other sources .

it also notes specific functions that have been designated as inherently governmental or commercial by statute , regulation , policy , or gao or judicial decision .

its primary focus is upon government - wide statutes , regulations , and policy documents , not agency - specific ones .

the report begins with ( 1 ) statutory definitions and declarations before turning to those in ( 2 ) policy guidance , ( 3 ) administrative law , and ( 4 ) judicial decisions .

however , the report's discussion of one type of definition often cross - references other types of definitions because of the complex interrelationships congress and the executive have established between the various provisions of law and policy on this topic .

the federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act of 1998 provides the primary statutory definition of inherently governmental function .

there are , however , several other statutory definitions of inherently governmental function and "functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions. .

some of these definitions mirror the definitions of the fair act or office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 , discussed below , while others incorporate the definitions of the fair act or omb circular a - 76 by reference .

there are also numerous statutory provisions declaring that specific functions are inherently governmental .

omb circular a - 76 provides the other main definition of inherently governmental functions used in federal law and policy .

office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) policy letter 11-01 , which was issued on september 12 , 2011 , also provides guidance on inherently governmental and related functions .

policy letter 11-01 adopts the fair act's definition of inherently governmental function , as well as the listings of inherently governmental functions and functions closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions given in the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) .

policy letter 11-01 does , however , establish a definition of critical functions , as well as new tests for identifying inherently governmental functions and guidance on pre - and post - award management of contracts for critical functions and functions closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions .

the key administrative law source on inherently governmental functions is the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , which is the "primary document" in the federal acquisition regulations system established for the "codification and publication of uniform policies and procures for acquisition by all executive agencies. .

further declarations of specific functions as inherently governmental or commercial come from executive orders and gao decisions construing executive branch regulations and guidance .

federal courts have also addressed the question of whether specific functions are inherently governmental or commercial .

two contexts typically prompt courts to determine what is an inherently governmental function .

the first context involves litigation under the fair act , omb circular a - 76 , and the far .

this context actually entails a smaller number of published decisions than the second context , which involves litigation concerning constitutional rights .

the litigation concerning constitutional rights itself can take two forms .

first , there are cases involving the "state action doctrine," which consider whether private actors are performing inherently governmental functions in determining ( 1 ) whether those actors must provide the same constitutional rights to third parties that the government must provide , and ( 2 ) whether those actors can claim sovereign immunity for certain actions like government officials can .

second , there are cases involving the "private delegation doctrine," which center upon whether a private party was given impermissible authority to legislate or make rules on the government's behalf .

legislating and rulemaking are inherently governmental functions .

the courts , like gao , do not have an independent definition of inherently governmental functions .

in deciding cases under the fair act or other authorities , the courts use the definitions provided in these sources .

moreover , in at least some such cases , courts give considerable deference to the executive branch's classification of a function as inherently governmental or commercial because of the political question doctrine , under which courts decline to hear issues that have been entrusted to the discretion of another branch of government and that lack judicially discoverable and management standards for their resolution .

in arrowhead metals , ltd. v. united states , for example , the court categorized the coinage of money as inherently governmental because it is one of the powers that the constitution grants to congress .

however , the court also found that the u.s. mint has discretion to determine whether the stamping of blanks constitutes coinage .

in reaching this conclusion , the court noted its "desire to avoid a legislative - executive controversy" regarding whether the striking of blanks in the production of coins constitutes an inherently governmental function .

in other cases not involving the fair act or specific provisions of procurement law or policy , the courts use a test of inherently governmental functions much like that used by gao , focusing upon the degree to which a private party exercises substantial discretion , or makes judgments , on the government's behalf .

functions classified as inherently governmental under the constitutional test include: conducting elections ; exercising the power of eminent domain ; providing police services ; investigating allegations of child abuse ; exercising prosecutorial discretion ; chartering , oversight , and regulation of companies ; creation of public monopolies ; holding the personal property of prisoners ; limiting the first amendment rights of prisoners ; taxing and paying governmental indebtedness or obligations ; devising tariff regimes ; and hiring diplomatic staff or civil servants .

functions categorized as commercial , in contrast , include providing transportation services to citizens , and selling government land on the government's behalf .

designations of specific functions as inherently governmental in judicial decisions have the force of law , at least within the jurisdictions where the decisions are precedent and for so long as the decisions are not overturned .

however , a judicial declaration that a function is inherently governmental under a constitutional test would not necessarily preclude the executive branch from contracting out this function under the fair act , omb circular a - 76 , the far , or ofpp policy letter 11-01 .

rather , in the "state action" context , the designation of a function as inherently governmental means only that the contractor performing the inherently governmental function ( 1 ) owes private individuals the same constitutional rights that the government owes them and ( 2 ) can potentially claim sovereign immunity like government officials can .

similarly , in the "private delegation" context , the designation means only that any regulations issued by the contractor cannot be constitutionally applied to private individuals .

the "private delegation" doctrine would not necessarily preclude the contractor from performing other functions under the contract that resulted in the contractor's issuance of the regulations .

in sum , the various authorities discussed herein differ somewhat in their treatment of inherently governmental and other functions .

the primary differences between them are arguably not in their definitions of inherently governmental function , however , as table 1 illustrates .

rather , the key differences are in their provisions elaborating and expanding on the definition of inherently governmental functions , provisions which arguably reflect the source's intended purpose and use , not differing conceptions of what constitutes an inherently governmental functions .

for example , omb circular a - 76 , which "establishes federal policy for the competition of commercial activities," includes a definition and discussion of commercial services that is not found in other sources .

similarly , ofpp letter 11-01 , which is designed to "assist agency officers and employees in ensuring that only federal employees perform work that is inherently governmental or otherwise needs to be reserved to the public sector," includes a definition of critical functions and tests for identifying inherently governmental functions , among other things , not found in other sources .

