as congress exercises oversight and prepares to consider programs for lebanon in the coming year , uncertainty about syria's future is now raising questions about how unrest there may affect the security and stability of lebanon .

while many analysts posit that the government of syrian president bashar al asad will fall , specific outcomes and timelines remain subject to debate .

lebanese concerns center on the potential for conflict or regime change in syria to disrupt lebanon's security directly and to reshape the context in which lebanon's fragile sectarian political balance has endured since the end of the lebanese civil war in 1990 .

a complex relationship exists between lebanon and syria as a result of geography , history , and networks of political , economic , and social ties that bind the countries' populations .

over time , lebanese leaders have sought to manage the influence of their larger and more powerful neighbor while maintaining domestic stability and preserving strong bilateral economic ties .

syrian leaders have sought to influence developments in lebanon in order to prevent forces hostile to the syrian government from consolidating a position of strength there .

this approach has often led to direct syrian intervention in lebanese affairs .

at present , syria continues to exert a great deal of influence in lebanon through its patronage relationships with hezbollah and the hezbollah - affiliated , pro - syrian march 8 governing coalition .

the outsized role that syria plays in lebanon's affairs and its role as a lifeline for hezbollah further raises the stakes of the unrest for both lebanon and israel .

hezbollah and the asad government have warned that third - party intervention in syria's crisis could lead to regional conflagration , widely interpreted as a message for israel .

the unrest in syria and the possibility for spillover into lebanon affect the current policy priorities of the united states , which include preserving regional peace , strengthening lebanon's weak democratic institutions , limiting iranian and syrian influence in lebanon's political process , and countering transnational threats from hezbollah and other militant groups .

since 2006 , congress has authorized and appropriated hundreds of millions of dollars for lebanon , with parallel goals of supporting the implementation of united nations security council resolutions ; reducing sectarianism and unifying national institutions ; providing military equipment and basic supplies to the lebanese armed forces ( laf ) ; and providing support to the internal security forces ( isf ) for training , equipment and vehicles , community policing assistance , and communications .

these programs began in the wake of the withdrawal of syrian military forces in 2005 and the israel - hezbollah war of july and august 2006 .

over the last five years , u.s. programs have steadily improved the capabilities of nonsectarian security forces in lebanon , while lebanese politics have remained deadlocked by competition between rival camps defined in part by their differing perspectives toward the assertive asad government and the future of its hezbollah allies .

the prospect of political change in syria is now challenging core assumptions that have guided the decisions of leaders in lebanon , syria , the united states , israel and other regional powers .

this report reviews recent developments in light of those assumptions and analyzes issues of potential concern to congress as members exercise oversight and prepare to consider new appropriations and authorization requests from the obama administration .

lebanon has largely escaped the protests and prolonged unrest that much of the region , including syria , has faced since early 2011 .

two primary factors distinguish lebanon from other regional states and may explain this dynamic: the absence of a strong , repressive , and autocratic government and a long history of civil war ingrained in collective memory .

at the same time , two main issues contributed to syria - related domestic political wrangling in lebanon in 2011: the collapse of the government on january 12 , 2011 , and the subsequent nomination of prime minister najib miqati , who was backed by hezbollah and is widely viewed as pro - syria ; and , developments pertaining to the special tribunal for lebanon .

many analysts argue that the asad regime will fall within the next six to 18 months , and others express skepticism or decline to place an expected time frame on the potential collapse of the regime .

regardless of the time frame , the course of events in syria and the responses of key actors will determine the broad effects on lebanon and the region .

in all future scenarios , israel , iran , and other regional and international actors , including the united states , serve as wildcards .

any could shape developments in both syria and lebanon through their interactions with various players .

the unrest in syria may affect the pursuit and implementation of current policy priorities for the united states , including strengthening lebanon's weak democratic institutions , limiting the influence of iran and syria in lebanon's political process , and countering transnational threats from hezbollah and other militant groups in lebanon .

given the current security and political situation in syria , members may consider the following questions as they discuss future u.s. security assistance to lebanon: what are the rationales for key u.s. foreign assistance programs related to the security forces , border control , and combating terrorism ? .

how might u.s. programs limit the potential for spillover from syria into lebanon ? .

how will the syrian uprising affect key u.s. foreign assistance programs in lebanon ? .

will u.s. goals and modes of engagement change ? .

to what extent should u.s. policymakers seek to impose further conditions on u.s. aid to lebanon in light of events to curtail hezbollah's political influence ? .

is lebanon circumventing international sanctions on syria ? .

if a civil war begins in syria , would it spill over into lebanon ? .

would hezbollah be party to the conflict ? .

is the syrian uprising weakening hezbollah within lebanon ? .

what are the potential ramifications of a syrian or hezbollah attack on israel , and what are the possible u.s. responses to such an attack ? .

will the uprising in syria negatively impact the religions sects / minorities in lebanon , including the christian community ? .

continued unrest in syria leaves the future of asad's regime uncertain , and the extent of the impact on lebanon is still being determined .

this ambiguity raises a wide range of questions for the goals and implementation of u.s. policy priorities in lebanon .

as the obama administration and congress review u.s. policy priorities in this shifting landscape , issues that members may encounter include: whether and how u.s. assistance programs in lebanon are being affected by developments in syria and what , if any , changes in assistance program goals or implementation may be necessary in light of changing conditions ; whether events in syria and lebanon create new concerns regarding the protection of religious minorities , particularly in light of proposed h.r .

440 , which provides for the establishment of a special envoy to promote the religious freedom of religious minorities in the near east and south central asia ; how u.s. support for the laf , the isf , and lebanon's security apparatus can best minimize risks posed by hezbollah as its strategic alliance with syria remains in question ; how might the united states engage with lebanon to better protect israel in light of continuing regional unrest ; and , how might u.s. assistance and trade and investment policy most effectively shield the lebanese economy from the effects of political unrest ? .

