congress annually considers several appropriations measures , which provide discretionary funding for numerous activities — such as national defense , education , and homeland security — as well as general government operations .

appropriations acts are characteristically annual and generally provide funding authority that expires at the end of the federal fiscal year , september 30 .

these measures are considered by congress under certain rules and practices , referred to as the congressional appropriations process .

this report discusses the following aspects of this process: the annual appropriations cycle , the relationship between authorization and appropriation measures , types of appropriations measures , budget enforcement for appropriations measures , and rescissions .

when considering appropriations measures , congress is exercising the power granted to it under the constitution , which states , "no money shall be drawn from the treasury , but in consequence of appropriations made by law. .

the power to appropriate is a legislative power .

congress has enforced its prerogatives through certain laws .

the so - called antideficiency act , for example , strengthened the application of this section by , in part , explicitly prohibiting federal government employees and officers from making contracts or other obligations in advance of or in excess of an appropriation , unless authorized by law , and providing administrative and criminal sanctions for those who violate the act .

furthermore , under law , public funds may be used only for the purpose ( s ) for which congress appropriated the funds .

the president has an important role in the appropriations process by virtue of the constitutional power to approve or veto entire measures , which congress can override only by two - thirds vote of both chambers .

the president also has influence , in part , because of various duties imposed by statute , such as submitting an annual budget to congress .

the house and senate committees on appropriations have jurisdiction over the annual appropriations measures .

each committee is organized into subcommittees , with each subcommittee having responsibility for developing one regular annual appropriations bill to provide funding for departments and activities within its jurisdiction .

each house appropriations subcommittee is paired with a senate appropriations subcommittee and the two subcommittees' jurisdictions are generally identical .

the current appropriations subcommittee structure includes the following 12 subcommittees : 1 .

agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ; 2 .

commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ; 3 .

defense ; 4 .

energy and water development , and related agencies ; 5 .

financial services and general government ; 6 .

homeland security ; 7 .

interior , environment , and related agencies ; 8 .

labor , health and human services , education , and related agencies ; 9 .

legislative branch ; 10 .

military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies ; 11 .

state , foreign operations , and related programs ; and 12 .

transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies .

congress has established a process that provides for two separate types of measures — authorization measures and appropriation measures .

these measures perform different functions .

authorization acts establish , continue , or modify agencies or programs .

for example , an authorization act may establish or modify programs within the department of defense .

an authorization act may also explicitly authorize subsequent appropriations for specific agencies and programs , frequently setting spending ceilings for them .

these authorizations of appropriations provisions may be permanent , annual , or multiyear authorizations .

annual and multiyear provisions require reauthorizations when they expire .

congressional rules generally restrict appropriations measures to provide new budget authority only for programs , activities , or agencies previously authorized by law .

congress , however , is not required to provide appropriations for an authorized discretionary spending program .

house and senate rules enforce the separation of these functions into different measures by separating committee jurisdiction over appropriations and other types of legislation and rules prohibiting measures from including both appropriations and other legislation .

authorization measures are under the jurisdiction of legislative committees , such as the house committees on agriculture and homeland security or the senate committees on armed services and the judiciary .

appropriations measures are under the jurisdiction of the house and senate appropriations committees .

the house and senate prohibit , in various ways , language in appropriations bills providing appropriations for purposes not authorized by law or legislation on an appropriations bill .

an appropriation for purposes not authorized by law , commonly called an unauthorized appropriation , is new budget authority in an appropriations measure ( including an amendment or conference report ) for agencies or programs with no current authorization or for which budget authority exceeds the ceiling authorized .

legislation refers to language in appropriations measures that changes existing law , such as establishing new law or amending or repealing current law .

legislation is under the jurisdiction of the legislative committees .

although house rules prohibit both unauthorized appropriations and legislation in regular appropriations bills and supplemental appropriations measures that provide funds for two or more agencies , the house may choose to waive their application .

however , house rules do not prohibit such provisions in continuing resolutions .

the house prohibition applies to bills reported by the house appropriations committee , amendments , and conference reports .

the point of order applies to the text of the bill as well as any amendments or conference reports .

senate rules regarding legislation on appropriations bills restrict the content of amendments to regular bills , supplementals that provide funds for more than one purpose or agency , and continuing resolutions .

such amendments include those that are: offered on the senate floor , reported by the senate appropriations committee to the house - passed measure , or proposed as a substitute for the house - passed text .

in other words , senate rules prohibit legislation in both senate appropriations committee amendments and non - committee amendments .

they also prohibit non - germane amendments .

these senate rules do not apply to provisions in senate bills or conference reports .

recently , the practice of the senate appropriations committee has been either to ( 1 ) report the house - passed bill with a committee substitute , or ( 2 ) report an original senate bill , wait until the senate receives the house - passed bill , and then offer a committee substitute ( comprising the text of the senate bill ) to the house - passed bill .

in either case , the senate considers the committee's recommendations in the form of a committee amendment .

senate rules are generally considered to be less restrictive than the house regarding what may be interpreted as unauthorized appropriations , and they prohibit such appropriations in comparatively fewer situations .

for example , the senate appropriations committee may report committee amendments containing appropriations not previously authorized by law .

similarly , an amendment moved by direction of the committee with legislative jurisdiction or in pursuance of an estimate submitted in accordance with law would not be prohibited under rule xvi .

an appropriation is also considered authorized if the senate has previously passed the authorization during the same session of congress , even if the bill has not been enacted into law .

as a result , while the senate rule generally prohibits unauthorized appropriations , senators rarely raise this point of order .

the division between an authorization and an appropriation is a construct of house and senate rules created to apply to congressional consideration so that the term "unauthorized appropriations" does not convey a legal meaning with regard to funding .

if unauthorized appropriations or legislation remain in an appropriations measure as enacted , either because no one raised a point of order or the house or senate waived the rules , the provision will still have the force of law .

unauthorized appropriations , if enacted , are therefore generally available for obligation or expenditure .

legislative provisions enacted in an annual appropriations act also generally have the force of law for the duration of that act unless otherwise specified .

there are generally three types of appropriations measures: regular appropriations bills , continuing resolutions , and supplemental appropriations measures .

in general , during a calendar year , congress may consider: 12 regular appropriations bills for the fiscal year that begins on october 1 ( often referred to as the budget year ) to provide the annual funding for the agencies , projects , and activities funded therein ; one or more continuing resolutions for that same fiscal year ; and one or more supplemental appropriations measures for the current fiscal year .

budget enforcement for appropriations measures under the congressional budget process has both statutory and procedural elements .

the statutory elements are derived from the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) , which imposes limits on discretionary spending each fiscal year through fy2021 .

the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( cba ) that are normally associated with the budget resolution .

through this cba process , the appropriations committee in each chamber , as well as each of their subcommittees , receives a procedural limit on the total amount of budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year .

rescissions are provisions of law that cancel previously enacted budget authority .

for example , if congress provided $50 million to an agency , it could enact subsequent legislation cancelling some or all of the budget authority prior to its obligation .

rescissions are an expression of changed or differing priorities .

they may also be used to offset increases in budget authority for other activities .

the president may recommend rescissions to congress , but they must be enacted into law in order to take effect .

under title x of the cba , if congress does not enact a bill approving the president's rescissions within 45 days of continuous session of congress , the budget authority must be made available for obligation .

in response to the president's recommendation , congress may decide not to approve the amount specified by the president , approve the total amount , or approve a different amount .

for example , in 2005 , the president requested a rescission of $106 million from the department of defense ( dod ) , operations and maintenance , defense - wide account and $48.6 million from dod , research , development , test , and evaluation , army account .

congress provided a rescission of $80 million from the first account in the dod , emergency supplemental appropriations to address hurricanes in the gulf of mexico , and pandemic influenza act , 2006 , but it did not provide a rescission from the second account .

congress may also initiate rescissions .

for example , in the above act , congress also included a rescission of $10 million from the department of state , diplomatic and consular programs account .

as budget authority providing the funding must be enacted into law , so too a rescission cancelling the budget authority must be enacted into law .

rescissions can be included either in separate rescission measures or any of the three types of appropriations measures .

