this report describes and compares the drug - and crime - related policy restrictions contained in selected federal programs that provide assistance to low - income individuals and families: the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) , and the three primary federal housing assistance programs ( the public housing program , the section 8 housing choice voucher program , and the project - based section 8 rental assistance program ) .

these programs were chosen because they serve many of the same families .

however , the programs also differ .

they have different drug - and other crime - related restrictions , with varying levels of federal administration and discretion for state or local administrators .

the drug - and crime - related restrictions in tanf , snap , and the housing assistance programs were developed at different times in different laws , but it appears they are intended to serve similar purposes .

to some extent , they are intended to deter people from engaging in drug - related and other criminal activity .

they may also be intended to punish individuals for engaging in undesirable behavior .

further , when resources are limited , these policies may be intended to direct assistance to other households who are deemed more worthy of assistance .

additionally , particularly for housing assistance programs , drug - and crime - related restrictions may be intended to protect vulnerable communities from the consequences of drug - related and other criminal activity .

the report begins by providing a brief overview of the history and evolution of policies establishing drug - and crime - related restrictions in federal assistance programs .

it then briefly describes tanf , snap , and the three housing programs , and then discusses the specific policies in those programs related to drug testing and drug - related and other criminal activity .

it concludes by comparing and contrasting those policies and highlighting considerations for policymakers .

this section of the report describes specific federal tanf , snap , and housing assistance policies on drug testing and pertaining to drug - related and other criminal activity engaged in by applicants and recipients .

in some cases , the federal policies are prescriptive ; in other cases , they leave discretion to the state or local administering entity .

as is evident in this report , there are similarities and differences in federal policies governing drug - and crime - related restrictions in tanf , snap , and federal housing assistance programs .

some may reflect the intentions underlying the policies .

as noted earlier in this report , those policy goals may include the desire to deter people from engaging in undesirable behavior , to punish people for engaging in undesirable behavior , to direct limited resources to persons deemed most "worthy" of assistance , or to protect vulnerable communities .

they may also reflect the similarities and differences in the programs themselves , including the goals of the programs , how they are administered , the populations they serve , and what benefits are provided .

the following section of the report summarizes the similarities and differences between tanf , snap , and the major housing assistance programs and how they may affect the drug - and crime - related policies in those programs .

the information provided in this report may raise considerations for policymakers , which are presented at the end of this report .

tanf , snap , and the major housing assistance programs are all administered either at the state or local level , and they have left a great deal of discretion to state or local decisionmakers .

as a result , the experiences of similarly situated families will differ based both on where they live and in which assistance programs they wish to participate .

the programs also differ in terms of the way they are funded , which may affect how assistance is provided or rationed .

snap benefits are a 100% federally financed entitlement to eligible individuals .

as a result , when states adopt snap rules that are more expansive or inclusive , they do not affect state budgets , but do affect federal spending .

tanf , on the other hand , is both federally financed and state financed .

since federal funding is limited and states are required to pay a portion of the costs of the program , state tanf program administrators may have an incentive to limit the number of persons who can receive benefits .

assisted housing is 100% federally funded , but it is not an entitlement and , given limited federal resources , the program only serves roughly one in four eligible families .

this scarcity of resources leads housing program administrators to prioritize who receives assistance , which may involve weighing who is most in need of assistance versus who is most worthy of assistance .

in terms of populations served , snap and federal housing assistance programs serve a wider population than does tanf .

snap and housing assistance are received by households of all types , including those made up of persons who are elderly and / or disabled , in addition to other families with children and childless nonelderly and nondisabled adults .

on the other hand , tanf predominately serves families with children headed by an able - bodied adult of working age .

further , tanf generally serves only the poorest of families with children , as its state - determined income eligibility standards tend to be lower than those of snap and federal housing assistance programs .

since societal concern about crime and drug use is not generally associated with persons who are elderly or have disabilities , snap and housing program administrators have a different set of considerations about how and to whom to apply crime - and drug - related policies than do tanf administrators .

the goals and benefit structures of the programs also vary .

snap and housing assistance are intended to meet two of the basic needs of all families: food and shelter .

snap provides assistance that can only be used for food ; housing assistance provides subsidies that only can be used for housing expenses .

tanf cash assistance , on the other hand , while intended to also help meet a family's basic needs , is used to purchase goods and services at the discretion of the recipient .

given these different goals and benefit structures , the potential consequences of limiting access to snap and housing assistance are much more clear — hunger and homelessness — than those of limiting access to tanf .

concern about these potential consequences may make it more difficult for snap and housing assistance administrators to broadly apply sanctions .

since the spending of tanf cash cannot be easily regulated , policymakers and program administrators may place recipients of tanf cash assistance under greater scrutiny to ensure that federal tax dollars are not being used for undesirable purposes , such as illicit drug use .

in the case of the housing assistance programs , the structure of the benefit is place - based .

if a family did not receive the assistance , arguably , the family could not afford to live where it does .

as a result , assisted housing administrators may feel an added responsibility to ensure that assisted tenants not engage in activities that could have negative spillover effects for other residents or the surrounding neighborhood .

this concern may be most evident in the public housing program , where an assisted tenant is surrounded by other assisted tenants and the pha , which owns the property , is responsible for providing safe and decent housing to all tenants .

tanf and snap program administrators do not have these place - based considerations .

in recent years , there have been calls for expansions of crime - and drug - related policy restrictions , and conflicting calls for reforms to current policies meant to limit their impact .

this report raises several considerations that policymakers may wish to evaluate when contemplating changes to federal crime - and drug - related restrictions .

this report highlights the variations in federal crime - and drug - related restrictions in the tanf , snap , and housing assistance programs .

these variations in policy exist across programs , in part , due to the differences in the goals and design of the programs , as well as the laws that govern them .

there is also the potential for geographic variation in these policies , attributable to the discretion that federal law leaves to local policymakers .

the policy goal behind the devolution of social programs is to allow states and localities to design their programs differently , to reflect their interests , values , and needs .

state and local variations in crime - and drug - related restrictions are consistent with that goal .

however , inconsistencies in crime - and drug - related policies may have unintended consequences .

for example , inconsistent policies may cause confusion among potential recipients , possibly limiting their access to federal assistance for which they are eligible .

variations may also raise questions of equity and fairness .

this report also observes that while some states are increasing their drug - related sanctions ( specifically , implementing drug testing policies ) , most states are opting - out of or modifying the federal drug felon ban in tanf and snap .

this may raise questions about the appropriateness of current federal policy .

for example , some may ask whether the federal policy intentions underlying drug - and crime - related sanctions should override the desires of state and local administrators .

in order to inform the federal policy debate , it may be useful to better understand state policy choices .

for instance , the drug felon ban is the default policy , which raises questions as to whether states are actively choosing the default or passively choosing not to pursue legislation to opt out — a subtle but possibly significant policy difference .

while some of the factors that might influence state and local policies are identified in this report — including budget constraints , value judgments , and other policy goals — this report does not attempt to answer the question of which factors are actually driving state and local policy choices .

there appears to be an overall absence of evidence about the impact and effectiveness of crime - and drug - related restrictions in federal assistance programs .

in part , the challenge of this is identifying the desired objectives of crime - related restriction policies — decreasing drug use , deterring criminal activity , reducing or prioritizing applications — and whether the desired objectives apply to the entire population or only certain program participants .

more research in this area could be useful for policymakers .

there are several other considerations that may be of interest to policymakers , but they are beyond the scope of this report .

one such consideration may be the populations affected by crime - and drug - related restrictions .

since the war on drugs began , incarceration rates have risen sharply , particularly among young black men .

given this , questions may be raised about whether crime - and drug - related restrictions have disproportionate implications for racial minorities .

the government accountability office ( gao ) attempted to evaluate this question in a 2005 report , but found that the data needed to fully assess the question were not available .

the same gao report raised a related question for policymakers regarding how current crime - and drug - related restrictions may interact with recent federal initiatives to support prisoner reentry and responsible fatherhood , and whether these policies may be at cross purposes .

also , the current sets of crime - and drug - related restrictions were established in the 1980s and 1990s , when rates of violent crime , particularly drug - related violent crime , were much higher than they are today .

given this shift , policymakers may wish to reevaluate current federal policies to ensure that they appropriately address today's concerns .

a final consideration is whether current policies related to drug testing will withstand legal challenge as they are currently designed , or whether modifications will be necessary .

