this report gives an overview of the major federal programs that provide food assistance within the united states and the territories .

the report begins by discussing common concepts and themes across the network of domestic food assistance programs .

the report is split into two main parts: programs administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) , and programs administered by the administration on aging ( aoa ) , within the u.s. department of health and human services' administration for community living ( hhs - acl ) .

within the usda - fns section are two subsections of programs: farm bill programs ( table 1 ) , and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) and child nutrition programs ( table 2 ) .

within the hhs - acl section , table 3 provides an overview of the older americans act ( oaa ) nutrition programs .

the tables within this report are intended to provide summary information , which can help illustrate the ways in which domestic food assistance programs are both similar and different .

usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) administers domestic food assistance programs authorized in the farm bill ( table 1 ) , as well as wic and child nutrition programs ( table 2 ) .

table 1 and table 2 provide details on the usda - fns programs , including services provided , eligibility , participation , and funding .

the usda - fns national office works in concert with usda - fns's regional offices and state agencies .

with respect to snap ( formerly known as the food stamp program ) , state agencies and legislatures have a number of options and waivers that can affect snap program operations from state to state .

usda - fns's "snap state options" report illustrates how states are administering the program .

with respect to school meals programs ( national school lunch program and school breakfast program ) , state departments of education and school districts play a role in administering these programs .

wic as well as the child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) are often co - administered by state and local health departments .

as mentioned above , usda commodity foods are foods purchased by the usda for distribution to usda nutrition programs .

the programs in this report that include usda commodity foods are the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , national school lunch program ( nslp ) , summer food service program ( sfsp ) , and child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) .

usda commodity foods are also provided to the hhs - acl's nutrition services incentive program ( nsip ) ( table 3 ) .

these programs distribute "entitlement commodities" ( an amount of usda foods to which grantees are entitled by law ) as well as "bonus commodities" ( usda food purchases based on requests from the agricultural producer community ) .

these domestic food assistance programs have a historical , and in most respects , ongoing relationship with farming and agriculture .

for example , the first food stamp program , a pilot program in the 1940s , sold orange and blue "food stamps" to program participants .

while $1 would provide a program participant with $1 in value of "orange stamps" that could be spent on any food , the program participant would also receive an additional 50 cents worth of "blue stamps," which could only be used to purchase agricultural products that were in surplus .

commodity donation programs that supported the post - depression farm economy were precursors to the national school lunch program .

tefap and several of the child nutrition programs still benefit from usda commodity foods as well as usda's donation of bonus commodities , which usda purchases based on agricultural producers' identification of surplus goods or need for price support .

as a contemporary example , the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , most recent child nutrition reauthorization ( p.l .

111-296 ) , and usda initiatives include efforts to promote "farm - to - school" endeavors , seeking , for example , to facilitate school cafeterias' purchasing from local and regional farms .

the administration on aging ( aoa ) within the u.s. department of health and human service ( hhs ) , administration for community living ( acl ) administers domestic food assistance programs authorized under the older americans act ( oaa ) .

these programs provide formula grants to states , u.s. territories , and indian tribal organizations to support congregate meals in group settings ( i.e. , senior centers , community centers , and houses of worship ) and home - delivered meals to older americans .

aoa also administers the nutrition services incentive program ( nsip ) , which provides funds to the same entities to purchase food for these programs .

while oaa's nutrition programs provide food assistance in the form of a prepared meal to older individuals living in the community , the stated purpose of the program is not only to reduce hunger and food insecurity , but also to promote socialization , as well as the health and well - being of older individuals .

table 3 provides details on the hhs - acl programs , including eligibility , services provided , and funding .

older individuals who meet certain income and other requirements may also be eligible for other domestic food assistance programs administered by usda , such as supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , the senior farmers' market nutrition program ( sfmnp ) , and the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) .

moreover , other services funded under oaa provide outreach , education , and referral to assist eligible older individuals in accessing these usda benefits and programs .

while senior nutrition programs are administered by aoa , there continues to be program coordination between hhs - acl and usda - fns .

at the federal level , states and other entities may choose to receive all or part of their nsip allotments in the form of usda commodities .

obligations for nsip commodity procurement are funded under an agreement between hhs - acl and usda - fns .

at the state level , hhs - acl and usda - fns nutrition services programs that target seniors may be jointly administered under state aging and disability agencies , who are primarily responsible at the state level for administering oaa - funded programs .

according to findings from an evaluation of the oaa nutrition services programs , 8 in 10 state units on aging ( suas ) — designated state - level agencies — had a nutrition program administrator ( npa ) who plans , develops , administers , implements , and evaluates oaa nutrition services .

in 40% of suas with an npa , the npa has program responsibilities for oaa nutrition services as well as usda programs such as snap and sfmnp .

whether a state agency has some responsibility for administering hhs - acl and usda - fns programs and services may depend on whether the agency functions as an independent administrative agency or part of an umbrella agency that also has responsibility for other health and human services .

suas may also collaborate with usda - fns programs .

most suas reported that they also collaborate with snap ( 56% ) and sfmnp ( 62% ) , but collaborate less so with other usda - fns programs , such as csfp , child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) , and the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) .

collaboration activities with snap and sfmnp included promoting older - adult access to these programs , participating in committees and workshops as well as training and assistance programs , and policy planning activities .

also , older adults participating in snap can use their benefits as a voluntary contribution toward the oaa meal if the nutrition service provider is authorized by usda to accept snap benefits for this purpose and the older adults choose to do so .

congress has reauthorized and amended the oaa numerous times since it was first enacted in 1965 .

the last oaa reauthorization occurred in 2016 , when the 114 th congress enacted the older americans act amendments of 2016 ( p.l .

114-144 ) , which extended the act's authorization of appropriations for most programs , including senior nutrition , through fy2019 .

the 2016 oaa reauthorization made two changes to the nutrition services programs .

first , it required states to "utilize" the expertise of a dietician or other individuals with equivalent education and training in nutrition science , or an individual with comparable expertise ( rather than "solicit" ) .

second , where feasible , it added language for states to ensure that the nutrition project encourages the use of locally grown foods in meals programs and identifies potential partnerships and contracts with local producers and providers of locally grown foods .

