on february 16 , 2012 , the house natural resources committee ordered reported h.r .

1837 , the sacramento - san joaquin valley water reliability act .

the bill aims to address water shortages experienced by some california state and federal water contractors , shortages that sponsors attribute to implementation of the central valley project improvement act of 1992 ( cvpia , title 34 of p.l .

102-575 ) , as well as state and federal environmental laws ( eg , the federal endangered species act , its state equivalent , and possibly state rules implemented to comply with the federal clean water act ) .

the bill also addresses many other issues associated with california water management , including making substantial changes to the san joaquin river restoration settlement act ( title x of p.l .

111-11 ) and allowing early or accelerated repayment by private parties of outstanding construction cost obligations .

the bill would make numerous changes to federal and state law regarding the management of water , fish , and wildlife resources in california .

it also preempts "any" law ( subject to certain state water rights priorities identified in title iv of the bill ) pertaining to operation of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) and the california state water project ( swp ) and substitutes for those laws operational principles elaborated in a 1994 interim agreement among cvp and swp parties and others , known as the bay - delta accord .

because the cvp and swp are operated in a coordinated manner , actions taken by either the state or federal government can and do affect the other's operations .

the tensions among the different stakeholders in california water policy are particularly high given current low snowpack conditions and recent state and federal water allocations , which project that some water users will get 30% of their contracted water supplies and that many others , including many municipalities and senior water rights holders , are projected to receive 75% of their contracted supplies .

in other drought years , some south - of - delta contractors have received as little as 10% to 35% of their contracted amounts .

overall , some south - of - delta contractors have received 90% - 100% of their contracts in just five of the last 20 years .

at the same time , fish populations throughout the central valley of california have dramatically declined due to water diversions and other factors .

fishing communities have also experienced significant losses as a result of salmon population declines .

for example , a fishery disaster declaration was in effect for the california and oregon coast in 2008 and through 2010 .

per the disaster declaration , congress appropriated $170 million to be used to compensate some communities for losses due to the closed fisheries .

at issue for congress is how to address chronic shortages for some in the cvp system without disrupting decades - long federal and state law addressing senior water rights and other priorities .

also at issue is to what degree congress is willing to change or allow preemption of long - standing federal and state environmental laws , including state water quality and endangered species laws , and at what benefit and cost .

for example , what are the tradeoffs embedded in the bill's preemption of state law and fish and wildlife protections as a means to increase the water deliveries to some irrigation contractors and municipalities ? .

what will be the impact on the state's recreation and sport and commercial fishing industries and its long - term flexibility to manage water for new uses ? .

will potential benefits to some irrigators outweigh such costs ? .

will water remain in agricultural use or will new and less costly transfer provisions result in more water flowing to more affluent urban areas and water brokers ? .

will such an outcome create efficiency gains ? .

these are some of the questions that arise in changes proposed by h.r .

1837 .

many of these questions remain unanswered .

the remainder of this report provides a brief title - by - title summary of the key provisions and water policy changes proposed in h.r .

1837 .

a legal analysis of the proposed legislation is beyond the scope of this report .

each title of h.r .

1837 addresses a different aspect of california water policy .

title i makes numerous changes to the cvpia: broadening purposes for which water previously dedicated to fish and wildlife can be used ; changing the definitions of fish covered by the act ; broadening purposes for which the central valley project restoration fund ( cvprf ) monies can be used ; reducing revenues into the cvprf , mandating operation per a 1994 interim agreement ; and mandating development and implementation of a plan to increase the water yield of the cvp by october 1 , 2013 .

title ii directs the secretary to cease implementation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement agreement , which is the foundation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement act ( sjrrs ) .

the title also removes the salmon restoration requirement and makes other changes to the sjrrs .

title iii directs the secretary of the interior , upon request from water contractors , to convert utility - type water service contracts to repayment contracts , and then allows accelerated repayment of those outstanding repayment obligations .

 ( irrigation and municipal & industrial [m&i] repayment obligations for the cvp for 2010 , the last year for which such data are readily available , total approximately $1.2 billion. ) .

title iv outlines water rights protections for those with water rights senior to the cvp , including sacramento river valley contractors and addresses shortage policy for certain north - of - delta cvp water service contracts .

title v declares that the unique circumstances of coordinated operations of the cvp and swp "require assertion of federal supremacy to protect existing water rights throughout the system" and that as such shall not set precedent in any other state .

 ( there has been concern from some western states that the state and federal preemptions contained in h.r .

1837 might be used as precedent in other western states and threaten their allocation of state water rights. ) .

h.r .

1837 is primarily aimed at addressing decreased water deliveries to california's cvp contractors , particularly those south of the delta , since passage of the cvpia in 1992 .

the means would be delivering water to contractors that would become available due to the bill's prohibition on restrictions in environmental and other laws .

the bill would primarily accomplish greater water deliveries by preempting federal and state law , including fish - and - wildlife protections and other cvp operational mandates , which are all tied to the coordinated operations of the cvp and swp .

it is unclear what impacts such changes would have on other water users in the state .

title iv of the bill attempts to provide protections for california's senior water right holders , particularly those in the sacramento valley watershed and in "area - of - origin" areas .

a key remaining unknown is the significance of the bill's use of the fixed 1994 bay delta accord as a basis rather than current ( and evolving ) in - delta water quality standards ; the current standards impose water flow restrictions and appear to be a contributing factor to annual pumping restrictions in the delta .

h.r .

1837 would make extensive changes to implementation of federal reclamation law under the central valley project improvement act , the contracting provisions under the 1939 reclamation project act , restoration efforts under the san joaquin river restoration settlement act , and state and federal relationships under section 8 of the reclamation act of 1902 .

the bill would also potentially significantly alter the way the state of california implements its own state laws with regard to operation of the cvp and swp .

while much attention has been paid to the effects of federal and state environmental laws on reductions in water supplies south of the delta , the extent to which the bill would relieve water supply shortages , particularly in drought years , is uncertain .

without new water to contractors beyond what might be garnered from prohibition on state and federal environmental restrictions ( and none from changes in water rights priorities or certain delta water quality requirements ) , it is unclear the extent to which the bill would relieve shortages in water deliveries .

an analysis of drought years and other years reveals that another significant factor in pumping restrictions is a state water quality control plan , which includes salinity and flow requirements in the delta , as well as the fundamental tenet of state water rights allocations during times of hydrological and regulatory shortages .

for example , in 2009 ( a drought year ) the department of the interior estimated that approximately 25% of the water supply reductions south of the delta ( which were approximately 40% of average annual exports ) were due to federal endangered species protections .

the rest of the restrictions were due to lack of water and other factors ( including cvpia ) .

for 2011 ( a wet year ) , the department estimates that pumping restrictions for endangered species and cvpia purposes totaled 90,000 acre feet ( 62,000 and 28,000 respectively ) – approximately 1.4% of the total 6.9 million acre feet exported from the delta that year .

it is not clear how much of any given year's pumping restrictions are due to state water quality control requirements and to what degree the bay - delta accord matches those requirements , and thus to what degree a similar level of restrictions would remain under h.r .

1837 for water quality purposes .

further , any reduction can be important in the long run , due to the state and federal system's reliance on storage carryover capacity and its ability to store water in wet years for use in dry years .

h.r .

1837 goes to the heart of the water supply issue by proposing to prohibit "any" state or federal law ( including the public trust doctrine and possibly california water rights laws ) from reducing water supplies beyond those allowed in the bay - delta accord and declaring a federal supremacy over water management to "protect existing water rights throughout the system. .

however , some argue that the bill would undermine efforts to achieve the "co - equal" goals of "providing for a more reliable water supply for california and protecting , restoring , and enhancing the bay - delta ecosystem," which is the foundation of state and federal efforts in development of the bdcp .

while section 401 of title iv would direct the secretary to strictly adhere to state water rights and honor senior water rights , it is unclear how other sections of title iv square with the broad preemption language of section 108 and the federal supremacy language in title v , and how such legislation would be implemented .

