from december 2011 to january 2012 , some iranian government officials openly threatened to close the strait of hormuz , a major artery of the global oil market , if sanctions are imposed on iran's oil exports .

iran's first vice president mohammad reza rahimi first stated that threat on december 28 , 2011 .

various iranian naval and other commanders restated and in some cases changed the threat somewhat .

for example , on january 3 , 2012 , the commander of iran's regular army , ataollah salehi , warned the united states not to return the departing u.s.s .

john stennis aircraft carrier to the gulf .

perhaps recognizing the potential for conflict with superior u.s. forces , a few iranian figures , including regular navy commander habibollah sayyari , issued statements downplaying or softening the warnings and threats .

the iranian threats were issued during "velayat 90," naval exercises held from december 23 , 2011 , to january 2 , 2012 , which culminated with the test firing of iran - made surface - to - surface missiles .

oil exports are critical to iran , providing 76% of export earnings and 62% of government revenues .

many experts see iran's warnings as a reiteration of its long held position to defend these exports .

the strait of hormuz is a key artery of the global oil market .

persian gulf oil exporters — iraq , kuwait , saudi arabia , the united arab emirates and qatar — shipped about 17 million barrels a day ( mb / d ) of oil through the strait in 2011 , which is roughly 20% of the global oil market and 35% of seaborne trade according to the energy information administration .

on average , 14 crude oil tankers leave the persian gulf through the strait each day with more than 85% of these crude oil exports going to asian countries , including china , japan , india , and south korea .

the united states imports 1.8 mb / d from persian gulf countries , roughly 10% of u.s. consumption .

separately , more than a quarter of the world's liquefied natural gas ( lng ) trade , equal to about 2.6% of global natural gas consumption , moves through the strait .

this is primarily exports from qatar to europe and asia .

the united states imports little lng .

the persian gulf is also home to the world's spare oil production capacity .

current estimates for global spare oil production capacity tend to be around 2 to 3 mb / d .

opec members hold spare capacity as a result of their market management strategy .

basically all of this spare capacity is held by persian gulf oil producers — mostly saudi arabia , with small amounts in kuwait and the united arab emirates .

spare capacity is viewed as a cushion to the oil market which can be used to offset supply disruptions .

however , given its location , this spare capacity would not be available to offset a disruption to the strait of hormuz .

there is little ability for oil shipments to bypass the strait through alternative routes , particularly in the short - run .

according to reports , saudi arabia could redirect 1.5 mb / d of oil currently exported through the persian gulf to terminals on its red sea coast through unutilized capacity currently available on its east - west pipeline .

a 1.5 mb / d pipeline to bypass the strait is being built in the united arab emirates , but it is not likely to be completed until the middle of 2012 .

several other pipelines that ran through iraq and saudi arabia to the mediterranean and red sea export facilities have been out of operation for many years , and it is unclear how readily they could be returned to operation .

a disruption of oil through the strait of hormuz could significantly affect global oil prices .

though most of the flows through the strait go to asia , the oil market is globally integrated and a disruption anywhere can contribute to higher oil prices everywhere .

a disruption of oil exported from the persian gulf to asia would leave asian refineries bidding for oil from alternative sources elsewhere .

due to the wide number of relevant variables , there is significant uncertainty on how much a disruption could contribute to higher crude oil prices .

while disruption risks in the past may have contributed to prices being higher than they might have otherwise been , actual iran - related events have not necessarily resulted in clear and significant price increases ex - post ( see table 1 ) .

the numerous variables affecting the price of oil at any given time can make it difficult to estimate what specific change in price is due to a specific event .

nonetheless , reductions or threatened reductions to supply do tend to push oil prices up .

key uncertainties for the impact of a disruption would be how much global oil supply was reduced , risks of further reductions , and duration of the disruption .

risk of damage to oil production and export facilities in the persian gulf would also be of concern .

the response of oil - importing countries would also be important , namely if and how consumer countries released strategic oil stockpiles , in addition to any possible military response .

conditions in the rest of the oil market and the global economy would also affect how prices eventually responded .

for example , disruptions that occur during periods of strong global oil demand growth and limited supply growth elsewhere may have a relatively greater price impacts than those that occur when demand is falling and other sources of supply are growing or commercial oil inventories are high .

given limited bypass options , outright closure of the strait would represent an unprecedented disruption to global oil supply and would likely cause a substantial increase in oil prices .

however , as suggested above , outright closure may be unlikely , and even if it occurred , might not persist for very long .

another possibility is the harassment of tanker traffic through the strait as described above .

the impact of harassment would depend on the degree to which it effectively reduced oil exports through the strait and its duration .

harassment could reduce the rate at which oil exited the gulf , raise the cost of transport , and raise worries of future disruption .

a third possibility — one already pursued by iran — is that iranian officials can make threatening statements suggesting they will disrupt tanker traffic .

the increased perception of risk could contribute to higher oil prices without requiring military action , though this is only effective in contributing to oil prices as long as and to the degree that global oil market participants take such threats seriously .

such a measure can benefit iran by increasing their oil revenues without risking military retaliation .

in the event of a disruption , consumer countries could release strategic stocks to offset the impact on oil supply .

the united states currently holds 696 million barrels of crude oil in the strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) , a publicly held stockpile of crude oil to be used to offset supply disruptions .

the united states coordinates use of its spr with other members of the international energy agency ( iea ) , which include japan , germany , south korea , and other members of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) .

oil importing members of the iea have an obligation to hold oil stocks equal to at least 90 days worth of net imports .

the iea has coordinated to collectively release stocks three times since the organization was created in the wake of the 1973 / 1974 oil crisis: after iraq's invasion of kuwait in 1990 / 1991 ; after hurricanes katrina and rita in 2005 ; and in response to prolonged disruption of libyan oil production in 2011 .

iea countries hold about 4.2 billion barrels of crude oil and refined products in inventory , of which 1.5 billion are held by governments .

if drawn down at the maximum rate technically possible , these government - held stocks could be delivered to the market at an average rate of 10.4 mb / d of crude oil and 4 mb / d of products in the first month of an iea collective action , diminishing thereafter .

 ( the rate diminishes as stocks are depleted. ) .

by offsetting the loss of supply , a strategic stock release could blunt the impact a disruption can have on oil prices .

there are several additional resources to respond to an oil supply emergency .

in some iea member countries oil companies are required by governments to hold emergency stocks .

these can be made available to supplement a release government held strategic stocks elsewhere .

iea members can also coordinate demand restraint measures to offset the impact of a supply disruption .

some non - oecd governments , including china , have started building strategic stocks and some oil exporters , including saudi arabia , hold small amounts of crude in storage near consumer markets .

concerns about broadening international sanctions on iran's oil exports prompted some iranian officials to make threatening statements about closing the strait of hormuz .

iran has invested in the military capability to close or disrupt traffic through the strait .

if iran attempted to do so , the united states — which has invested in military preparedness to keep the strait open — would respond , potentially joined by other countries .

such a military response may or may not be limited to simply reopening the strait for transit .

the threat of military response , coupled with its economic concern about disrupting commerce with its own trading partners , makes iran unlikely to attempt to close the strait of hormuz .

iran has the option of harassing tanker traffic through the gulf as it has in the past , though that also runs the risk of military retaliation and alienating customers .

however , it is possible that iranian action becomes relatively more likely as more countries reduce or refuse iranian exports .

alternatively , iran may choose to continue making threatening statements without actually acting and / or to seek a diplomatic solution to curb oil sanctions through renewing international talks on its nuclear program .

a disruption of oil exports through the strait would have significant impacts on oil prices around the world .

to some degree a disruption could be offset by release from the u.s. strategic petroleum reserve and similar reserves in other countries .

even without an extant disruption , concerns about a future disruption may also contribute to oil prices being higher than they might otherwise be by creating uncertainty about a large portion of the world's oil supply .

iran has the option of making threatening statements about the strait without actually acting , which is what it has been doing since december 2011 .

so long as oil market participants consider this a credible future threat , it could contribute to upward pressure on oil prices .

even prior to iran's recent threats , legislation in congress to increase sanctions on iran was pending , and some had been recently adopted , such as sanctions against banks that do business with iran's central bank .

some legislation still pending might receive more attention in light of iran's threats to the strait .

if hostilities with iran were to occur in the strait , it is likely that the question of presidential authority to use force will be raised .

a "global diplomatic effort to regulate and write rules for all ocean areas , all uses of the seas and all of its resources" led the united nations to convene the third united nations conference on the sea in 1973 and adoption of the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) in 1982 .

the convention states: recognizing the desirability of establishing through this convention , with due regard for the sovereignty of all states , a legal order for the seas and oceans which will facilitate international communication , and will promote the peaceful uses of the seas and oceans … believing that the codification and progressive development of the law of the sea achieved in this convention will contribute to the strengthening of peace , security , cooperation and friendly relations among all nations in conformity with the principles of justice and equal rights … [and] affirming that matters not regulated by this convention continue to be governed by the rules and principles of general international law… parties to the convention agreed to the adoption of the comprehensive international treaty after nine years of negotiations .

unclos generally incorporates the rules of international law codified in the1958 united nations convention on the high seas , but also comprehensively addresses the use of other areas of the sea including , for example , the territorial seas , natural resources , and the seabed .

while the united states is a signatory to the 1958 convention on the high seas , it is not a party to unclos .

however , unclos is generally viewed as a codification of customary international law .

with respect to the coastal nations bordering the straits of hormuz , iran is a signatory to unclos but has not ratified the convention and oman is both a signatory to and has ratified the convention .

straits used for international navigation are addressed in unclos .

specifically , part iii ( arts .

34-45 ) of the convention is comprised of various provisions related to the legal status of waters forming straits and authorized forms of passage through such waters .

the general provisions ( arts .

34-36 ) establish the legal status of waters forming straits and scope of application .

the remaining articles in part iii identify the legal regimes of transit passage and innocent passage , including the rights and duties of transiting vessels as well as the rights and duties of states bordering the straits .

transit passage is defined as "the exercise in accordance with this part of the freedom of navigation and overflight solely for the purpose of continuous and expeditious transit of the strait between one part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone and another part of the high seas or an exclusive economic zone. .

while exercising the right of transit passage , ships and aircraft are required to: ( a ) proceed without delay through or over the strait ; ( b ) refrain from any threat or use of force against the sovereignty , territorial integrity or political independence of the states bordering the strait ; and ( c ) refrain from any activities other than those incident to their normal modes of continuous and expeditious transit unless necessary by force majeure or by distress .

the states bordering the straits may adopt laws and regulations related to safety and navigation of maritime traffic , pollution , fishing , and commodity trades .

however , authorized laws and regulations "shall not discriminate in form or in fact among foreign ships or in their application have the practical effect of denying , hampering or impairing the right of transit passage. .

in support of the safety and navigation of maritime traffic , states bordering straits may "designate sea lanes and prescribe traffic separation schemes … to promote the safe passage of ships. .

with respect to the straits of hormuz , the states bordering the straits have designated sea lanes and a traffic separation scheme as adopted by the maritime safety committee of the inter - governmental maritime consultative organization ( a specialized agency of the united nations , now known as the international maritime organization ( imo ) ) in 1979 .

states bordering straits may substitute other sea lanes or traffic separation schemes , after consultation with a competent international organization ( imo ) .

ships in transit passage are required to respect the applicable sea lanes and traffic separation schemes established in accordance with unclos .

finally , states bordering straits "shall not hamper transit passage and shall give appropriate publicity to any danger to navigation or overflight within or over the strait of which they have knowledge .

there shall be no suspension of transit passage. .

