the u.s. department of veterans affairs ( va ) offers a broad range of benefits to veterans of the u.s. armed forces and to certain members of their families .

among these benefits are various types of financial assistance , including monthly cash payments to disabled veterans , health care , education , and housing .

certain criteria must be met to be eligible to receive any of the benefits administered by the va .

this report focuses on basic eligibility and entitlement requirements for former servicemembers for benefits administered by the va. certain va benefits are available to current servicemembers , and the eligibility requirements for those benefits are not a component of this report .

the va uses a two - step process to evaluate claims for benefits .

first , the claimant must demonstrate eligib i l ity for veterans' benefits in general .

that is , the claimant must prove that he or she is a bona fide veteran and verify certain related matters .

second , the veteran must prove entitlement to the particular benefit being sought .

to be eligible for most va benefits , the claimant must be a veteran or , in some circumstances , the survivor or the dependent of a veteran .

by statute , a veteran is defined as a "person who served in the active military , naval , or air service , and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable. .

in evaluating the evidence to determine whether the claimant is a veteran for the purposes of va benefits , the va relies upon military service records .

the va is bound by information that the service documents contain .

such records may include an original military service record ; a copy issued by the military service with the certification that it is a true document ; or a copy submitted by an accredited agent , attorney , or service representative with special training , who certifies that it is a copy of an original military service document or a copy of a copy of such a document .

in addition , the document must contain data regarding the length , time , and character of the service , and the va must believe that the document is genuine and accurate .

if the claimant does not provide the requisite documentation or other evidence , or the submitted documentation does not meet the requirements , the va must seek to verify the claimant's military service directly from the appropriate military service .

to be eligible for va benefits , members of the national guard and the reserve components must meet the same standards as other claimants .

in many cases , however , they do not meet the active duty standard or length of service standard and are therefore ineligible for va benefits .

members of the national guard and reserves who are never activated for federal active duty military service do not meet the active duty requirement .

national guard and reserve members who are called to active duty and serve the full period for which they are called meet both the active service and length of duty requirements .

national guard and reserve members also qualify as veterans for the purposes of va benefits if they are disabled or die from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty .

national guard and reserve members may qualify as veterans for the purposes of va benefits under other circumstances , which adds to the complexity of the eligibility determination .

for example , under certain conditions guard and reserve members may be eligible for education benefits ( through the reserve educational program or the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) and home loans from the va ( with six years of service in the selected reserves or national guard ) .

eligibility under these special cases is usually determined by the va after reviewing the individual servicemember's military service records .

some groups of civilians who participated in world war i and world war ii are also eligible for va benefits .

the gi bill improvement act of 1977 ( p.l .

95-202 ) recognized the service of the women's air forces service pilots , a civilian group , as active service for benefits administered by the va. that law also provided that the secretary of defense could determine that service for the armed forces by a group of civilians or contractors be considered active service for benefits administered by the va. based on the provisions of p.l .

95-202 , the secretary of defense established that the secretary of the air force would develop and maintain the process to determine if the wartime employment of certain groups of individuals is considered active duty military service for the purpose of receiving certain veterans' benefits .

if these groups are considered to be active duty by the secretary , they are eligible to receive certain benefits , including health care .

regulations implementing p.l .

95-202 specify which groups the secretary has determined were employed in active duty service .

the regulations also established the department of defense civilian / military service review board and advisory panel to review each application for active duty status .

following its review , the board recommends to the secretary whether the applicant group should be considered active duty for the purposes of the act ; the secretary makes the final decision .

changes and clarification to the regulations were implemented in 1989 in response to "a federal court determination [ schumacher v. aldridge ] that the department of defense had failed to clarify factors and criteria in their implementing directive concerning p.l .

95-202 . .

to date , only certain groups who participated in world war i and world war ii have been accorded active duty status under this procedure , including women's air force service pilots ( wasps ) , signal corps female telephone operators unit ( world war i ) , engineer field clerks ( world war i ) , male civilian ferry pilots ( world war ii ) , and other groups of employees with war - related occupations .

civilian groups granted veterans status pursuant to p.l .

95-202 are eligible for va burial benefits including interment or inurnment in va national cemeteries .

pursuant to legislation enacted on may 20 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-158 ) , these veterans are eligible for inurnment in the columbarium or niche wall at arlington cemetery but not ground burial .

merchant mariners are civilians who engage in certain maritime activities , such as the transportation of military equipment by sea , in support of the armed forces .

in general , merchant mariners are not considered veterans for the purposes of any va benefits .

however , pursuant to regulations promulgated in accordance with p.l .

95-202 , the following groups of merchant mariners are considered veterans for purposes of eligibility for all programs administered by the va: united states merchant seamen who served on blockships in support of operation mulberry in world war ii ; and american merchant marine personnel who served in oceangoing service during the period of armed conflict between december 7 , 1941 , and august 15 , 1945 .

in addition , pursuant to section 402 of the veterans programs enhancement act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-368 ) , merchant mariners may qualify for interment or inurnment at a va national cemetery and va burial benefits only if they were members of the united states merchant marine , army transport service , or naval transport service who served between august 16 , 1945 , and december 31 , 1946 .

