smart meter technology is a key component of the advanced metering infrastructure ( ami ) that will help the smart grid link the "two - way flow of electricity with the two - way flow of information. .

privacy and security concerns surrounding smart meter technology arise from the meters' essential functions , which include ( 1 ) recording near - real time data on consumer electricity usage ; ( 2 ) transmitting this data to the smart grid using a variety of communications technologies ; and ( 3 ) receiving communications from the smart grid , such as real - time energy prices or remote commands that can alter a consumer's electricity usage to facilitate demand response .

beneficial uses of ami are developing rapidly , and like the early internet , many applications remain unforeseen .

at a basic level , smart meters will permit utilities to "collect , measure , and analyze energy consumption data for grid management , outage notification , and billing purposes. .

the meters may increase energy efficiency by giving consumers greater control over their use of electricity , as well as permitting better integration of plug - in electric vehicles and renewable energy sources .

they may also aid in the development of a more reliable electricity grid that is better equipped to withstand cyber attacks and natural disasters , and help to decrease peak demand for electricity .

to be useful for these purposes , and many others , data recorded by smart meters must be highly detailed , and , consequently , it may show what individual appliances a consumer is using .

the data must also be transmitted to electric utilities — and possibly to third parties outside of the smart grid — subjecting it to potential interception or theft as it travels over communications networks and is stored in a variety of physical locations .

these characteristics of smart meter data present privacy and security concerns that are likely to become more prevalent as government - backed initiatives expand deployment of the meters to millions of homes across the country .

in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , congress appropriated funds for the implementation of the smart grid investment grant ( sgig ) program administered by the department of energy .

this program now permits the federal government to reimburse up to 50% of eligible smart grid investments , which include the cost to electric utilities of buying and installing smart meters .

in its annual report on smart meter deployment , the federal energy regulatory commission cited statistics showing that the sgig program has helped fund the deployment of about 7.2 million meters as of september 2011 .

at completion , the program will have partially funded the installation of 15.5 million meters .

by 2015 , the institute for electric efficiency expects that a total of 65 million smart meters will be in operation throughout the united states .

installation of smart meters and the communications technologies that accompany them may have unforeseen legal consequences for those who generate , seek , or use the data recorded by the meters .

these consequences may arise under existing federal laws or constitutional provisions governing the privacy of electronic communications , data retention , computer misuse , foreign surveillance , and consumer protection .

this report examines federal privacy and cybersecurity laws that may apply to consumer data collected by residential smart meters .

it examines the legal implications of smart meter technology for consumers who generate the data , law enforcement officers who seek smart meter data from utilities , utilities that store the data , and hackers who access smart grid technology to steal consumer data or interfere with it .

this report looks at federal laws that may pertain to the data when it is ( 1 ) stored in a utility - owned smart meter at a consumer's residence ; ( 2 ) in transit between the meter and the smart grid by way of various communications technologies ; and ( 3 ) stored on computers in the grid .

this report does not address state or local laws , such as regulations by state public utilities commissions , that may establish additional responsibilities for some electric utilities with regard to smart meter data .

it also does not discuss the mandatory cybersecurity and reliability standards enforced by the north american electric reliability corporation , which impose obligations on utilities that participate in the generation or transmission of electricity .

general federal privacy safeguards provided under the federal privacy act of 1974 ( fpa ) protect smart meter data maintained by federal agencies , including data held by federally owned electric utilities .

section 5 of the federal trade commission act ( ftc act ) allows the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to bring enforcement proceedings against electric utilities that violate their privacy policies or fail to protect meter data from unauthorized access , provided that the ftc has statutory jurisdiction over the utilities .

it is unclear how fourth amendment protection from unreasonable search and seizures would apply to smart meter data , due to the lack of cases on this issue .

however , depending upon the manner in which smart meter services are presented to consumers , smart meter data may be protected from unauthorized disclosure or unauthorized access under the stored communications act ( sca ) , the computer fraud and abuse act ( cfaa ) , and the electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) .

if smart meter data is protected by these statutes , law enforcement would still appear to have the ability to access it for investigative purposes under procedures provided in the sca , ecpa , and the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) .

residential smart meters present privacy and cybersecurity issues that are likely to evolve with the technology .

in 2010 , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) published a report identifying some of these issues , which fall into two main categories: ( 1 ) privacy concerns that smart meters will reveal the activities of people inside of a home by measuring their electricity usage frequently over time ; and ( 2 ) fears that inadequate cybersecurity measures surrounding the digital transmission of smart meter data will expose it to misuse by authorized and unauthorized users of the data .

the use of smart meters presents the recurring conflict between law enforcement's need to effectively investigate and combat crime and our desire for privacy while in our homes .

with smart meters , police will have access to data that might be used to track residents' daily lives and routines while in their homes , including their eating , sleeping , and showering habits , what appliances they use and when , and whether they prefer the television to the treadmill , among a host of other details .

though a potential boon to police , access to this data is not limitless .

the fourth amendment , which establishes the constitutional parameters for government investigations , may restrict access to smart meter data or establish rules by which it can be obtained .

the fourth amendment ensures that the "right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated...." this section discusses whether the collection and use of smart meter data may contravene this protection .

although there is no fourth amendment case on point , analogous cases may provide guidance .

to assess whether there has been a fourth amendment violation , two primary questions must be asked: ( 1 ) whether there was state action ; that is , was there sufficient government involvement in the alleged wrongdoing to trigger the fourth amendment ; and ( 2 ) whether the person had an expectation of privacy that society is prepared to deem reasonable .

if the first question is answered in the affirmative , then the analysis moves to the second question .

but if no state action is found , the analysis ends there and the fourth amendment does not apply .

this subpart will first determine whether access to smart meter data by police , or by privately and publicly owned utilities , satisfies the state action doctrine , thereby warranting further fourth amendment review .

this section discusses federal statutory protections that may be applicable to the contents of communications sent by a smart meter , independent of the fourth amendment , while they are either stored within the smart meter prior to transmission , during transmission , or after they have been delivered to the utility .

three federal laws , the electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) , the stored communications act ( sca ) , and the computer fraud and abuse act ( cfaa ) may be applicable to these situations and are discussed in more detail below .

section 5 of the ftc act prohibits "unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce" and gives the federal trade commission ( ftc ) jurisdiction to bring enforcement actions against "persons , partnerships , or corporations" that engage in these practices .

in the past , the ftc has used its authority under section 5 to take action against businesses that violate their own privacy policies or that fail to adequately safeguard a consumer's personal information .

although there do not appear to be any cases in which the ftc has taken action against an electric utility for failing to protect consumer smart meter data , the commission would have authority to enforce section 5 against a utility that fell within its statutory jurisdiction .

smart meter electricity usage data pertaining to u.s. citizens or permanent residents that is retrievable by personal identifier from a system of records maintained by any federal "agency," including federally owned utilities , is subject to the protections contained in the privacy act when it is maintained , collected , used , or disseminated by the agency .

all nine of the federally owned utilities are federal agencies covered by the privacy act .

for the purposes of the act , the term "agency" includes , but is not limited to , "any executive department , military department , government corporation , government controlled corporation , or other establishment in the executive branch of the government ( including the executive office of the president ) , or any independent regulatory agency. .

according to eia , utilities that are part of an executive department include the four power marketing administrations in the department of energy ( bonneville , southeastern , southwestern , and western ) , the international boundary and water commission in the department of state , and the bureau of indian affairs and the bureau of reclamation in the department of the interior .

the u.s. army corps of engineers resides in the department of defense , which is an executive department .

the tennessee valley authority is a government - owned corporation .

the privacy act protects the type of electricity usage data gathered by smart meters , provided that the data pertains to u.s. citizens or permanent residents , is personally identifiable , and is retrievable by the individual's name or another personal identifier .

the privacy act "governs the collection , use , and dissemination of a 'record' about an 'individual' maintained by federal agencies in a 'system of records.' .

under the statute , a "record" is "any item , collection , or grouping of information about an individual that is maintained by an agency ... that contains his name , or the identifying number , symbol , or other identifying particular assigned to the individual , such as a finger or voice print or a photograph. .

an "individual" is defined as "a citizen of the united states or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. .

a "system of records" is "a group of any records under the control of any agency from which information is retrieved by the name of the individual" or other personal identifier "assigned to the individual. .

smart meter data held by an agency certainly fits within the broad definition of a "record" because it is a grouping of information about an individual , namely , data on that individual's electricity usage .

the data is typically stored along with a consumer's account information , which usually includes a consumer's name , social security number , or other "identifying particular. .

thus , smart meter data would constitute a protected "record" under the privacy act , assuming that it pertains to a citizen of the united states or lawful permanent resident and is retrievable by a personal identifier such as a consumer's name or account number .

for information on the general safeguards that the privacy act provides for data that is maintained by a federal agency and meets the other requirements for a covered record under the act , see crs report rl34120 , federal information security and data breach notification laws , by [author name scrubbed] .

