on january 4 , 2011 , the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) became law .

the acronym "gpra" in the act's short title refers to the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra 1993 ) , a law that gprama substantially modified .

when gpra 1993 was enacted , it was regarded as a watershed for the federal government .

for the first time , congress established requirements in statute for most agencies to set goals , measure performance , and report the information to congress for potential use .

agencies submitted this information in three major products: multi - year strategic plans , annual plans , and annual reports .

the law also required agencies to consult with congress and non - federal stakeholders when developing some of these plans and goals .

as a thread running through these requirements , the authors of gpra 1993 said the law especially was intended to address the needs of congress in its policy making , oversight , and budgeting work , and the needs of agency program managers .

after a four - year phase - in period for gpra 1993 and 13 years of the law's full implementation , gprama makes substantial changes .

among other things , gprama continues the three agency - level products from gpra 1993 , but with changes ; establishes new products and processes that focus on goal - setting and performance measurement in policy areas that cut across agencies ; brings attention to using goals and measures during policy implementation ; increases reporting on the internet ; and requires individuals to be responsible for some goals and management tasks .

in making these changes , gprama aligns the timing of many products to coincide with presidential terms and budget proposals .

the law also includes more central roles for the office of management and budget ( omb ) , an entity that often seeks to advance the president's policy preferences .

gprama also contains more specific requirements for consultations with congress .

by design , many of gprama's products are required to be submitted to congress for scrutiny and potential use .

the law also provides opportunities for congress and non - federal stakeholders to influence how agencies and omb set goals and assess performance .

this report provides an overview of gprama's products and processes .

in addition , the report highlights potential issues for congress .

to provide context , the report first identifies potential congressional roles that relate to performance .

furthermore , because gprama inserts an extensive vocabulary into law and practice , the report also includes a list of acronyms ( appendix a ) and glossary ( appendix b ) .

the roles that congress may take regarding government performance are pervasive and difficult to overstate .

in exercising its constitutional powers , congress may by law establish agencies , their missions and goals , processes for how they operate , their priorities , and their resource levels .

congress also may influence the actions of agencies and omb through non - statutory means , conduct oversight , and study policy problems .

in any of these activities , congress may cooperate or compete with the president to influence how agencies implement public policies .

like gpra 1993 , gprama provides for goal - setting , measurement , and evaluation .

these activities may not always be pursued in a neutral way , however .

the choice of a policy goal or a trade - off among goals may be contested .

it could be argued , therefore , that goals are inherently political in nature .

similarly , the definition of "success" that is to be used when assessing a program's performance also may be contested .

in these situations , two tools of policy analysis often are used to help inform assessments of performance: program evaluation and performance measurement .

program evaluations use one or more methods to assess how , and the extent to which , programs or policies achieve intended objectives or cause unintended consequences ( see box at right ) .

by contrast , performance measurement is narrower in scope .

it refers to periodic measurement of data that are related to programs .

used in isolation , performance measures do not necessarily reflect how well a program is working , because measurements may be driven by so - called "external factors" that are separate from the program , such as a natural disaster or downturn in the economy .

in response , measurement and evaluation may be used together to help inform policy making .

policy making also may be informed by a variety of other analyses and considerations , such as forecasting , logic , risk assessment , and values .

in this context , congress may assume at least two roles .

first , when congress looks at a specific program or policy area , congress may use performance information to help inform its thinking , oversight , and policy making .

for example , an interest group or the president may cite goals , evaluations , and measures when justifying a proposal to congress .

congress and other consumers of performance information may face challenges in these situations — such as when scrutinizing whether information has been presented without bias or is relevant to a policy problem .

a large volume of incoming information also may strain time and staff resources .

challenges like these highlight another potential role .

in this second role , congress may establish federal policies and processes that relate to how the government's goal - setting , planning , and evaluation are to be conducted .

congress's passage of gpra 1993 and gprama are examples of this role .

in addition , congress may require agencies to involve non - federal stakeholders in processes like goal - setting or direct agencies to act transparently .

in these ways , stakeholders may help congress to identify performance - related issues that merit closer attention .

policies and processes like these typically are intended to generate useful information for multiple audiences — including congress , agencies , the president , and the public — and , thereby , to help inform policy making , oversight , and faithful and effective implementation of laws .

this crs report focuses primarily on the first role , regarding the information and opportunities that gprama may generate .

nevertheless , congress might also assume the second role if it were assessing gprama's design and implementation or considering changes to the law .

gprama substantially modified and added to gpra 1993's framework of products and processes .

in making these changes , gprama's design drew from multiple sources .

these included the views of the law's authors , the barack obama administration's approach to government performance , the george w. bush administration's approach to government performance , the work during the 111 th congress of a senate budget committee task force , and government accountability office ( gao ) views .

looking ahead , these influences and the federal government's experience with gpra 1993 may provide insights into current issues of gprama's design , implementation , and prospects .

this crs report , however , focuses more immediately on gprama's statutory requirements and the information and opportunities that the law may generate for congress .

in that light , the following subsections discuss gprama's major provisions in four categories: agency - level products and processes that gprama continues from gpra 1993 , albeit with significant changes ; new agency - level products and processes ; new products and processes that are executive branch - wide in scope ; and institutional changes .

after reviewing these provisions , subsequent sections of this report discuss how the changes fit together , some of their potential implications , and potential issues for congress .

depending on how gprama's changes are implemented , the law may have significant implications .

to highlight a few , gprama brings additional attention to policy implementation and oversight in several ways .

for example , gpra 1993 focused on annual plans that were used to support the president's budget proposal .

these plans were not required to be revised to reflect congressional action .

by contrast , gprama adds a requirement that effectively requires the agency performance plans to be updated to reflect this policy making .

in quarterly reviews , the law may bring focus to achieving goals during policy implementation , and the performance - related website may facilitate congressional oversight .

gprama's requirements for individual officials to be responsible for various management - and performance - related tasks also may provide a convenient means for congress to interact with agencies about discrete topics .

gprama continues with gpra 1993's emphasis on goal - setting and performance measurement , with little explicit emphasis on producing or presenting program evaluations .

under gpra 1993 , this sometimes could leave unclear how well programs themselves were performing , why , and what might be done in response .

for example , achievement or non - achievement of a goal might be driven by "external" factors other than the program , and measurement of goal achievement may reveal little information that is actionable for an agency , congress , or the president .

at the same time , gprama also brings more attention to goal - setting and performance in areas that cut across federal programs and agencies .

as shown in figure 2 , the law established a new set of executive branch - wide products and processes .

in addition , nearly 20 provisions in gprama relate to the concept of crosscutting policy areas , where multiple agencies , programs , regulations , delivery partners , and other policy tools may "contribute" to the accomplishment of a goal or desired outcome .

several provisions require assessments of whether activities that cut across these boundaries are contributing toward achievement of the same goal .

gprama does not specify how such assessments are to be made or presented to congress .

nevertheless , agencies and omb might use program evaluations or "logic modeling" ( see appendix b ) to portray and demonstrate these relationships .

in several ways , gprama establishes more specific requirements for agency and omb interactions with congress .

for example , agency consultations with congress about agency strategic plans are required to include both majority and minority views from authorizing , appropriations , and oversight committees .

in this context , another gprama provision requires consultations with "appropriate" committees to occur every two years .

similarly , when omb coordinates development of long - term federal government priority goals , gprama requires omb to consult "periodically" with the majorities and minorities of several specific committees .

to provide some accountability with regard to consultations , gprama requires reporting in agency strategic plans and on the omb website regarding how ( or whether ) congressional views and suggestions were incorporated into certain kinds of goals .

at the same time , it remains to be seen if gprama could have any implications for the working relationships and the power relationships among congress , agencies , omb , the president , and the public .

to illustrate , the omb website has stated that [t]he core mission of omb is to serve the president of the united states in implementing his vision across the executive branch.... as the implementation and enforcement arm of presidential policy government - wide , omb carries out its mission through five critical processes that are essential to the president's ability to plan and implement his priorities across the executive branch .

gprama gives omb specific statutory authorities that it could attempt to use to influence several products , processes , and institutions .

in any of these situations , if a gprama product or process were perceived as reflecting primarily the president's policy preferences or assessing performance in a way that does not reflect underlying statute or congressional intent , some observers might view the product or process as less credible or useful .

similarly , gprama aligns or re - aligns numerous products and processes according to presidential terms and budget proposals .

as a consequence , it arguably remains to be seen whether gprama's authorities could be used to alter the responsiveness of agencies to congress and congressional intent .

for example , in spite of more specific consultation requirements , it might become more difficult for congress to influence agencies' goal - setting in agency strategic plans .

under gprama , all agencies probably will submit draft asps to omb for clearance at the same time , in the first year of a new president's term .

this is a time when the president traditionally attempts to influence agencies to adopt and implement his or her policy agenda .

as a consequence , omb's ability to influence or direct the choices of agencies and the information that they present may be enhanced in comparison with gpra 1993 .

gprama's more specific requirements for congressional consultations about asps and priority goals , along with transparency from the omb performance website , also could affect working and power relationships .

for example , it remains to be seen whether congressional consultations might mitigate any of the possibilities discussed above , create enhanced opportunities for congress to influence the choices of agencies , or foster congressional - executive collaboration and compromise .

with these and other potential implications in mind , the bullets below highlight more specific issues for congress that might arise during implementation of gprama .

each bullet also includes questions that might be considered .

congressional consultations and defining "success. .

gprama requires agencies and omb to consult with congress regarding agency strategic plans , federal government priority goals , and agency submissions of plans and reports to congress .

committees also might consider asserting broader prerogatives to interact with or direct agencies .

in these contexts , have meaningful consultations occurred with relevant committees and members ? .

did the consultations occur during formulation of the plans , goals , and proposals , or only after the fact ? .

are agencies being responsive to committees of jurisdiction ? .

do committees and members agree with the way in which agencies or omb are defining what constitutes a "program," as this is required to be portrayed on the omb performance website by october 2012 ? .

how might committees and members engage on these topics effectively ? .

do goals and objectives reflect current law and congressional intent ? .

does congress agree with the designation of certain goals as being priority goals ? .

are plans and goals well formulated and coordinated ? .

agency and omb representations about performance .

by design , gprama requires many products to be submitted to congress to inform its policy deliberations .

if the products are to be considered useful to congress and the public , one input to perceptions of usefulness may be whether the products are perceived as making credible , unbiased representations about how well agencies and programs are performing .

how credible are these representations ? .

for a program or agency , is "success" being defined appropriately ? .

are credible and appropriate methods of policy analysis , measurement , and evaluation being used ? .

what resources and tools might congress draw upon , including from its support agencies and the public , to scrutinize any "evidence" that is presented ? .

what are the policy implications of available evidence and analyses ? .

oversight , transparency , and public participation .

congress oftentimes relies on transparency and public participation to help it conduct oversight of policy development and implementation within agencies and omb .

oversight findings may generate interest in subsequent lawmaking or other legislative activity .

what have been the recent activities of performance improvement officers and the performance improvement council ? .

are they functioning effectively ? .

what is happening during quarterly reviews ? .

are agencies and omb focusing on learning and improvement in addition to goal achievement ? .

is the omb performance website providing the required information ? .

if a goal is removed from the website , or if a goal's target is revised , will the website retain any record of the previous goal or target ? .

might it be worthwhile to communicate informally with a goal leader or other official who is responsible for a topic under gprama , or more formally invite the official to testify at a hearing ? .

are non - federal stakeholders being consulted by agencies in the development of agency strategic plans ? .

what are stakeholders' views about agencies' goals ? .

are omb and agencies consulting effectively with congress about the potential elimination of requirements to submit plans and reports to congress ? .

is gprama being implemented in a way that helps agency program managers and front - line staff without creating perverse incentives for organizations and individuals ? .

crosscutting policy areas .

congress and observers have expressed interest in policy areas that cut across agency and programmatic boundaries .

in these areas , more than one agency or program may collaborate and contribute toward desired policy outcomes or , conversely , duplicate effort .

for example , gprama requires omb to include information on its performance website about each agency program and how the program contributes to one or more of the agency's goals .

gao is separately required to report annually on programs , agencies , and initiatives with "duplicative goals and activities. .

most of gao's march 2011 findings cited "potential" fragmentation , overlap , or duplication , and gao oftentimes recommended further analysis or enhanced coordination .

are agencies and omb using their scarce analytical resources effectively to coordinate efforts and identify and exploit potential efficiencies ? .

are agencies and omb using appropriate tools to conduct these analyses , potentially including evaluations and logic modeling ? .

are there implications for coordination across congressional committees ? .

gprama 's design and implementation .

compared to the four - year phase - in period for gpra 1993 , the phase - in period for gprama before full implementation is fairly short .

answers to specific questions posed above about the implementation of gprama may raise broader questions about how well the law is designed and how well it is being implemented by omb or specific agencies .

in that light , how well is gprama serving congress's needs ? .

how well is it serving the needs of agency personnel , the president , and the public ? .

are agencies and omb adequately complying with the act ? .

are agencies and omb using the act in way that promotes improvement and learning in addition to accountability ? .

do agencies have the necessary capacity — including staff , skills , technology , and funding — to implement the law's numerous and detailed requirements ? .

in response to any of these topics , and if a problem were perceived , what options might be considered to enhance the law's design or implementation ? .

appendix a .

acronyms this table lists acronyms that are used in this crs report .

for some entries , text that is located inside parentheses indicates when an acronym is associated with implementation of gprama , gpra 1993 , another law , or a presidential initiative .

for acronyms associated with a particular president , the table indicates the relevant administration .

in practice , some terms and corresponding acronyms have been used that do not mirror the precise language from underlying statutes .

in appendix b , a glossary provides more information about these cases .

appendix b. glossary of terms government processes oftentimes involve specialized terms .

the federal budget process , for example , has evolved to a level of complexity where participants in the process often perceive a need for glossaries and guides .

gprama similarly establishes an elaborate framework of products and processes that focus on government performance .

in doing so , the law uses terms that are interrelated and sometimes technical in nature .

notably , the designs and legislative histories of gpra 1993 and gprama indicate congress's intention for congress itself , along with agencies , the president , non - federal stakeholders , and the broader public , to be consumers of the laws' products and to actively participate in the laws' processes for managing performance of the government .

to assist with navigating through gprama's varied products and processes , this glossary provides capsule summaries and statutory citations for related terms .

in each entry , when a term is included that also is listed elsewhere in the glossary , the term is written in italics the first time it is used .

