lending is inherently risky .

bank assets , which typically include loans made to borrowers , are risky because borrowers can default on their loans .

in addition , banks face funding risk because they must continuously borrow short - term liquidity to fund their assets ( customer loans ) .

in other words , banks provide longer - term ( illiquid ) customer loans by borrowing the funds via sequences of shorter - term ( liquid ) loans at relatively lower rates .

profits are generated from the spread between the long - term rates lenders charge and the successive sequences of shorter - term rates they pay for liquidity until the longer - term loans are repaid in full .

if borrowers default on their loans from the lender , the lender potentially could default on repayment of its liabilities , which are the shorter - term loan obligations to depositors and other financial institutions .

a bank's capital is defined as the difference between its assets and liabilities .

if a bank maintains sufficient capital , a default on one of its assets is less likely to translate into a subsequent failure to repay some of its shorter - term obligations .

a capital buffer , therefore , protects bank creditors from loan defaults by bank customers .

a bank is considered solvent as long as it maintains capital above a minimum threshold level , and it is considered undercapitalized and faces the prospect of being shut down by its regulator should its capitalization fall below the threshold .

a bank's asset or lending portfolio may grow proportionately with its capital reserves , and guidelines for this proportion have been established by the basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) .

the bcbs's work on the first basel capital accord , basel i , provided the international consensus framework for bank safety and soundness regulation .

the objective of the first basel capital accord was to promote consistent safety and soundness standards while providing an equitable basis of competition for banking institutions in participating countries .

in other words , banks may face a competitive disadvantage with competitors in other countries unless capital reserve requirements are internationally harmonized .

basel i established the amount of capital relative to assets , expressed as a capital - to - asset ratio , that financial institutions needed to maintain .

capital - asset ratios are generally computed using the total amount of capital in the numerator and the total amount of risk - weighted assets in the denominator .

the u.s. banking system currently operates under a safety and soundness framework based upon the first basel accord , which was adopted by the banking regulatory agencies in 1988 .

the second basel accord , basel ii , attempts to improve upon the methodology for capturing credit risk , which is explained in the next section .

in the united states , the federal banking regulatory agencies placed large "core" banks under the basel ii framework .

core banks are banking organizations with at least $250 billion of consolidated total assets or at least $10 billion of on - balance - sheet risk associated with foreign asset holdings .

core banks are also required to use the most advanced approaches of the basel ii framework to determine their credit risks .

the general "non - core" banks may continue to use basel i or the "general risk - based" capital rules to determine the optimal levels of capital to hold .

on december 7 , 2007 , the federal banking regulators published the final regulations for implementing basel ii for core banks that became effective on april 1 , 2008 .

in response to the 2007-2009 global financial crisis , the bcbs issued what is referred to as basel ii.5 as an amendment to basel ii , which increases the requirements on banks' models for evaluating financial risk and requires greater disclosures on banks' securitization activities .

the banking regulators issued proposed rules on the adoption of basel ii.5 revisions in the united states on january 11 , 2011 , which were amended and re - proposed on december 7 , 2011 .

in a further response to the financial crisis , the basel iii reform package revises the definition of regulatory capital and increases the amount that banks must hold .

basel iii also would require banks to hold a greater percentage of their assets in cash or in assets that can easily be converted to cash .

the quantitative requirements and phase - in schedules for basel iii were approved by the 27-member jurisdictions and 44 central banks and supervisory authorities on september 12 , 2010 .

basel iii requires banks to satisfy all of these enhanced requirements by 2019 .

formal implementation of basel iii has not yet begun in the united states ; however , a new proposed rule for the adoption of basel iii may be issued in 2012 .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) also addressed capital reserve requirements for banks .

the collins amendment of the dodd - frank act amends the definition of capital , establishes minimum capital and leverage requirements , and establishes an implementation timeline that is faster than what was agreed to in the basel iii accord .

in addition , dodd - frank removes the requirement that credit ratings be referenced when evaluating the creditworthiness of financial securities .

regulators are required to find other appropriate standards by which to determine the financial risks of bank portfolio holdings while enforcing the mandatory capital requirements .

this statutory requirement can potentially complicate implementation of basel ii.5 and basel iii in the united states .

implementation delays may also delay bank lending decisions and strategies .

bankers are likely to reconsider the size and composition of their longer - term asset portfolios in response to the new capital requirements once implementation of the rules is finalized .

this report discusses how the basel capital accord framework has been modified to improve the methodology used to capture credit risk , and analyzes selected implementation issues in the united states .

the next section explains how the bcbs incorporates credit ratings into the regulatory framework whereas the dodd - frank act eliminates any references to credit ratings in federal financial regulation , and how this may complicate the adoption of basel ii.5 and basel iii .

the report also summarizes the enhanced capital and liquidity requirements associated with basel iii and compares them to related provisions in the dodd - frank act .

safety and soundness provisions of the dodd - frank act that apply specifically to systemically important firms , such as a systemic risk tax and stress - testing , are not addressed in this report .

basel i introduced a risk - weighting system that weights ( multiplies ) the assets in the denominator of the capital - asset ratio by a factor that attempts to capture the relative credit or default risk of bank assets .

in the united states , bank assets are assigned into four categories ( buckets ) that receive weights of 0% , 20% , 50% , and 100% , respectively .

the risk weighting system arguably equates lower credit risk with liquidity given that it typically assigns lower weights to more liquid assets and higher weights to less liquid assets .

for example , cash and u.s. treasury securities , which are liquid and considered to have zero default risk , receive a risk weight of 0% .

these asset holdings would have no effect on a bank's portfolio capital - asset ratio .

on the other hand , a loan secured by residential property receives a risk weight of 50% , and a commercial loan receives a risk weight of 100% .

loans with higher risk weights reduce the overall portfolio capital - asset ratio .

in addition , a bank holding a loan that is assigned 100% risk weight would be required to hold 8% of the value of that asset as capital .

should a bank decide to hold less cash and increase its holdings of higher yielding , less liquid loans , then its capital reserves must also increase for its capital - asset ratio to remain intact .

conversely , when capital - asset ratios are low , academic research has found that some banks will substitute toward low risk - weighted asset categories to restore the ratio .

the composition of a bank's asset portfolio , therefore , may be influenced by the risk weights assigned to the assets .

the weighting system arguably does not sufficiently differentiate among the degrees of risk .

to illustrate , basel i places the same capital charge on all commercial loans regardless of the differences in credit ( default ) risk .

in other words , both high and low credit quality commercial loans receive the same 8% capital charge .

furthermore , the weighting system is unable to capture offsetting risk exposures .

the capital surcharge is the same even though holding the loan with lower default risk may compensate for holding the higher risk loan .

hence , banks arguably have the incentive to hold lower quality loans , which makes it possible for institutions to still be undercapitalized given their default risk exposures .

another concern regarding the weighting system is that it may encourage banks to hold government securities such as u.s. treasuries rather than extend loans where more severe credit shortages may exist .

the government securities of nations that are members of the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) receive a risk weight of 0% .

suppose capital - asset ratios fall below regulatory threshold levels during recessions after an increase in borrower loan defaults .

if banks , as discussed earlier , previously had the incentive to hold lower quality loans during an expansionary economic period , they may decide to hold more oecd country sovereign debt rather than make new loans during recessionary periods to keep capital - asset ratios in compliance .

these actions may further curtail lending to segments where more severe credit shortages may exist , such as in non - oecd emerging market economies or in the private sector when entering the recovery phase of a business cycle .

hence , the basel i weighting system results in "procyclical" capital requirements , which means they may incentivize excessive risk taking during expansions and impede economic recovery during an economic downturn .

furthermore , a bank's risk exposure may still be understated should the default risk of oecd securities increase .

this section begins with an overview of the enhanced minimum capital and liquidity requirements in basel iii , followed by a summary of the enhanced requirements mandated by the dodd - frank act .

although the requirements may be consistent , the dodd - frank act may require higher standards than basel iii .

challenges associated with simultaneous implementation of both basel iii and the dodd - frank act in the united states are discussed .

bank lending declined during the recent 2007-2009 recession for several reasons .

numerous u.s. banks found themselves undercapitalized as a result of a sudden surge of loan defaults that occurred over this period .

undercapitalized banks are unable to originate new loans until their capital reserves are restored .

u.s. banks that are sufficiently capitalized may have curtailed some lending activity given that higher loan defaults and unemployment rates translate into fewer borrowers able to qualify for loans , and even some qualified borrowers may face uncertain future earnings prospects .

bank lending decisions and strategies may also ensue at a slower pace as a result of the challenges associated with the simultaneous implementation of basel iii and the dodd - frank act .

bankers arguably would want to know what new capital requirements they face before making longer - term commitments to their asset portfolios .

the specific risk weights proposed for seven categories of exposures held in bank trading books are presented in more detail below .

sovereign entities currently , the risk - weighting factors for banks that hold sovereign debt positions are based upon whether the sovereign issuer is a member of the organisation for economic co - operations and development ( oecd ) .

covered debt positions with sovereign entity exposures where the entities are oecd members are assigned a zero percent specific risk - weighting factor , and exposures to non - oecd sovereign entities get an 8.0% specific risk - weighting factor .

the december npr proposed allowing a bank to determine its specific risk - weighting factors for sovereign debt positions based on the oecd's country risk classifications ( crcs ) , which are published by the oecd and used for sovereign positions , company - specific financial information , and other items .

the december npr noted that "the oecd is not subject to the sorts of conflicts of interest that affected nrsros because the oecd is not a commercial entity that produces credit assessments for fee - paying clients , nor does it provide the sort of evaluative and analytical services as credit rating agencies. .

the december npr also proposes applying a specific risk - weighting factor of 12.0% to sovereign debt positions if the sovereign has defaulted on any exposure during the previous five years .

in this context , a default by a sovereign would be defined as noncompliance by a sovereign entity with its external debt service obligations or the inability or unwillingness of a sovereign entity to service an existing obligation according to its terms , as manifested in its inability to make complete and timely payments on such obligations as principal and interest , and arrearages .

certain multilateral development banks , supranational entities bank trading book exposures to certain supranational entities and multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) are currently assigned specific risk - weighting factors that can range between 0.25% and 1.6% , depending on the remaining maturity .

the december npr proposed to apply a zero percent specific risk - weighting factor to mdb exposure .

the regulators argued that the more lenient treatment is warranted given general mdb attributes , which include high - credit quality as well as having shareholder bases primarily composed of highly creditworthy sovereign entities .

additionally , as is the case under basel ii , the december npr would assign a zero - specific risk weighting to bank exposures to specific supranational entities , such as the bank for international settlements , the european central bank , the european commission , and the international monetary fund .

government sponsored entities bank exposures to government - sponsored entities ( gses ) are currently assigned risk - weights between 0.25% and 1.6% , depending on the maturity of any debt issuances .

the december npr does not alter this approach .

bank exposures to gse equity , however , would be assigned a risk - weight of 8.0% .

depository institutions , foreign banks , and credit unions bank exposures to other banks incorporated in oecd countries are currently assigned risk - weighting factors ranging between 0.25% and 1.6% based on the maturity of the debt .

by contrast , the risk weighting of debt exposures to banks incorporated in non - oecd countries are determined through a more complex methodology that includes credit ratings .

the december npr would eliminate the disparate treatment of exposures to oecd banks and non - oecd banks .

specific risk - weighting factors would be assigned based upon the crc of a bank's sovereign nation of incorporation and the maturity of the exposure .

exposures to banks based in the highest tier of crc rated countries would be assigned a specific risk - weighting factor between 0.25% and 1.6% , depending on the maturity .

banks incorporated in the four lowest tier crc rated countries would receive a specific risk - weighting factor of 8.0% irrespective of maturity .

exposure to public sector entity debt positions risk - weights of public - sector entities ( pses ) currently range between 0.25% and 1.6% , based on maturity .

for revenue bonds , assigned risk - weights depend upon an array of factors , including credit ratings .

the december npr would assign risk - weights based on the crc of the sovereign nation in which the pse is located with some variability determined by the exposure's maturity and whether the exposure is a general or revenue obligation .

the lowest risk weighting would be between 0.25% and 1.6% for general obligations exposures to pses in relatively lower crc rated countries .

the highest risk weight of 8% would be given to exposures to pse general and revenue obligations in countries with middle tier crc ratings .

corporate debt positions bank - held corporate debt is currently risk - weighted based on the issuer's function , credit rating , and remaining time to maturity of the debt .

the december npr distinguishes between financial and nonfinancial corporations as well as between publicly traded and private corporations .

for financial and private company debt positions , bank exposures would be assigned a risk - weight of 8.0% .

for debt positions of a publicly traded nonfinancial company , a bank exposure would be assigned a risk - weighting factor of either 8.0% or 12.0% , based on the debt issuer's profitability , stock price volatility , and leverage .

the december npr also solicited comments for alternatives ( eg , bond spreads ) that could be used to assign minimum capital requirements for holding corporate debt positions .

securitization holdings if a bank does not opt to model individual asset risks , it must still determine a risk capital factor for each securitization position , using a standardized methodology .

banks must multiply the absolute value of the current market value of the securitization position by a specified risk - weighting factor that ranges between zero and 8.0% , depending on the credit ratings and remaining time to maturity .

the december npr proposed a simplified supervisory formulaic approach ( ssfa ) to risk - weight bank securitization positions .

the ssfa would be designed to assign higher capital requirements to the more subordinated , risky securitization tranches that typically absorb losses first ; lower capital requirements would be assigned to safer , senior tranches .

the december npr included formulas that would allow banks to determine the riskiness of their securitizations based upon the hierarchy of tranches .

