recent developments in china's banking system may have important implications for relations with the united states .

some observers assert that the chinese government is directing chinese banks to make investments or provide credit as part of a policy to secure access to strategically important natural resources .

another group of researchers maintain that china's lending practices are providing chinese companies with an unfair advantage in global markets .

other analysts are concerned that the inefficiencies of the lending practices of chinese banks may be feeding speculative bubbles in china's real estate and stock markets and / or creating a growing pool of non - performing loans ( npfs ) that could precipitate an economic crisis in china that could affect the united states .

china's economic reforms have increased the role its banks are playing in the nation's economy and the government's economic policy .

to match the nation's macroeconomic changes , the chinese government has begun the process of transforming its banking sector from a government - directed system to a more commercially - driven system , characterized in part by market - based allocation mechanisms .

at present , china's banks operate in a hybrid world in which they are at times encouraged to make decisions based on commercial considerations , and at other times expected to abide by government directives .

the transitional state of china's banking system has given rise to several concerns about the implications for china's financial system , china's economy , as well as the global economy .

first , some u.s. banks interested in competing in china's domestic market think that chinese banks are provided an unfair advantage under the current regulatory regime , and that china has not fulfilled its obligations under its world trade organization ( wto ) accession agreement to open its financial market to foreign competition .

second , it is unclear to what extent china's banks operate based on commercial considerations and to what extent they are vehicles by which the chinese government advances its political and / or economic agenda .

third , some observers question the efficiency and solvency of china's banking system , given the manner in which it appears to be allocating credit .

fourth , other observers maintain that the chinese government is utilizing its banks to subsidize key companies and industries to enhance their competitiveness on the global market .

this report begins with a summary of the current status of china's banking sector and the government's banking regulatory system .

it then addresses each of the four concerns listed above , with a focus on the implications for u.s. relations with china .

the report concludes with a discussion of the main implications for congress .

prior to the beginning of china's economic reforms in 1978 , the chinese banking system was largely government - owned and isolated from the global economy .

china's banks were generally subservient to the requirements of china's central planned economy .

a gradual process of change has created a banking system in china with multiple categories of institutions and agencies , operating in separated markets with generally clearly delineated functions .

one of the main objectives of china's banking reforms has been to create incentives for its financial institutions to behave more like competitive , commercial entities .

competition between these financial institutions and agencies is usually limited to those performing similar functions , but cross function rivalries do exist .

however , china's banks have not been granted complete autonomy , and are frequently required to comply with government directives with serious implications for their profitability and in some cases , their solvency .

several categories of banks operate in china , with different ownership structures and serving different functions .

the first category includes wholly state - owned banks .

the second category consists of "equitized" commercial banks — banks that were previously wholly state - owned , but were transformed into joint - stock companies , in which the chinese central government is usually the largest stockholder .

the third category encompasses a variety of local banks , with provincial or municipal governments as major stockholders .

a fourth category is composed of chinese joint - stock commercial banks that were created after the start of china's banking reforms and with comparatively low levels of government ownership .

below is a discussion of the main characteristics of each category , including the names of the major banks in each category .

a more complete list of chinese banks by type is provided at the end of this report ( see the appendix ) .

in addition to the legal banks , china also has an unknown number of illegal banking operations , or "underground banks," that accept deposits and offer loans to individuals and businesses ( see " underground banks " ) .

under china's current banking regulatory system , four key entities report to china's ruling state council ( 中华人民共和国国务院 ) , each with its own distinct area of responsibility .

china's central bank is the people's bank of china ( pboc ) , which is responsible for formulating and implementing china's monetary policy .

the pboc and the china banking regulatory commission ( cbrc ) effectively oversee the operations of all banking institutions in china .

the ministry of finance ( mof ) is responsible for china's fiscal policies and the central government's budget .

the state administration of foreign exchange ( safe ) is responsible for the supervision and monitoring of foreign exchange transactions in china , as well as the management of the government's foreign exchange reserves .

below is a short description of each of these four entities .

under the terms of its 2001 world trade organization ( wto ) accession agreement , china agreed to gradually open its financial markets over a five year period to foreign competitors .

the services schedule of china's wto accession agreement delineates the details of the scope of foreign bank access to china's financial markets .

foreign banks generally are to be afforded national treatment for listed banking services , with the ability to provide the same types of services and facing the same legal restrictions as domestic banks .

there are , however , some exceptions .

for example , foreign banks are not allowed to provide automobile financing .

foreign banks can accept deposits , make loans ( including mortgages , consumer credit , factoring , and commercial financing ) , issue credit and debit cards , provide letters of credit or guaranty , and other financial services .

since 2001 , the chinese government has passed laws and regulations to implement its wto obligations .

on november 11 , 2006 , china's state council promulgated decree no .

478 , "regulations of the people's republic of china on administration of foreign - funded banks," establishing the general policy of foreign bank operations in china .

the regulations differentiated between "foreign - funded banks" ( which includes "wholly foreign - funded banks" and "chinese - foreign joint venture banks" ) and their branches , and a branch of a foreign bank .

while the types of financial services the two types of foreign banks were authorized to provide were almost identical , they were subject to different minimum capital requirements .

foreign - funded banks had to have a minimum of 1 billion yuan ( $157 million ) in registered capital and have received a minimum of 100 million yuan ( $15.7 million ) in non - callable operating capital .

branches of foreign banks operating in china had to have received a minimum of 200 million yuan ( $31.5 million ) in operating capital .

in addition , the owners of foreign - funded banks must possess no less than $10 billion in assets at the end of the year prior to the submission of an application to form a foreign - funded bank , and the foreign banks seeking to establish a branch in china must possess no less than $20 billion in assets at the end of the year prior to the submission of an application to open the branch .

the approval process for foreign - funded banks and branches of foreign banks is a two - step process .

the first step is the submission of application documents to china's banking regulatory agencies , which are to make a decision within six months of submission .

the second step involves the submission of additional information within six months of receiving the decision of the regulatory agencies .

china's banking regulatory agencies have up to two months to approve or reject the second submission .

if the application is approved , the applicant must register with the appropriate administrative department and obtain a business license .

if foreign - funded banks or branches of foreign banks intend to apply to provide services denominated in renminbi , the regulations require that the bank have been in operation in china for no less than three years , and have been profitable for two consecutive years prior to the application .

both types of foreign banks must also comply with the asset - liability ratio requirements prescribed in the law of the people's republic of china on commercial banks .

among these ratios is a requirement that "the ratio of the outstanding of loans to the outstanding of deposits may not exceed 75 percent. .

while the 2006 regulations provide greater market access to foreign banks , the chinese government has also eliminated some of the special privileges previously offered to foreign banks .

special business arrangements — including tax holidays or reductions — were phased out , making foreign banks compete and operate under the same conditions as chinese banks .

for example , special tax deductions available to foreign banks for doubtful debts were eliminated on december 31 , 2010 .

the u.s. government , u.s. banks , and other interested parties are concerned that the chinese authorities are limiting market access for u.s. banks and protecting chinese banks from competition from u.s. banks .

although china has made apparent efforts to comply with its wto obligations , several u.s. banks maintain that china's laws and regulations , and the manner in which they have been enforced , have created barriers to entry for u.s. banks .

a recent assessment of china's wto compliance by the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) was generally supportive of the views of u.s. banks .

as of december 2011 , eight u.s. banks were operating in china ( see table 5 ) .

two banks , citibank and jpmorgan chase , chose to establish a subsidiary bank in china .

the chinese government considers these subsidiaries to be wholly foreign - funded banks .

the other six u.s. banks established what the chinese consider branches of a foreign bank .

seven additional banks have opened representative offices in china , but are not offering financial services .

in its 2011 report to congress on china's wto compliance , ustr mentioned four shortcomings in china's fulfillment of its wto obligations related to banking .

first , ustr sees the capital requirements for foreign banks as a de - facto barrier to entry .

second , foreign equity ownership has been effectively limited to 25% although existing regulations allow for up to 49% for joint venture banks .

third , the requirements for a foreign bank to offer financial services in renminbi are considered overly restrictive .

fourth , the process of obtaining approval to open a new bank or branch is too slow and cumbersome .

previously , ustr filed a wto case against china in september 2010 for its exclusion of u.s. suppliers from china's electronic payment services market ( see "u.s. wto case against china on electronic payment services" sidebar ) .

the ustr report indicated that obtaining "full access to the domestic currency business" for u.s. banks remains a priority .

u.s. banks currently operating in china voice the same complaints expressed by ustr in its report to congress .

in particular , u.s. and other foreign banks reportedly are concerned that restrictions on their ability to access renminbi - denominated deposits will make it difficult to meet the loans - to - deposit ratio requirement .

in an interview with crs , an officer for one u.s. bank claimed that chinese regulators are requiring u.s. banks to open a branch in a commercially undesirable city in order to obtain approval for a branch in a more commercially desirable city .

u.s. banks also indicate that they are facing stiffer competition from chinese commercial banks , who seemingly face fewer barriers to opening new branches or expanding operations .

despite the perceived problems , some u.s. banks reportedly plan to expand their operations in china .

citigroup announced in december 2010 that it plans to have about 100 branches in china within 2-3 years .

citigroup has 31 branches in china .

by comparison , china's largest lender , icbc , has over 16,000 branches in china .

according to sources in the banking industry , u.s. banks are especially interested in expanding into china's "second - tier" cities and providing financial services to china's growing middle class .

an unresolved issue regarding chinese banks is the extent to which regulatory reforms have led to the banks being operated on a commercial basis .

one of the stated goals of china's banking reforms has been to transform the banks into relatively autonomous , profit - driven financial institutions , modeled to a certain extent after commercial banks in the united states and western europe .

however , the relationships of the different types of banks in china with the central government and its various regulatory agencies , and with local government entities remain complex .

while circumstances vary for each of the major types of chinese banks , virtually all of them balance their commercial interests with the changing and sometimes conflicting directives and priorities issued by different arms of the central and local government .

below is a brief description of the operational patterns of the different types of chinese banks and their relationships with government entities .

the adoption of more commercially based management has brought about the return of serious problems that were associated with china's banking system when it was under greater government control: non - performing loans ( npls ) and fears of insolvency .

after several years of growing profitability and improved finances , china's banks appear to be poised for a rise in npls , particularly if there is a sharp decline in real estate values .

unresolved npls of the past , newly emerging npls associated with a recent sharp rise in local government debt , and hidden exposure to underground banking have increased the likelihood that china's banks may experience a rise in npls and , in some cases , edge towards insolvency .

while recent stress tests conducted by the cbrc indicate that most of the banks can survive a major drop in property prices , some banks — particularly city commercial banks — are more exposed .

china's banking regulators have taken some steps to avoid a precipitous rise in npls .

they are also discussing how to handle insolvent banks , if and when the issue arises .

the media and reports about china's banking system are replete with allegations that chinese banks provide subsidized loans to preferred companies — usually state - owned enterprises ( soes ) — as part of a central government strategy to make chinese companies more domestically or globally competitive .

such claims are regularly made by the u.s. government , u.s. businesses , scholars , and others .

the chinese government acknowledges that past financial policies did provide soes with preferential loans , but asserts that the recent banking reforms have effectively ended these policies and that lending is now being done on a commercial basis .

some scholars maintain that recent lending patterns — particularly after the 2007 global financial crisis — provide evidence that the central government by and large no longer directs banks to provide preferential credit to soes , and that banks are extending credit largely on a commercial basis .

the alleged bank subsidies of soes in china has become one of the issues raised in the larger discussion of china's supposed unfair competitive practices in world trade .

the world trade organization's agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures defines a subsidy as financial contribution by a government or public body within the territory of a wto member , which confers a benefit .

to be wto actionable , the subsidy must be shown to have an adverse effect on the complaining wto member , either by injuring its domestic industry , diminishing the value of some form of trade benefit ( eg — preferential tariffs ) , or seriously prejudicing its interests .

at present , two main aspects of china's banking systems may have significant implications for sino - u.s. relations and by extension , for congress .

first , china's policies on credit and loans have been cited as a source of subsidization for chinese companies , making it difficult for u.s. companies to compete in global markets .

congress could consider various options with respect to evaluating and responding to allegations of inappropriate bank subsidies in china .

second , china's intention to further liberalize its financial sector — including the further deregulation of interest rates — may create greater opportunities for u.s. banks and financial institutions to enter china's domestic market .

however , domestic concerns about inflation may make chinese officials cautious about implementing reforms that could lead to higher interest rates .

congress could look into ways of encouraging banking reforms in china that would be conducive to greater market penetration for u.s. banks .

under current u.s. law , the primary means by which u.s. entities can seek relief from perceived inappropriate bank subsidies in china is by submitting a cvd petition .

in order for the bank subsidy to be considered in the cvd determination , the subsidy must either be a prohibited or actionable subsidy .

for several years , some members of congress have advocated the reexamination of u.s. trade remedy laws .

the 112 th congress may consider modifying u.s. laws governing cvd petitions to include specific provisions regarding preferential loans , unwarranted credit provision , non - payment of loans , and other means by which banks can subsidize companies .

in addition , congress may chose to press the obama administration to respond to allegations of inappropriate bank lending practices at such fora as the strategic and economic dialogues ( s&ed ) and the joint committee on commerce and trade ( jcct ) meetings .

furthermore , congress may consider asking the u.s. department of the treasury to investigate the lending practices of chinese banks to determine to what extent the banking sector is operating on a commercial basis and if chinese banks are a significant source of subsidization of chinese enterprises and investment .

congress may also seek greater u.s. efforts to address bank subsidization at multilateral fora , such as the g20 , as well as part of the on - going doha round negotiations .

in his report to the national people's congress march 2009 , premier wen jiabao called for the continuation of banking reforms in china .

the reform of state - owned financial institutions were to be "deepened," and small and medium - sized financial institutions were to be "steadily" developed under "multiple forms of ownership. .

on december 31 , 2010 , however , pboc governor zhou stated that while efforts would be made to continue financial reforms in 2011 , the prevention of systemic risks and safeguarding financial stability would be priorities in china's monetary policy .

it is unclear how china will balance wen's call for further reforms with zhou's concerns about financial stability .

if implemented , wen's proposed reforms may provide an opportunity for u.s. banks and other financial service providers to enter china's financial market .

the exchange of information and ideas on possible reforms in china's banking sector may be a productive topic for future bilateral talks .

the topics of china's banking reforms and china's compliance with its wto accession agreement have been raised at past strategic and economic dialogues ( s&ed ) , as well as joint committee on commerce and trade ( jcct ) meetings , and are likely to continue to be raised by the united states at future bilateral fora .

it is also likely that china , for its part , will continue to raise its concerns about market access for chinese banks in the united states .

chinese officials have claimed in the past that u.s. procedures for approving foreign bank branches is needlessly complex and that selective enforcement has discriminated against chinese banks .

the 111 th congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) , which , among other things , created a bureau of consumer financial protection within the federal reserve and consolidated bank regulation by merging the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) into the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) .

china monitored congressional consideration of this act closely .

based on meetings with chinese officials , one of their main concerns was how the new law would affect u.s. compliance with basel iii .

it is possible that any additional reforms in china's financial system may reflect lessons learnt from chinese officials' analysis of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act .

the extent to which the 112 th congress may choose to play a role in this issue remains to be seen .

under current law , congress is to be advised on the proceedings of major bilateral meetings , such as the s&ed and the jcct .

in addition , the ustr is required to provide congress with an annual report on china's wto compliance .

congress could , if it should so choose , hold hearings or request briefings on china's financial reforms and their implications for u.s. market access .

in addition , congress could consider legislation designed to encourage or require china to fulfill its wto obligations with respect to opening its financial services sector to foreign banks .

