section 9401 of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) provides the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) with broad waiver authority with respect to programs authorized under the act .

while this waiver authority is limited in some respects , such as its applicability to fiscal accountability and civil rights requirements , at the request of specified entities , the secretary may choose to grant a waiver of various esea requirements , including those related to academic accountability .

the decision to grant the waiver is left to the secretary's discretion .

this broad waiver authority was initially included in the esea through the improving america's schools act ( p.l .

103-382 ) .

the authority was retained through enactment of the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , the most recent amendments to the esea .

the secretary has used the authority provided under section 9401 to grant numerous waivers over time , including waivers of accountability and general administrative requirements .

for example , since the enactment of nclb , the secretary has granted waivers of various esea requirements in response to the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 and to address issues raised by the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

on june 13 , 2011 , the secretary announced that he might begin to use the authority provided under section 9401 to issue broad sweeping waivers if congress fails to reauthorize the esea .

subsequently , on august 8 , 2011 , it was announced at a white house press briefing that president obama had directed the secretary to "move forward with plans to provide flexibility to states. .

on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary of education formally announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states that included 11 waivers of esea requirements , as well as four principles for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction" that must be met to receive the waivers .

with the exception of one optional waiver , state educational agencies ( seas ) applying for the esea flexibility must apply for all 10 waivers and must agree to implement all four principles related to receiving the waivers .

the waivers would apply to school years 2011-2012 , 2012-2013 , and 2013-2014 .

states would have the option to apply for a one - year waiver extension for the 2014-2015 school year .

the administration has argued that the esea flexibility package is needed because congress has failed to reauthorize the esea .

the esea was authorized through fy2008 ; however , esea programs continue to receive annual appropriations .

the administration has suggested that this lack of congressional action is particularly an issue as there are requirements contained in the esea , including academic accountability requirements , that have become problematic for state educational agencies , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and schools to implement , and various states have sought waivers of these provisions .

a commonly cited problem is that under the performance - based accountability provisions enacted in nclb , all students are expected to perform at a proficient level on state administered reading / language arts and mathematics assessments by the end of the 2013-2014 school year .

as this deadline approaches , and performance expectations under the law increase , an increasing share of the nation's schools are failing to meet adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) — the measure that determines whether a school is or is not meeting the academic accountability requirements .

there is broad concern that states and leas may become increasingly taxed with regard to their ability to undertake required activities to help schools that fail to make ayp .

this report begins with a general discussion of the esea flexibility package and current congressional efforts to reauthorize the esea .

also included is an update on state applications for the esea flexibility package .

following these brief discussions , the report examines the waiver authority provided to the secretary under section 9401 , beginning with a brief history of the provisions , followed by a discussion of how waiver requests are granted and limitations on the secretary's waiver authority .

the next section of the report provides an examination of how the secretary has used waiver authority in the past and a legal analysis of the scope of the secretary's waiver authority and the secretary's authority to grant a waiver in exchange for another action .

the next part of the report focuses on describing and analyzing the waivers and related principles that collectively comprise the administration's esea flexibility package .

taken together , the waivers and accompanying principles included in the esea flexibility package being offered to seas could be viewed as a fundamental redesign of key elements of the esea .

through the use of secretarial authority to waive various esea provisions , the esea flexibility package being offered by ed would alter the existing accountability requirements under title i - a in such a way that they would have little resemblance to the accountability requirements included in statute .

for example , requisite adoption of college - and career - ready standards that are either common to a "significant" number of states or that have been approved by a state network of institutions of higher education ( ihes ) is not in current law .

rather , this is a new condition that would be placed on seas by the administration .

under current law , states are required to implement accountability systems that establish content and performance standards in reading / language arts and mathematics and include aligned assessments that are administered annually in grades 3-8 and once in grades 10-12 .

states are also required to have content and performance standards and aligned assessments in science that are administered once in grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 .

in meeting these requirements , states have the latitude to independently select their own content and performance standards and assessments .

there are no requirements that the standards be "college - and career - ready" standards or be approved by a state network of ihes .

the esea flexibility package would also eliminate the requirement that all schools receiving title i - a funds that fail to make ayp for at least two consecutive years be required to implement a series of increasingly severe outcome accountability requirements .

rather , prescribed interventions would be limited to the lowest performing 5% of schools ( priority schools ) and some type of intervention would be required in the next lowest performing 10% of schools ( focus schools ) .

the outcome accountability requirements that currently apply to all title i - a schools that fail to meet ayp would be replaced by more prescriptive requirements for priority schools and a requirement for non - specified interventions to be implemented in focus schools .

the mechanisms used to identify schools in need of intervention would no longer be based solely on whether the school made ayp .

rather , other measures could be taken into account in making these decisions .

finally , the identification of schools as priority schools would be based on the performance of all students in the school or student graduation rates rather than the performance of individual subgroups .

under current law , the performance of all students , the performance of subgroups of students , and graduation rates are taken into account in determining ayp .

the esea flexibility package would also substantially alter accountability requirements applicable to educators .

while current law focuses on having highly qualified teachers , the esea flexibility package would alter existing teacher requirements to focus on teacher ( and school leader ) effectiveness , determined , in part , based on student achievement .

to date , no provisions in the esea address how teachers and school leaders should be evaluated .

the 112 th congress continues to work on esea reauthorization .

the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee has ordered reported an esea reauthorization bill that would incorporate some of the changes included in the esea flexibility package being offered by the administration .

the chairman of the house education and workforce committee has released two draft esea reauthorization bills that would collectively provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

it is difficult to gauge at this stage in the process whether the 112 th congress will pass a bill to reauthorize the esea , and whether congress would include provisions similar to those of the esea flexibility package in a final bill .

most states have either applied for the esea flexibility package or have indicated an intention to do so .

if those packages are approved by ed , they may be in effect in many states by the end of the current school year if esea reauthorization does not occur prior to that time .

if the esea flexibility package is implemented by numerous states prior to reauthorization , it may complicate an eventual reauthorization , as the esea flexibility package may become the de facto esea law under which many states are operating .

if congress does not take this into account in its reauthorization process , states and leas may have to retool their accountability systems to comply with a new round of requirements from the federal government .

alternatively , states that have received the esea flexibility package could be permitted to continue to operate under waivers and principles similar to those included in the esea flexibility package , while other states could be required to comply with new esea requirements , thus creating two different systems of accountability under which states would be operating .

following the announcement of the esea flexibility package , 39 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico indicated that they intended to apply for it .

eleven states applied for the esea flexibility package by the first deadline of november 14 , 2011 .

on february 26 , 2012 , 26 additional states and the district of columbia submitted applications for the flexibility package .

the next deadline for the submission of applications is september 6 , 2012 .

on february 9 , 2012 , the administration announced that it was granting flexibility to 10 of the 11 states that applied in the first round for the esea flexibility package .

these states include colorado , florida , georgia , indiana , kentucky , massachusetts , minnesota , new jersey , oklahoma , and tennessee .

new mexico was not approved to receive the esea flexibility package .

of these states , florida , georgia , and oklahoma received conditional approval of their requests for flexibility .

each of these states is required to make additional amendments to their requests based on a prescribed timeline in order to receive the esea flexibility package through the 2013-2014 school year .

ed subsequently announced on february 15 , 2012 , that new mexico had received approval of its application .

on may 29 , 2012 , ed announced the approval of eight state applications from the second round of applications for the esea flexibility package .

the states receiving approval include connecticut , delaware , louisiana , maryland , new york , north carolina , ohio , and rhode island .

among these states , new york received short - term approval for its use of a growth model in its accountability system .

ed will conduct a separate review of new york's growth model in the next few months .

ohio received conditional approval of its request for flexibility and is required to study and refine its "a - f grading system" in order to receive the esea flexibility package through the 2013-2014 school year .

ed will continue to review the remaining applications received in february .

since the announcement of the esea flexibility package , there has been substantial congressional interest in waiver provisions and the extent to which they may be coupled with accompanying conditions .

this part of the report examines the history of waiver authority under the esea .

this is followed by a detailed description of the broad waiver authority currently provided to the secretary under section 9401 of the esea .

following these discussions , an analysis of waivers that the secretary has granted under this authority is provided , as well as a legal analysis of the secretary's authority under section 9401 .

as previously mentioned , on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary formally announced the availability of a package of 10 waivers and one optional waiver of esea requirements for states and the four principles that states must meet to obtain the waivers .

below is a list of the 10 waivers .

the waivers are discussed thematically in this report , and the parenthetical information refers to the section in which the waiver is discussed in this report .

1 .

flexibility regarding the 2013-2014 timeline for determining adequate yearly progress ( waiver of existing accountability provisions ) 2 .

flexibility in implementation of school improvement requirements ( waiver of existing accountability provisions ) 3 .

flexibility in implementation of lea improvement requirements ( waiver of existing accountability provisions ) 4 .

flexibility for rural leas ( waiver providing flexibility in the use of federal funds ) 5 .

flexibility for schoolwide programs ( waiver providing flexibility in the use of federal funds to support new accountability provisions ) 6 .

flexibility to support school improvement ( waiver of an existing school improvement grant ( sig ) program provision to support new accountability provisions ) 7 .

flexibility for reward schools ( waiver of an existing accountability provision ) 8 .

flexibility regarding highly qualified teacher ( hqt ) improvement plans ( waiver of teacher - related provisions ) 9 .

flexibility to transfer certain funds ( waiver providing flexibility in the use of federal funds ) 10 .

flexibility in the use of sig funds to support priority schools ( waiver of current sig program requirements to support new accountability provisions ) the optional waiver is described as flexibility in the use of the 21 st century community learning centers ( 21 st cclc ) program funds .

ed has announced two dates by which states can apply for the esea flexibility package to be effective for the 2011-2012 school year .

the first application deadline was november 14 , 2011 .

these applications were to be reviewed in december with decisions on which states will receive waivers made by mid - january 2012 .

the next date by which states may submit applications is february 21 , 2012 , for peer review in spring 2012 .

with the exception of the optional waiver , seas may not apply for only some of the 10 waivers or only implement some of the principles related to receiving the waivers .

however , nothing precludes an sea from submitting a separate request for similar or additional waivers under esea section 9401 .

esea requirements that are not specifically waived by the secretary will continue to apply .

in addition , if an sea chooses not to implement a specific waiver included in the esea flexibility package , it must continue to meet the requirements of current law .

the next sections of the report discuss each of the 10 individual waivers included in a single package that ed is making available to states , as well as the one optional waiver related to the 21 st cclc program .

in general , the 10 waivers included in the package affect existing academic accountability , teacher , and funding flexibility provisions .

rather than analyzing the waivers in the order in which they are presented in the ed esea flexibility package , this section of the report examines the waivers thematically based on the types of current law provisions they would affect ( i.e. , accountability , teachers , or funding flexibility ) .

for each waiver , a discussion of the flexibility being offered by the administration and how this differs from current law requirements is included .

there has been substantial interest in the extent to which the package of waivers and accompanying requisite principles reflect the priorities identified in the administration's esea reauthorization blueprint ( the blueprint ) .

to the extent that it is relevant , each discussion includes an examination of whether the administration has proposed or provided similar flexibility either in its blueprint or through implementation of the race to the top ( rttt ) program .

each waiver analysis concludes with a general discussion about the waiver and possible issues that could arise through the granting of the waiver .

the optional waiver related to the 21 st cclc program is discussed after the waivers included in the package of 10 waivers .

it should be noted that the focus of this report is on actions at the state level .

only seas are currently permitted to apply for the esea flexibility package .

leas in the states that receive the waivers will receive increased flexibility with respect to the waivers , but also increased responsibilities in terms of complying with the conditions associated with receiving the waivers .

similar to seas , however , nothing precludes an lea , including an lea in a state that does not apply for or does not receive the esea flexibility package , from applying separately to the secretary under esea section 9401 to obtain any desired waivers .

under the provisions enacted in nclb , seas receiving esea funding must agree to adopt and implement specific accountability requirements .

key features of such systems include the development of content and performance standards and aligned assessments in reading / language arts , mathematics , and science ; annual testing of students in grades 3-8 and once in high school to gauge students' progress toward meeting standards in reading / language arts and mathematics ; and implementation of outcome accountability consequences for schools and leas receiving title i - a funds that fail to demonstrate a requisite level of academic performance .

this section discusses each of the six waivers related to accountability .

collectively , these waivers would provide alternative approaches for meeting current law academic accountability requirements .

while the discussion includes some information regarding current esea accountability requirements pertinent to each waiver , for more detailed information about current requirements , see crs report r41533 , accountability issues and reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

in its description of the esea flexibility package , ed notes that many states are already developing new accountability systems that ( 1 ) include student growth and school progress , ( 2 ) "align accountability determinations with support and capacity - building efforts , and [3] provide for systemic , context - specific interventions that focus on the lowest - performing schools and schools with the largest achievement gaps. .

the waivers , according to ed , would enable seas and leas to implement their new systems without being bound by the school and lea improvement requirements contained in current law .

under the provisions enacted in nclb , seas receiving esea funds were required to develop and implement a plan for ensuring that all teachers in core academic subjects are highly qualified .

the esea flexibility package includes only one waiver related to teachers .

in practice , as discussed below , this waiver would have little effect on how seas and leas are currently implementing provisions related to highly qualified teachers ( hqt ) .

however , one of the four principles with which states must comply in order to receive the esea flexibility package would require substantial changes to be made with respect to teacher - related accountability requirements , placing additional emphasis on evaluating teacher performance , based in part on student performance , and less emphasis on qualifications ( see subsequent discussion on conditions ) .

the esea flexibility package includes three waivers related to funding flexibility .

each of the waivers is discussed below .

in addition to the package of 10 waivers that ed is offering to states , ed is offering one optional waiver that would provide flexibility in the use of 21 st cclc funds to support expanded learning time programs .

the 21 st cclc program , authorized by title iv - b of the esea , supports activities provided during nonschool hours that offer learning opportunities for school - aged children .

formula grants are made to states , which subsequently make grants to local entities ( eg , leas , community - based organizations ) on a competitive basis for a period of three to five years .

eligible entities are to serve primarily students who attend schools eligible for schoolwide programs under title i - a and the families of these students .

eligible entities may use funds for before - and after - school activities that advance student academic achievement .

the program's focus , however , is currently on providing after - school activities for children and youth , and literacy - related activities for their families .

currently , expanded learning time programs that operate during the school day are not an authorized activity under the 21 st cclc .

the definition of a "community learning center" contained in the law specifies that funded activities are to occur: "during non - school hours or periods when school is not in session ( such as before and after school or during summer recess ) . .

in order to receive the esea flexibility package , seas would have to meet the administration's four "principles for improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: 1. college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; 2. state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; 3. supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and 4. reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

similar to the discussion of the waivers , each of the principles is examined below , including an overview of the condition , relevant requirements in current law , and connections between the principle and the administration's blueprint for esea reauthorization or the race to the top program .

as previously discussed , the esea flexibility package would apply to school years 2011-2012 , 2012-2013 , and 2013-2014 .

states would have the option to apply for a one - year waiver extension for the 2014-2015 school year .

ed has established a detailed timeline for the implementation of the waivers by states , indicating what states must provide when they submit their applications and what must be accomplished during each year of the waiver .

one interesting aspect of the timeline is that if states do not apply for the optional one - year extension , they may not have to actually implement various requirements associated with the conditions for receiving waivers .

for example , during the 2013-2014 school year , states are required to pilot the implementation of teacher and principal evaluation and support systems .

full implementation is not required until the 2014-2015 school year .

if congress has not acted to reauthorize the esea by the end of the 2013-2014 school year , it appears that states that do not apply for the one - year waiver extension may then have to revert to compliance with current law requirements .

also , the secretary retains the authority under esea section 9401 to terminate the waivers if seas or leas fail to comply with the requirements associated with the waivers .

ed has noted that the implementation timeline specifies both a timeline for implementing the principle associated with the waivers as well as the waivers themselves .

the deadlines for meeting a particular principle are the latest dates by which an sea or lea may meet a principle and still be in compliance with the requirements established for receiving the esea flexibility package .

the dates specified for implementing a particular waiver are the earliest time that an sea or lea may take advantage of a particular waiver .

an sea can choose not to implement a particular waiver , provided it continues to carry out current law in that area .

regardless of whether an sea chooses to implement some or all of the available waivers , it must adhere to the four principles established by ed to receive the waivers .

while it is beyond the scope of this report to analyze the contents of the state applications submitted in the first and second rounds of applications or approved by ed , the center on education policy ( cep ) has examined the accountability proposals included in the hundreds of pages of materials submitted by applicants in both the first and second rounds of applications .

cep has also examined the accountability plans approved by ed for the 11 states from the first round of applications .

in general , with respect to the approved applications from the first round cep characterized the accountability provisions proposed in the state applications as more complex than those required under current law .

they report that these changes would result in a "more diverse and complicated array of accountability systems across states. .

in addition , they report that the new accountability provisions "would lead to greater complexity within many states. .

other key findings include the following: all 11 states will more closely integrate federal accountability requirements with state accountability systems than they do now ; 10 of the 11 states have already adopted and are implementing the common core state standards and most of the states are part of one of the two consortia developing assessments aligned with these standards ; most states will continue to establish amos but their use in making major accountability determinations ( eg , identifying schools for interventions ) will vary ; most of the states will use new , multifaceted measures to identify schools for various levels of interventions or rewards ; most of the states will have multiple performance levels with respect to the identification of schools for interventions or rewards ; most of the states will make some of their major accountability decisions based on two student groups — all students and a single , broad "disadvantaged" students group ; and only 2 of the 11 states will require public school choice or ses .

in its examination of the second round of applications , cep noted once again that "not only will these changes result in a more diverse and complicated array of accountability systems across states , but they also will lead to greater complexity within states. .

they found many similarities between the approved accountability plans of the first round applicants and the proposed accountability plans of the second round applicants .

key findings include the following: all 27 applicants will more closely integrate federal and state accountability requirements ; 26 of the 27 applicants have adopted and are implementing the common core state standards , and most of the states are participating in one of the two consortia developing assessments aligned with these standards ; all 27 states will continue to have amos but will vary in their use of them in making major accountability decisions ; 26 of the 27 applicants will replace the goal of 100% proficiency by the 2013-2014 school year ; at least 24 of the 27 applicants will supplement or replace ayp with a "new , state - specific primary accountability indicator ; " most of the applicants will use multiple performance levels to identify schools for consequences or rewards ; at least 19 of the applicants would change their use of subgroups for some or all of their major accountability determinations ; none of the applicants indicated that they will continue to require school choice ; and none of the applicants indicated that they would reserve the full 20% required under current law for school choice transportation or ses .

