questions about the characteristics of members of congress , including their age , education , previous occupations , and other descriptors , are of ongoing interest to members , congressional staff , and constituents .

some of these questions may be asked in the context of representation , in efforts to evaluate the extent to which members of congress reflect their constituencies and the nation at large .

in other instances , questions arise as to how the characteristics of members have changed over time , which may speak in part to the history of congress .

a challenge of discussing member characteristics in a manner that allows comparison across the history of congress is the identification of characteristics and reliable data on those characteristics that are collected in a consistent manner over time .

no government entity has collected data on members in a consistent manner for all congresses .

congressional sources , including entries in the online biographical directory of the united states congress , or the print versions of the biennial official congressional directory , are compiled by the house and senate , based on information reported by members .

some academic and journalistic sources provide data on a limited number of member characteristics over a variety of time periods .

while these sources provide some information , they do not report various descriptive characteristics for all members or all congresses in a consistent manner .

biographies created by members for official or campaign purposes are another potential source ; those are not readily retrievable for all members in the congresses for which this report provides data , and do not report various characteristics for all members in a uniform manner .

this report provides profiles of senators and representatives based on selected characteristics since 1945 .

data are drawn from the cq press electronic library , cq congress collection ( hereafter cq press ) , a subscription database that provides data on members and a range of characteristics .

data provided in this report are based on the number of representatives and senators who took seats on the first day of a new congress .

the cq press database does not contain information on members who have served as delegates or resident commissioner for puerto rico .

table 1 provides the number of members who took seats on the first day of the 79 th – 113 th congresses and the years those congresses met .

the report provides data on the following characteristics: age , including the oldest and youngest members of the house and senate ; sex ; previous occupation ; race and ethnicity ; education ; religion ; and military service .

for each characteristic category , a summary is provided .

in some categories , the report provides data on the u.s. population that may be comparable to data available on members of congress , as discussed in more detail below .

following the characteristic summaries , the report provides a number of tables that provide the detailed data by the category on which the summaries are based .

all data tables appear in the " member characteristics data tables " section .

a detailed discussion of the methods used to develop the data presented in the report , and efforts to provide comparison between member characteristics and the american public , is provided in an appendix .

due to differences in data collection or characterization , data in other studies on member characteristics may differ from those presented in this report .

a challenge to understanding an enduring institution like congress is the broad scope of its activities and the lack of consistent , reliable information about its various components over time .

this report focuses on selected characteristics of members that appear to be consistent over a period of seven decades .

members in 2013 are older , more likely to identify a religious affiliation , and include more women and members of racial and ethnic groups than members in 1945 .

the data suggest that since the 79 th congress , members have had high levels of education , and worked in professional positions prior to coming to congress .

the number of members who previously served in the military has risen and fallen , possibly in tandem with the levels of service in the broader population .

these findings arguably provide a more robust understanding of the composition of representatives and senators over time than other studies that focus on the membership of individual congresses .

a consistent data source enables longitudinal analysis , but comparisons to other profiles of congress , which may rely on different data sources , characteristics of members , or time periods , should be made with caution .

data provided in this report include the number of representatives and senators who took seats in the house or senate , respectively , on the first day of a new congress .

proportions reported may be affected by vacancies .

in the 79 th - 85 th congresses , the senate had 96 seats representing the 48 states admitted to the union .

during the 86 th congress the number of seats increased to its current level of 100 with the admission of alaska and hawaii as states .

membership of the house has been fixed at 435 seats since 1911 , except for a temporary enlargement to 437 in the 86 th – 87 th congresses to accommodate representatives from alaska and hawaii .

the number of house seats reverted to 435 following the 1960 census and reapportionment .

since cq press provides no information on delegates and the resident commissioner from puerto rico , they are excluded from house calculations .

table 1 provides the number of members who took seats on the first day of the 79 th - 113 th congress .

beyond the basic information necessary to ascertain the qualifications for office of a u.s .

senator or representative , the disclosure of details of a member's race , education , previous occupation , or other characteristics over the years has been voluntary , and has not been collected by congressional or other governmental authorities .

this report provides data on member characteristics based on sources and methodologies described below .

member characteristics data on member characteristics provided in this report are drawn from the cq press electronic library , cq congress collection ( hereafter cq press ) .

a subscription database , cq press provides data on members serving since the 79 th congress and a range of characteristics according to the following variables: congress ; representative or senator ; political party ; state ; age ; religion ; race / ethnicity ; previous occupation ; sex ; and military service .

cq press provides data on representatives , senators , and individuals who served as president and vice president of the united states .

the database does not contain information on members who have served as delegates or resident commissioner for puerto rico .

u.s. population data are based on the results of decennial censuses conducted by the bureau of the census between 1940 and 2010 , and other official government sources as appropriate .

data on religious affiliations of the u.s. population are taken from a private source , as discussed in the " religion " section below .

data for all representatives and senators who served on the first day of the 79 th – 113 th congresses were taken from the cq press database .

previously , the material that comprises the cq press data was gathered and maintained by congressional quarterly , inc. , through research and reporting capacities that now are a part of cq roll call .

cq press and cq roll call are separate entities with different corporate ownership .

some of the data have been reported in various forms in products created by congressional quarterly , inc. , cq press , or cq roll call .

those products may also rely on data that are not included in the cq congress collection .

consequently , there may be differences between data reported here and information reported in some commercial products issued by cq press , cq roll call and other sources of congressional information .

according to cq press , their member biographical data are derived from a variety of primary sources , including reporting , surveys administered to congressional offices , and official sources .

cq press reports that it "uses multiple sources to confirm this information , including obituaries and excerpts from major newspapers , as sources do not always agree on precise dates. .

cq press does not indicate whether the data underlying their database have been collected in a consistent manner over time .

in the 79 th – 86 th congresses , the senate had 96 seats representing the 48 states admitted to the union as of the day congress convened .

at the beginning of the 87 th congress , the number of seats increased to its current level of 100 due to the admission of alaska and hawaii as states .

membership of the house has been fixed at 435 seats since 1911 , except for a temporary enlargement to 436 in the 86 th congress ( which occurred after the first day ) and 437 in the 87 th congresses to accommodate representatives from alaska and hawaii .

the number of house seats reverted to 435 following the 1960 census and reapportionment that set the distribution of representatives for the 88 th congress .

on the first day of a new congress , some seats may be vacant due to the illness or death of a member - elect , a contested election , or other reason .

on the first day of the 111 th congress in the senate , for example , 98 senators were present , and two seats were vacant .

in the house , 433 representatives were present on the first day of the 113 th congress and two seats were vacant .

percentages provided in figures and data tables above are based on the number of members who were present on the first day of a congress in each chamber .

table 1 provides the numbers of representatives and senators who took seats in their respective chambers on the first day of the 79 th – 113 th congresses .

due to differences in data collection or characterization , data in other studies of member characteristics may differ from those presented in this report .

comparing members to the u.s. population comparing the small number of members of congress to the population of the united states ( 131.7 million in 1940 ; 308.7 million in 2010 ) poses some challenges .

such challenges results , in part , from differences in scale .

others arise as a consequence of the way information about members of congress or the u.s. population is collected , or how the information has been categorized over time .

since , in some instances , described below , there may be no direct comparison between the types of data available describing characteristics of representatives , senators and the u.s. population , any comparison between members and the broader american public is potentially subject to a wide range of interpretations .

conclusions should be drawn from the data provided here with care .

issues that inform the understanding , utility , and comparability of the data presented in this report include the following: education cq press data provide the academic degrees members have earned ( high school completion , undergraduate , graduate , and professional degrees ) .

the census bureau expresses educational attainment among the u.s. population as percentages of individuals aged 25 years and older who have completed four years of high school or four or more years of college .

the census bureau also provides a measurement of the median years of schooling completed by the population aged 25 years and older .

previous occupation questions arise when comparing the occupation of members to occupations pursued in the united states , but also when comparing the work of members before they arrived in congress .

with regard to the comparison of members to constituents , is the proper comparison between the american public and members in their roles as government officials , or to the work they did before taking office ? .

in addition , census and other government efforts to categorize work have changed to reflect the dynamic nature of work activity , which may limit or preclude comparison of occupations over time .

focusing on member characteristics , what might previous occupations reveal about members who have served in congress for many years , or otherwise left other professions to pursue elective office prior to their congressional service ? .

if the focus is on members in their official capacities , in what ways might that work be categorized ? .

the cq press data provide previous occupations reported by individual members , organized by broad category identified as "previous occupation. .

occupations previously practiced by members might fit into one or more of the subcategories cq press identifies .

for example , cq press provides previous occupational subcategories that include congressional aide , law enforcement , and military ; each of these arguably could be included in another subcategory cq press provides , entitled "public service / politics. .

in addition to that concern , the extent to which the public service / politics subcategory includes or excludes members prior elected service in state or local offices ( which are common paths to congressional careers ) cannot be determined .

questions regarding the most appropriate manner of identifying congressional work experience , coupled with changes in the collection of occupational data for the nation , may raise questions about the comparability of congressional and u.s. population data across time .

due to the diversity of employment in the u.s. population , and the challenges of comparing that data to cq press information on members , comparisons between the occupations of members and those of the u.s. population at large are not provided in this report .

race and ethnicity in the census data , race and ethnicity are currently based on self - identification .

cq press data , which are collected from a number of sources including self - identification , reports only one response for this category for members ; members , or other sources , may identify more detailed racial or ethnic affiliations elsewhere .

over time , congress has required the census bureau to deploy a broader array of categories in the decennial censuses , and to allow respondents to choose more than one category .

these changes may raise questions about the comparability of congressional and u.s. population data , whether at a specific moment in time or across the span of the congresses examined .

religion comparing member religious affiliation to that of the u.s. population poses a number of challenges for several reasons .

first , there is no authoritative categorization of american religious practice that covers the period since 1945 in a consistent manner that includes consideration of all faiths , denominations , and traditions .

this is due , in part , to the prohibition placed on the census bureau from collecting religious affiliation data .

second , the data that are available from private sources for the u.s. population are not readily comparable to the data cq press gathers on the religious affiliations of members of congress as they chose to identify themselves .

cq press's member information includes broad listings that do not identify different traditions within broader denominations .

another challenge is the lack of consistent information on the number of american observers of some religions , or the incomplete collection of data over time .

most efforts to categorize religious affiliation in the united states attempt to identify adherents within the mainline and evangelical traditions of protestantism , or affiliation with historically black churches , but no such distinction is possible regarding member affiliation , based on the cq press data .

with regard to the u.s. population , it is possible to identify information on the number of christian adherents in the united states since 1945 , but it is more difficult to identify those who follow jewish , muslim , buddhist , or hindu faiths , or those who identify no religious affiliation .

some of this is explained in part by the preponderance of americans who identify themselves as christians , or as members of christian churches .

as a consequence , it is only possible to compare religious adherents in the house and senate in the 113 th congress , and the u.s. population in 2008 .

u.s. population data are based on the research of the pew forum on religious & public life .

military service as with previous occupation , questions arise when considering the military service of members of congress , or comparing that service to the u.s. population .

some members come to congress after working in other occupations , including having served in military service .

members may continue to serve in the military during their terms of office .

cq press provides military categories as follows: did not serve , or service in the u.s. air force ; u.s. army ; u.s. marine corps ; or u.s. navy , but does not distinguish whether the service occurred before , during , or after a member's term of office .

despite its stated categorizations , the cq press data provide as military service responses that include reported service in the reserves ; state guards and militias ; military components ( eg , "rotc," field artillery , or volunteer infantry ) ; and specific conflicts ( eg , spanish - american war ) .

in addition , the cq press data provide activity that may or may not constitute military service , including work for the u.s. food administration and war trade board , or the public health service , or service with the "u.s. general hospital. .

this report provides data on members identified in the cq press data as having military service regardless of type .

as a consequence it is possible that the extent of member military service may be overstated in some instances .

an additional set of challenges arises when comparing the military service of members with the service of the general population .

data on the number of americans serving in the military is not readily available .

military service is a defining characteristic of veteran status , but data on veteran status are also problematic .

the statutory definition of veterans appears to exclude service in reserve and state guard units , which precludes comparison between data collected by the department of veterans' affairs for the general population and the cq press member data .

instead , this report relies on data provided by the census bureau , which published veteran information in the 1960-2000 decennial censuses , and continues to collect veterans' data through the american community survey ( acs ) .

census data excluded reservists , members of state guards , and women from its tabulations of veterans until 1980 , and took steps to clarify veteran status by age , and type of military service , in most censuses .

as a consequence , direct comparability between census bureau data and the cq press data may be problematic , due to data inconsistencies in both collections .

