until relatively recently , natural gas - rich shale formations throughout the united states were not considered to have significant resource value because no technologies existed to economically recover the gas .

development and deployment of advanced drilling and reservoir stimulation methods have dramatically increased the gas production from these "unconventional gas shales. .

the marcellus shale formation of the appalachian basin , in the northeastern united states , potentially represents one of the largest unconventional natural gas resources in the united states .

natural gas prices have fallen significantly in the last five years , but particularly since mid - 2008 due in large part to the development of shale gas .

prices briefly exceeded $13 per million btu ( mbtu ) in 2008 , but fell below $4 per mbtu by the summer of 2009 .

the energy information administration ( eia ) expects that the henry hub spot price for natural gas will average $3.53 per mbtu in 2012 , a drop of $0.47 per mbtu from the 2011 average .

however , increased drilling activity in pennsylvania and west virginia and industry presence in new york and maryland reflect strong interest in the marcellus shale .

as a result , natural gas reserves in the united states may show a significant increase .

low natural gas prices have raised expectations that demand for natural gas will increase .

moreover , unlike the natural gas found in some regions , the gas produced from the eastern portion of the marcellus formation is of high enough quality that it requires minimal treatment for injection into transmission pipelines .

multiple gas transmission pipelines already serve the northeast united states .

the millennium pipeline project in southern new york could accommodate increased shale gas production from new york and parts of pennsylvania to serve the natural gas needs of the region .

west virginia may face obstacles to developing additional pipeline capacity and other infrastructure , as its terrain is more rugged .

gas producers would also have to construct an extensive network of gathering pipelines to bring the gas out of the fields to market .

one study by the interstate natural gas association of america estimated that almost 60,000 miles of gathering pipelines would be needed in the marcellus area .

directional drilling and "hydraulic fracturing" are essential to exploiting shale gas resources .

although oil and gas developers have applied these technologies in conventional oil and natural gas fields for some time , recent improvements in both technologies have allowed them to be applied effectively to unconventional gas shales on an industrial scale .

as a result , gas development has expanded in traditional gas producing areas , and has moved into areas that may have rugged topography , dense vegetation , higher population densities , and where residents may be less familiar with the oil and gas exploration and production industry .

shale gas development in the marcellus region has been particularly controversial .

the potential economic benefits from both the drilling activities and the lease and royalty payments compete with the public's concern for environmentally safe drilling practices and protection of groundwater and surface water resources .

water supply is an important issue because hydraulic fracturing requires large amounts of fresh water , but contamination of water resources is also a major concern to many across the region .

as with oil and gas production generally , development of the marcellus shale is primarily subject to state law and regulation , and requirements for well construction and operation differ among the states .

additionally , provisions of two federal laws — the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) and the clean water act ( cwa ) — can apply to some activities , specifically those related to wastewater disposal through underground injection or discharge to surface waters .

the sdwa exempts from regulation the underground injection of fluids ( except diesel fuel ) for hydraulic fracturing .

two bills introduced in the 112 th congress ( as in the last congress ) would remove the exemption and explicitly authorize regulation of hydraulic fracturing under the sdwa .

as exploration and production activities have increased , so has concern that development of the marcellus shale could harm human health and the environment .

one concern is that hydraulic fracturing or faulty well construction might damage groundwater and drinking water wells by introducing chemicals , natural gas , and other contaminants into aquifers .

a second issue is the potential contamination of water wells from surface activities related to gas production .

accidental spills , leaky surface impoundments , equipment failure , or careless surface disposal of drilling fluids at the natural gas production site could increase the risk of contaminating a nearby water well or run off to surface water .

managing the wastewater produced from the fracturing process has emerged as a major water resource issue in the marcellus region .

critics maintain that improper treatment and disposal of the large quantities of water used for , and resulting from , the hydraulic fracturing process may harm local and regional water supplies and that disposing the "flowback" and brine extracted from the shale after fracturing may affect the water quality of lakes , rivers , and streams and potentially damage public wastewater treatment plants and water supplies .

gas producers have pointed out that virtually all oil and natural gas production , including all the historical conventional production in the united states , requires wells that penetrate the local groundwater aquifers .

several shale gas contamination incidents have been attributed to poor well construction or surface activities that would be associated with any oil or gas drilling and production operation , and not just with the unique techniques associated with the hydraulic fracturing process .

however , these observations emphasize the importance of good well design and construction for any wells that penetrate local aquifers , regardless of their purpose .

 ( see " well construction and casing ," below. ) .

incidents of well - water contamination have been reported as marcellus shale development has expanded .

in one case , pennsylvania regulators confirmed that methane had migrated from drilling sites to private drinking water wells , and issued notices of violations to a drilling company for , among other things , "failure to prevent gas from entering fresh groundwater. .

in this case , state regulators attributed the contamination to faulty well construction .

in some cases of well - water contamination attributed to gas development in various gas producing areas , the source of contamination remains undetermined .

identifying the cause of contamination can be difficult for various reasons , including the complexity of hydrogeologic processes and investigations , and a lack of baseline testing of nearby water wells prior to drilling and fracturing , as well as the confidential business information status historically given to fracturing compounds across the states .

major oil and gas producing states have asserted that the hydraulic fracturing process has not been linked directly to groundwater contamination .

however , contamination incidents attributed to poor well construction have raised concerns regarding the adequacy and / or enforcement of state well construction regulations for managing oil and gas development that increasingly depends on fracturing .

this report discusses the marcellus shale resource , technical methods used to develop it , and associated groundwater and surface water issues .

the report also discusses relevant federal and state regulatory authorities , recent developments at the federal and state levels , and pending federal legislation .

well drilling technology has progressed markedly over the last 50 years .

an important recent advance in drilling is the ability to direct the drill bit horizontally beyond the region immediately beneath the drill rig .

it is this directional drilling , in combination with hydraulic fracturing , that has made it feasible to develop the marcellus shale and other unconventional gas and oil formations .

directional drilling offers a significant advantage over vertical well drilling in developing gas shales .

in the case of thin or inclined shale formations , a long horizontal well increases the length of the well bore in the gas - bearing formation and therefore increases the surface area for gas to flow into the well .

directional drilling technology also enables drilling a number of wells from a single well pad , thus cutting costs and reducing environmental disturbance .

 ( see figure 4 . ) .

however , this drilling technique alone is often insufficient to significantly improve gas production without some means of artificially stimulating flow .

in tight formations like shale , inducing fractures can increase flow by orders of magnitude .

however , before stimulation can take place , the well must be cased , cemented , and completed ( the well casing perforated ) .

in the late 1940s , drilling companies began inducing hydraulic pressure in wells to fracture the producing formation .

this fracturing process stimulated further production by effectively increasing the area from which a single well could produce gas .

combining hydraulic fracturing with directional drilling has opened up production of tighter ( less permeable ) petroleum and natural gas reservoirs , and in particular , unconventional gas shales like the marcellus .

development of natural gas resources in the marcellus shale is subject to regulation under several state and federal environmental laws .

in particular , the large volumes of water needed to drill and hydraulically fracture the shale , and the disposal of this water and other wastewater associated with gas extraction , may pose significant water quality and quantity challenges that trigger regulatory attention .

usgs noted in a 2009 publication that "concerns about the availability of water supplies needed for gas production , and questions about wastewater disposal have been raised by water - resource agencies and citizens through the marcellus shale gas development region. .

essentially all permitting , inspection , and enforcement activities related to gas development are conducted by state agencies .

in the cases where federal laws may apply , these regulatory requirements also are typically administered by the states .

the following sections review key provisions of two relevant federal laws — the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) and the clean water act ( cwa ) — and related state requirements .

the marcellus shale formation represents one of the largest unconventional or conventional natural gas resources in the united states .

current and planned projects to develop marcellus shale gas are apparent across the six - state region that overlies the resource .

for example , gas producers have reportedly planned over 2,000 gas wells just in west virginia , and the state's oil and gas commission estimates that , based on current information , there could be a well on every 40 acres in the state .

throughout the region , this activity is placing increasing demands on regulatory agencies — especially state agencies — for necessary licensing , permitting , inspections , and enforcement , and also for revising regulations .

because of questions related to water supply and wastewater disposal , some state agencies and drbc have been cautious about granting permits until these issues are resolved .

new york , in particular , is taking a cautious approach and has accepted , but not processed , permits pending completion of a state supplemental generic environmental impact statement .

at the same time , there is counter - pressure from companies , drillers , and landowners to move forward with developing the gas resource .

the success of planned development activities could depend , in part , on the capacity of regulatory agencies to provide the administrative and oversight resources to support such plans .

the development of the marcellus shale and other unconventional natural gas resources , and the use of hydraulic fracturing in particular , has generated considerable debate in congress and has been the topic of hearings and legislation .

industry and many state agencies are arguing against broad federal regulation of hydraulic fracturing under the sdwa , and noting a long history of the successful use of this practice in developing oil and gas resources .

a typical horizontal well is estimated to cost between $3 million and $5 million , and industry representatives argue that more federal regulation is unnecessary and would likely slow domestic gas development and increase energy prices .

at the same time , the amount of natural gas produced from unconventional formations that rely on hydraulic fracturing continues to grow .

moreover , drilling and reservoir stimulation methods have changed significantly over time as they have been applied to more challenging formations , increasing markedly the amount of water and fracturing fluids involved in production operations .

it is the rapidly increasing and geographically expanding use of hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling , along with a number of citizen complaints of water contamination and other environmental problems attributed to this practice — and to shale gas development more broadly — that has led to calls for greater state and / or federal environmental oversight of this activity .

natural gas locked in tight , impermeable shale has been uneconomical to produce until recently .

advances in directional well drilling and reservoir stimulation have dramatically increased the production from these unconventional shales .

however , the development of the marcellus and other shales comes with some challenges and controversy .

the marcellus shale formation represents one of the largest unconventional or conventional natural gas resources in the united states .

the natural gas produced from the eastern portion of the formation is pipeline quality , requiring no upgrading .

although the gas transmission pipeline network needed to supply the residential , retail , and commercial customers in the northeast united states is largely in place , gas producers would need to construct an extensive network of gathering pipelines and supporting infrastructure to move the gas from the new well fields to the transmission pipelines , as is the case for developing any new well field .

the lack of such infrastructure may limit or delay gas production in some areas of the region .

shale gas development has stirred concerns regarding water consumption and potential groundwater and water well contamination from hydraulic fracturing , and surface water contamination from disposal of the fracturing fluids .

the process of developing a shale gas well is an issue of concern for increasing the risk of water contamination , and concerns about contamination of fresh surface water or groundwater must be addressed during three phases of gas well development: ( 1 ) drilling through an overlying aquifer , completing and casing the well , ( 2 ) stimulating the well via hydraulic fracturing , and ( 3 ) flowback of fluids to the surface during development of the well and production of the gas ) .

if contamination of fresh water supplies from shale gas development is suspected , each of these three phases must be carefully examined to ensure that each is conducted without causing undue environmental impacts .

1 .

drilling and well construction through an aquifer : a properly cased well allows gas production up through the well to the surface , while preventing drilling fluids , hydraulic fracturing fluids , or natural gas from leaking into the permeable aquifer and contaminating groundwater .

construction of an oil and gas well of any type generally requires penetration of near - surface fresh water aquifers , and the application of rigorous drilling and well completion techniques is vital during this phase of production .

these activities are regulated by the states .

2 .

hydraulic fracturing : hydraulic fracturing does induce new fractures into the marcellus shale , and may lengthen existing fractures .

the chances of creating or extending fractures linking the marcellus shale to an overlying aquifer appear remote , however , because the vertical distance separating the marcellus shale from most aquifers is typically much greater than the length of the fractures generally induced during hydraulic fracturing .

hydraulically fractured gas production wells are subject to state regulations , but legislation has been introduced to authorize epa to regulate broadly hydraulic fracturing under sdwa , which likely would affect state requirements .

3 .

flowback of fracking fluids and produced waters : the flowback water pumped back to the surface after fracturing poses a significant environmental management challenge in the marcellus shale region .

the flowback and produced water's high content of salts , minerals , and other contaminants must be disposed of or adequately treated before discharged to surface waters .

state laws and the federal clean water act regulate the discharge of this flowback water and other drilling wastewater to surface waters , while the safe drinking water act regulates deep well injection of such wastewater .

cumulatively , the concerns about the potential water quality and other environmental impacts of unconventional gas exploration and development , including in the marcellus shale , have prompted close examination at a number of levels .

congress has directed epa to "review the risks that hydraulic fracturing poses to drinking water supplies , using the best available science , as well as independent sources of information. .

epa expects to report on the interim research results in 2012 , and issue a follow - up report in 2014 .

in march 2011 , president obama announced a broad "blueprint for a secure energy future. .

in it , the president asked the doe secretary to identify steps that can be taken to improve the safety and environmental performance of shale gas production , and to develop consensus recommendations on practices to ensure the protection of public health and the environment , including water quality .

in november , the secretary of energy advisory board ( seab ) shale gas subcommittee issued a final report , with recommendations for state and federal governments and industry .

water quality recommendations , aimed mainly at the states , include ( 1 ) adopting best practices for well construction ( casing , cementing , and pressure management ) , ( 2 ) adopting requirements for background water quality measurements , ( 3 ) manifesting all water transfers across various locations , and ( 4 ) measuring and publicly reporting the composition of water stocks and flow throughout the fracturing and cleanup process .

the seab also suggested that states review and modernize rules and enforcement practices .

in april 2011 , the new york state attorney general stated he would sue the federal government if an environmental review of natural gas drilling in the delaware river basin was not conducted under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .

also in april , a coalition of environmental advocates , including the chesapeake bay foundation , petitioned the white house to conduct an environmental impact analysis on the effects that natural gas drilling and production may have within the marcellus shale region .

in october 2011 , epa initiated a rulemaking to set technology - based pre - treatment standards to regulate discharges of shale gas wastewaters to publicly owned treatment works .

across the region , state oil and gas regulators and environmental regulators have been evaluating and revising regulations to strengthen water quality protections during shale gas exploration and production .

shale gas development using high - volume horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing has been done for only about a decade and is increasing rapidly , catching states and communities at various states of preparedness .

the industry's growth has created new regulatory , enforcement , and oversight challenges for state officials , and often new concerns for landowners and communities in the marcellus shale region .

the growing number of gas wells and related infrastructure and land - use changes has drawn attention to the adequacy of regulatory oversight governing this industry .

natural gas production has long been regulated by the states .

state oil and gas and environmental protection agencies widely support keeping responsibility for regulating oil and gas production generally , and hydraulic fracturing specifically , with the states .

the interstate oil and gas compact commission ( iogcc ) , representing the oil and gas producing states , adopted a resolution urging congress not to remove the fracturing exemption from provisions of the sdwa , noting that the process is a temporary injection - and - recovery technique and does not fit the uic program which epa generally developed to address the permanent disposal of wastes .

if congress were to require epa to regulate all hydraulic fracturing of oil and gas wells , a key issue would involve epa's capacity to assume such a role .

epa likely would require substantial new resources and technical staff to oversee major elements of oil and gas production and to directly implement any new rules in non - primacy states .

for example , unless pennsylvania and new york assumed primacy for the uic program , epa would have responsibility for permitting and overseeing all hydraulically fractured wells in those states , while the wells remained subject to state permitting requirements and regulations .

this scenario has raised concerns from states and industry regarding the potential benefits , costs , and redundancies that may result from such an approach .

nonetheless , given the concern about potential water contamination expressed by citizens and communities , and uneven regulation across the states , some continue to urge greater federal involvement .

the american water works association ( awwa , representing drinking water professionals and public water suppliers ) , various towns , and environmental groups support the frac act .

epa currently is developing new measures to protect water quality during shale gas development .

the agency is developing regulations under the clean water act to regulate flowback and produced water discharges to municipal wastewater treatment plants .

also , epa is writing guidance under the sdwa uic program to assist states with permitting hydraulic fracturing operations that use diesel fuel .

the pending diesel guidance may provide insight into how the agency might regulate hydraulic fracturing broadly , if directed to do so by congress .

currently , there is little agreement as to the potential risks that shale gas development poses to water resources across the region .

given the level of debate , it appears that the understanding of the risks could benefit from a better scientific foundation .

congress has urged epa to study the relationship between hydraulic fracturing and drinking water .

the results of the epa study , along with work being done by the states , interstate commissions , industry , and others , should enable a better assessment of the risks that unconventional shale development may pose to water resources , and help inform any potential congressional action .

in the meantime , states across the marcellus shale region continue to review and revise regulatory programs in response to robust growth in the shale gas industry .

