a mandatory minimum sentencing statute is a law that requires a judge to impose a statutorily prescribed sentence .

it is most commonly understood to mean a statute that requires imposition of a specific minimum term of imprisonment .

the statutes that outlaw most federal crimes do not call for a mandatory minimum sentence .

several statutes that outlaw federal sex offenses insist upon a minimum term of imprisonment .

this is a brief overview of those provisions .

mandatory minimum sentences have been with us since the dawn of the republic .

the first congress made mandatory capital offenses of treason , murder in a federal enclave , piracy , forgery , and counterfeiting .

a few years later , the sedition and logan acts arrived with six - month mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment .

congress made rape committed within the maritime jurisdiction of the united states a mandatory capital offense in 1825 .

so the punishment remained until the 1948 recodification of federal criminal law , when rape became punishable by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for life .

congress increased the number of federal sex offenses and their attendant mandatory minimum sentences beginning in 1978 with the enactment of the first federal child pornography statutes: 18 u.s.c .

2251 , 2252 .

it filled out the complement of federal sex offenses with mandatory minimum sentences of imprisonment at fairly regular intervals thereafter .

in united states sentencing commission survey which addressed mandatory minimum sentences in child pornography cases but not other sex offense cases , a majority of the judges responding to a united states sentencing commission survey thought that the mandatory minimum sentences for production and distribution of child pornography and other child exploitation offenses were generally appropriate .

well over two - thirds , however , considered those for receipt of child pornography too high .

the commission's report on mandatory minimum sentencing statutes noted that its "review of available sentencing data [relating to sex offenses] indicates that further study of these penalties is needed before it can offer specific recommendations in this area. .

it concluded preliminarily , however , that "the mandatory minimum penalties for certain non - contact child pornography offenses may be excessively severe and as a result are being applied inconsistently. .

defendants sentenced to mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment have challenged them on a number of constitutional grounds ranging from congress's legislative authority , to cruel and unusual punishment , through ex post facto and double jeopardy , to equal protection and due process .

each constitutional provision defines the outer boundaries that a federal criminal statute must be crafted to honor .

most statutes and the penalties they impose have survived scrutiny .

most of the mandatory minimum penalties for federal sex offenses appear in one of three chapters of title 18 of the united states code .

chapter 109a outlaws rape and other forms of sexual abuse and sexual contact when committed in federal enclaves or federal prisons .

chapter 110 outlaws child pornography .

chapter 117 outlaws sexual activities that have travel or commercial attributes .

chapter 109a reaches a relatively wide range of sexual misconduct under relatively narrow jurisdiction circumstances .

it applies in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states .

it applies as well in federal prisons and other institutions where individuals are held in federal custody by contract or agreement with federal authorities , regardless of whether they are located within the territorial jurisdiction of the united states .

within the united states , the "territorial jurisdiction of the united states" refers to those areas over which congress enjoys state - like legislative jurisdiction .

it includes some , or parts of some , military installations , indian reservations , national parks , and national forests .

outside of the united states , it includes overseas federal facilities and residences with respect to offenses committed by or against u.s. nationals .

felonies proscribed when committed within the territorial jurisdiction of the united states are also proscribed when committed outside the united states by members of the armed forces , or employees of the armed forces , or those accompanying the armed forces .

the "maritime jurisdiction of the united states" includes vessels of u.s. registry , vessels owned by americans , and vessels scheduled to arrive in , or depart from , the united states with respect to crimes committed by or against a u.s. national .

prosecution of the mandatory minimum offenses of chapter 109a and each of the other mandatory minimum federal sex offenses may begin at anytime .

there is no applicable statute of limitations , although in rare instances due process may preclude prosecution of a stale complaint .

several mandatory minimum sentencing statutes punish sexual misconduct based on congress's legislative authority to regulate interstate and foreign commerce .

most are found in chapter 117 ( relating to transportation for illegal sexual activity ) , but a few others appear in either chapter 109a ( relating to sexual abuse ) or chapter 77 ( relating to peonage , slavery , and human trafficking ) .

four federal child pornography sections establish mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for violations: 18 u.s.c .

2251 ( relating to sexual exploitation of children ) , 18 u.s.c .

2251a ( relating to selling or buying children ) , 18 u.s.c .

2252 ( relating to certain activities relating to material involving sexual exploitation of children ) , and 18 u.s.c .

2252a ( relating to certain activities relating to material constituting or containing child pornography ) .

section 2251 creates a series of mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for the production of , attempted production of , and conspiracy to produce , child pornography or related misconduct under various jurisdictional circumstances .

first time offenders are punishable by a fine and imprisonment for not less than 15 years ; offenders with a prior conviction face a fine and imprisonment for not less than 25 years ; and offenders with 2 or more prior convictions must be fined and sentenced to imprisonment for at least 35 years .

should a death result from the commission of such offense , the offender must be imprisoned for at least 30 years .

section 2251 outlaws four substantive offenses: the use of a child to produce child pornography , subsection 2251 ( a ) ; the participation of a parent or other custodian of a child in such production , subsection 2251 ( b ) ; the overseas production of such material , subsection 2251 ( c ) ; and the advertising of such material , subsection 2251 ( d ) .

subsection 2251 ( e ) applies the same penalties to attempts or conspiracies to commit any of the four substantive offenses .

the elements common to all four are a child under 18 years of age and at least the goal of creating a visual depiction of sexually explicit conduct of the child .

a majority of courts have held that neither the statute nor the constitution requires the prosecution to show that the defendant knew the child was underage and that mistake of age constitutes no defense .

"visual depiction" includes photographs , video , and computer disks .

"sexually explicit conduct" is defined to encompass various sexual acts as well as "lascivious exhibition[s]" of an individual's pubic area .

the lower federal appellate courts have endorsed the so - call dost factors as a guide to determine when the otherwise lawful depiction of nudity has become a lascivious exhibition .

subsection 2251 ( a ) outlaws employment , use , or inducement of a child to produce a visual depiction of sexually explicit conduct under a range of jurisdictional circumstances , or by virtue of subsection ( e ) attempting or conspiring to do so .

the jurisdictional circumstances include interstate or territorial transportation of the child , anticipated or actual transmission or transportation of the depiction in or affecting interstate commerce , and use of materials transported in interstate commerce .

the courts have held that subsection 2251 ( a ) constitutes a valid exercise of congress's legislative power under the commerce clause .

moreover , they have concluded that its mandatory minimum term of imprisonment does not offend the eighth amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishments .

subsection 2251 ( b ) applies the mandatory minimums of subsection 2251 ( e ) to a parent , or other custodian of a child under 18 years of age , who permits , attempts to permit , or conspires to permit a child to be used for the visual depiction of sexually explicit conduct under jurisdictional circumstances comparable to those that apply to subsection 2251 ( a ) .

a related provision with a more substantial mandatory minimum sentence of imprison appears in 18 u.s.c .

2251a and differs primarily in its requirement of a transfer of custody or control .

subsection 2251 ( c ) applies the mandatory minimums of subsection 2251 ( e ) to the overseas use , attempted use , or conspiracy to use , a child in the visual depiction of sexually explicit conduct with the intent to transport , or the transportation of , the depiction into the united states .

subsection 2251 ( d ) applies the mandatory minimums of subsection 2251 ( e ) to anyone who "knowingly makes , prints , or publishes , or causes to be made , printed , published any notice or advertisement seeking or offering child pornography" or to anyone seeking or offering to participate in the production of child pornography under various jurisdictional circumstances .

federal jurisdiction exists if the notice or advertisement is transported or transmitted using the facilities of interstate commerce or the defendant anticipates that it will be .

the notice or advertisement need not "specifically state that it offers or seeks a visual depiction to violate §2251 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ; " all that is required is that its implications are clear .

section 2251a demands a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment of 30 years for those convicted of relinquishing or acquiring custody or control of a child under 18 years of age knowing or intending that the child will be used to produce visual depictions of sexually explicit conduct , under certain jurisdictional circumstances .

"custody or control" is statutorily defined to "include[] temporary supervision over or responsibility for a minor whether legally or illegally obtained. .

"the statute does not require transfer of full parental authority ; something less than the control a parent exercises — including ... limitations on time and scope — suffices to violate the law. .

moreover , "the terms contained in the title of §2251a ( b ) — buying and selling — do not exclusively define the statute's reach. .

the statute's reach extends as well to instances where the defendant acquires custody or control of the child by paying the victim herself .

federal jurisdiction over the offense exists if it occurred within the territorial jurisdiction of the united states , if it involved travel in or affecting interstate commerce , or if the offer was transported or transmitted through the facilities in or affecting interstate commerce .

three of the four offenses created in 18 u.s.c .

2252 require imposition of a sentence of imprisonment for not less than 5 years: transportation , receipt , or possession with intent to sell , of visual depictions of sexually explicit conduct involving a child under 18 years of age — under various jurisdictional circumstances .

attempts or conspiracies to commit those offenses carry the same mandatory minimum penalties .

simple possession by a first time offender is not punishable by a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment .

defendants charged with any of the four offenses , who have a prior similar conviction , face increased mandatory minimum sentences of imprisonment .

the mandatory minimum sentences of subsection 2252 ( b ) ( 1 ) apply to those convicted of violating subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 1 ) which outlaws the transportation or transmission of child pornography in or affecting interstate commerce or by using the facilities of interstate commerce .

the mandatory minimum sentences apply as well to those convicted of attempting or conspiring to violate the subsection .

"under section 2252 ( a ) ( 1 ) , the government must prove that: ( 1 ) the defendant knowingly transported or shipped , ( 2 ) in interstate or foreign commerce , ( 3 ) any visual depiction involving the use of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct. .

the government must also prove that the visual depiction was of an actual child not a mere computer simulation , and that the defendant knew the child was underage .

moreover , simply because the statute indicates that transportation may take the form of computer transmission "does not mean that use of a computer is a required element of the crime. .

for purposes of subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 1 ) , "interstate commerce" includes commerce to and from the possessions and the territories of the united states , and "foreign commerce" includes travel between foreign nations by way of the united states .

the government , however , need not prove that the defendants know of the interstate or foreign commercial nature of the transportation or shipment .

when the government seeks the 15-year recidivist mandatory minimum sentence and the "state law [upon which the prior conviction was based] covers conduct some of which is within , and the rest of which is outside , the scope of a recidivist statute , the federal court may examine the [state] charging papers ( and any guilty - plea colloquy ) to classify the conviction. .

the same mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment apply when the defendant is convicted of receipt or distribution of , attempted receipt or distribution of , or conspiracy to receive or distribute , child pornography , under the same jurisdictional circumstances — not less than 15 years with a prior conviction ; not less than 5 years otherwise .

"the elements of receipt under 18 u.s.c .

2252 ( a ) ( 2 ) require the defendant to knowingly receive an item of child pornography , and the item to be transported in interstate or foreign commerce" or otherwise satisfy the subsection's jurisdictional requirements .

to be sure , the exact contours of the crime of "knowingly receiving" electronic child pornography in a constantly shifting technological background are murky .

part of the problem is that computers connected to the internet store vast quantities of data about which many users know nothing .

as a user browses the internet , the computer stores images and text and other kinds of data in its temporary memory the way a ship passing through the ocean collects barnacles that cling to its hull .

thus , there is some risk that the computer of an internet user not intending to access child pornography may be infected with child pornography .

understandably , our sister circuits have struggled with whether to impute knowledge from the presence of illicit files found in such temporary storage .

ultimately , the facts of a given case will determine whether the defendant is the unwitting victim of technology or knowingly received child pornography .

the government's burden includes proving that the defendant knew that child depicted was real and underage .

for purposes of the jurisdictional element , "the government prove[s] images traveled interstate when it introduce[s] evidence that the defendant received images that were transmitted over the internet. .

to be guilty of attempted violation of subsection 2252 ( b ) ( 2 ) , the defendant must have intended to receive or distribute child pornography and taken a substantial step towards the achievement of that goal .

when a court faces the question of whether a defendant must be sentenced to the mandatory minimum 15-year term of imprisonment reserved for recidivists in a case where the prior conviction occurred under a statute proscribing both qualifying and non - qualifying offenses , the court "may refer to the charging document , the terms of a plea agreement , the transcript of the colloquy , jury instructions , and other comparable judicial records. .

subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 3 ) , which prohibits the sale of , or possession with intent to sell , child pornography under various jurisdiction circumstances , requires imposition of a 5-year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment as well ( a minimum of 15 years for recidivists ) .

the same penalties must be assessed upon conviction of an attempt or conspiracy to violate the subsection .

jurisdiction exists if the offense occurs within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states , on a federal facility or indian reservation .

it also exists if interstate commerce is implicated in the offense .

recidivists in possession of child pornography must be sentenced to 10-year minimum term of imprisonment under subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 4 ) , as must a recidivist convicted of attempting or conspiring to violate the subsection .

the necessary jurisdictional circumstances are the same as those which apply in the case of the sale offense under subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

qualifying prior convictions may include convictions under either state or federal law .

the offender's prior state conviction must be "related to" one of the statutorily described offenses and involve a minor , but the statute of conviction need not list a minor victim as an element of the offense .

"[t]he sentencing court looks to the fact of conviction and the statutory definition of the prior offense and determines whether the full range of conduct encompassed by the statute qualifies to enhance the sentence. .

in this exercise , "[i]f the statute [of prior conviction] criminalizes both conduct that would qualify a defendant for an enhancement , as well as conduct that would not do so , the court may refer to the charging document , the terms of a plea agreement , the transcript of the colloquy , jury instructions , and the comparable judicial records to determine the basis for the guilty plea or verdict [in the prior case]. .

subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 4 ) has two distinctive features .

first , offenders are not subject to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment , unless the recidivist provisions are tripped .

second , subsection 2252 ( c ) provides a narrow explicit statutory defense , available when possession is minimal and the individual destroys the material or reveals it to authorities .

sections 2252 and 2252a were almost identical at one point .

section 2252 covered only visual depictions of sexual activity involving an actual child .

section 2252a covered visual depictions of sexual activity involving a digitally created child as well .

other changes have occurred over the years , but that essential distinction remains .

so too do the mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment that attend comparable violations of either section .

at least a 5-year term of imprisonment must be imposed for a violation , attempt to violate , or conspiracy to violate any of five child pornography - related offenses found in subsection 2252a: transportation ; receiving or distributing ; reproducing or promoting ; selling or possession with intent to sell ; or providing to a child .

recidivists must be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than 15 years ( not less than 10 years for a recidivist guilty of simple possession ) .

as discussed below , a 20-year mandatory term of imprisonment attends conviction for a child exploitation enterprise offense involving multiple violations of subsection 2252a ( a ) and related child abuse offenses that involve several children and several collaborators .

a 5-year mandatory term of imprisonment must be imposed on "[a]ny person who - ( 1 ) knowingly mails , or transports or ships using any means or facility of interstate or foreign commerce or in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce by any means , including by computer , any child pornography. .

a mandatory 15-year term of imprisonment awaits recidivists .

the subsection's recently expanded jurisdictional statement ( "using any means ... affecting ... commerce" ) eliminates the split among the lower federal appellate courts over whether the earlier version of the statute covered any internet use , or use where actual interstate transportation can be shown .

on the other hand , the use of a computer is not an element of the offense ; the offense may be committed with or without the use of computer .

defendants accused of violating the transportation prohibition of subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 1 ) enjoy a relatively narrow affirmative defense .

the defense is available , if , after giving the required pre - trial notice , the defendant establishes that the alleged child pornography did not involve the use of a real child or the image of a real child .

section 2252a punishes the knowing receipt or distribution of child pornography , committed under certain jurisdictional circumstances , with imprisonment for not less than 5 years .

it punishes attempt and conspiracy in the same manner .

it imposes a minimum 15-year term of imprisonment upon recidivists .

the offense must be committed knowingly ; inadvertent receipt is not a violation .

knowing violation occurs , for instance , when the defendant "intentionally views , acquires , or accepts child pornography on a computer from an outside source. .

attempted violation requires evidence of an intent to commit the offense and a substantial step beyond mere preparation towards that goal .

factual impossibility , such as the absence of a real child in a sting situation , poses no obstacle to conviction for attempt .

possession of child pornography under subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 5 ) is a lesser included offense to the crime of receipt of child pornography under subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 2 ) .

the constitution's double jeopardy clause thus precludes punishment under both subsections for the same misconduct .

punishment under both subsections is permissible , however , when each addresses a different violation .

the double jeopardy clause may also bar punishment for receipt of child pornography under both subsection 2252 ( a ) ( 2 ) and 2252a ( a ) ( 2 ) , unless the offenses involve different violations ; for example , the 2252a ( a ) ( 2 ) offense involves a digital image and the other involves a real child .

knowingly reproducing or promoting child pornography carries the same 5-year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment ( 15 years for recidivists ) .

reproduction and the promotion offenses are distinct .

both offenses , however , rest on a broad claim of federal jurisdiction: utilization of a means or facility "affecting interstate or foreign commerce" by any manner "including by computer. .

the supreme court in williams held that neither the reproduction nor promotion proscription violates either first amendment over breadth restrictions or fifth amendment due process vagueness limitations .

the court dissected several of subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 3 ) 's features in the course of its analysis .

first , it observed that the knowledge requirement applies to both the reproduction and promotion offenses .

second , it said that the action elements of the promotion offense — "advertises , promotes , presents , distributes , or solicits" — bespeaks a transaction , although not necessarily a commercial transaction .

"that is to say , the statute penalizes speech that accompanies or seeks to induce a transfer of child pornography — via production or physical delivery — from one person to another. .

for the promotion offense , the advertisement , promotion , or presentation must be advanced with one of two intents: either "in a manner that reflects belief" that child pornography is being offered , or in a manner that is calculated to induce another to believe child pornography is being offered .

as for the first , the manner of advertisement , promotion , or presentation "must objectively manifest a belief that the material is child pornography ; a mere belief , without an accompanying statement or action that would lead a reasonable person to understand that the defendant holds that belief , is insufficient. .

as for the second , "the defendant must 'intend' that the listener believe the material to be child pornography , and must select a manner of 'advertising , promoting , presenting , distributing , or soliciting' the material that he thinks will engender the belief — whether or not a reasonable person would think the same. .

defendants charged with the reproduction offense may invoke the narrow affirmative defense covering pornography that involves only adults ; defendants charged with the promotion offense may not .

the same 5- and 15-year mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment follow conviction for selling or possession with intent to sell child pornography if committed under a wide range of jurisdictional circumstances , or for attempting or conspiring to do so .

jurisdiction exists if the offense occurs on federal enclaves or facilities or in indian country .

it also exists if the offense involves transportation using a means or facility in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce .

the affirmative defense available when children have not been used in the pornography may be claimed by defendants charged with selling or intent to sell child pornography .

section 2252a requires a fine and a minimum term of imprisonment of 5 years for offering child pornography to a child with the intent to induce the child to engage in illegal activity , or attempting or conspiring to do so .

it requires a fine and a minimum term of 15 years for recidivists .

the offense is punishable if the offer , the pornography , or the material used to produce the pornography , was transported using a means or facility in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce .

the defendants charged under the offering offense of subsection 2252a ( a ) ( 6 ) may not claim the affirmative defense available elsewhere for when the pornography involves only adults .

there is no mandatory minimum term of imprisonment for conviction of simple possession of child pornography .

however , there is a 10-year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment for conviction of possession by a recidivist .

the possession which triggers the minimum sentence may occur in indian country or on federal enclaves or facilities .

interstate commerce may also provide a basis for jurisdiction .

defendants charged with possession may assert the affirmative , adults - only pornography defense , if they do so in a timely fashion .

subsection 2252a ( g ) outlaws "child exploitation enterprises," a crime punishable by a fine and imprisonment "for any term of years not less than 20 or for life. .

the crime's federal predicate felony offenses include not only pornography , but sex trafficking , kidnaping a child , sex abuse of a child , and mann act violations involving a child .

more precisely , the penalty applies to: ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) in concert with three or more other persons ( 3 ) commits a series of predicate offenses ( 4 ) constituting three or more separate incidents ( 5 ) involving more than one victim ( 6 ) when the predicate offenses involve felony violations of: 18 u.s.c .

1591 ( relating to sex trafficking of a child or by force ) 18 u.s.c .

1201 ( relating to kidnaping of a child ) 18 u.s.c .

ch .

109a ( relating to sexual abuse of a child ) 18 u.s.c .

ch .

110 ( relating to pornography but not including record - keeping violations ) , or 18 u.s.c .

ch .

117 ( relating to sex offenses involving travel ) .

each predicate offense need not involve more than one victim nor be committed in concert with three other offenders ; it is enough that the series of predicate offenses , taken in total involve more than one victim and three or more other offenders .

the constitution's double jeopardy clause bars punishment for both a violation of subsection 2252a ( g ) and for conspiracy to violate the underlying predicate offenses .

child pornography offenses come with their own mandatory restitution provisions , not unlike those covering sex trafficking and sex abuse in federal enclaves .

the provision , section 2259 , is much like section 2248 that applies in enclave cases .

it adopts the procedures generally applicable in restitution cases .

its definition of the term the "victim" suggests that parents must be awarded restitution for expenses incurred on behalf of a victimized child .

the examples of qualifying expenses are the same as those used for the victims of sexual abuse in federal enclaves under section 2248 .

it references a similar list of specific qualifying expenses , but adds to the list the right to recover the value of the services of the trafficked victim .

offenders convicted of a mandatory minimum pornography offense must be sentenced to a term of supervised release for "any term of years not less than 5 , or life. .

a defendant sentenced to a term of supervised release must ( 1 ) avoid further criminal activity ; ( 2 ) submit to drug testing and the collection of dna samples ; and ( 3 ) obey sex offender registration requirements .

in addition , internet use and child contact restrictions are particularly common conditions of supervised release in pornography cases .

here too , however , the discretionary conditions of supervised release must be consistent the policies of the sentencing guidelines , must be related to the statutory sentencing factors concerning the circumstances of the offense and the offender , and must not unduly deprive the defendant of his liberty .

