u nder the appointments clause of the constitution , the president and the senate share the power to fill high - level politically appointed positions in the federal government .

the recess appointments clause of the constitution also empowers the president unilaterally to make a temporary appointment to such a position if it is vacant and the senate is in recess .

such an appointment , termed a recess appointment , expires at the end of the following session of the senate .

the records of debate at the constitutional convention do not provide much evidence of the framers' intentions in the recess appointment clause .

a discussion of the clause by alexander hamilton , in the federalist papers , suggests that its purpose was to provide an alternative method of appointment that would allow the filling of vacancies "without delay" during periods of senate absence .

opinions by later attorneys general also supported this general notion , suggesting that the purpose of the clause was to allow the president to maintain the continuity of administrative government through the temporary filling of offices during periods when the senate was not in session , at which time his nominees could not be considered or confirmed .

this interpretation is supported by the fact that both houses of congress had relatively short sessions and long recesses during the early years of the republic .

in fact , until the beginning of the 20 th century , the senate was , on average , in session less than half the year .

president barack obama made 32 recess appointments .

of the 32 , he made 22 during recesses within the second session of the 111 th congress .

he made six during the recess between the adjournment of the 111 th congress and the convening of the 112 th congress .

from the 110 th congress onward , it became common for the senate and house to use certain scheduling practices as a means of precluding the president from making recess appointments .

as discussed in greater detail later in this report , the practices do this by preventing the occurrence of a senate recess of sufficient length for the president to be able to use his recess appointment authority .

president obama made four recess appointments during a three - day recess between pro forma sessions of the senate on january 3 and january 6 , 2012 , a period that was generally considered too short to permit recess appointments .

the recess and pro forma sessions had been set as part of the senate schedule for the period of december 20 , 2011 , through january 23 , 2012 , established by unanimous consent on december 17 , 2011 .

this schedule provided for a series of pro forma sessions with intervening three - and four - day recesses .

the recess during which the president made the appointments was part of a period of senate absence that would otherwise have constituted an intrasession adjournment of 10 days or longer .

in an opinion regarding the lawfulness of these appointments , the office of legal counsel at the department of justice argued that "the president may determine that pro forma sessions at which no business is to be conducted do not interrupt a senate recess for the purposes of the recess appointments clause. .

the u.s. supreme court later concluded otherwise in a case regarding three of the four appointments .

it held that , for purposes of the clause , "the senate is in session when it says it is , provided that , under its own rules , it retains the capacity to transact senate business. .

these three recess appointments were found by the court to be constitutionally invalid .

this report identifies recess appointments made by president obama .

the report discusses these recess appointments in the context of recess appointment authorities and practices generally , and it provides related statistics .

congressional actions to prevent recess appointments prior to and during the obama presidency , the president's unconstitutional appointments , and the judiciary's response are discussed in more detail in an appendix to the report .

additional information concerning recess appointments by president george w. bush , general recess appointment practices , and legal issues pertaining to judicial recess appointments in particular may be found in other crs reports .

the individual obama recess appointments are shown in table 3 .

the table provides , for each appointment , the name of the appointee , the position to which he or she was appointed , and the date on which the appointment was announced .

entries in bold are recess appointments that were made during a recess within a session of congress ( intrasession recess appointments ) .

all other entries are recess appointments that were made during a recess between congresses or between sessions of congress ( intersession recess appointments ) .

from the 110 th congress onward , it became commonplace for the senate and house to use certain scheduling practices as a means of precluding recess appointments by the president .

the practices do this by preventing the occurrence of a senate recess of sufficient length for the president to be able to use his recess appointment authority .

in a june 26 , 2014 , opinion , the u.s. supreme court held that the president may use the recess appointment power essentially only during a senate recess of 10 days or longer .

furthermore , the court concluded that , for purposes of the recess appointments clause , "the senate is in session when it says it is , provided that , under its own rules , it retains the capacity to transact senate business. .

this implies that the senate would also determine if and when it will adjourn for a recess of 10 days or longer and thus allow for the possibility of recess appointments .

in this way , the court validated the use of congressional scheduling as a mechanism for preventing the president from making recess appointments .

one set of scheduling practices that has arisen was implemented by the senate alone ; no unusual action or inaction by the house was necessary .

a second , related set of practices , which developed in the 112 th congress , arose from the lack of a concurrent resolution of adjournment , which can result from a lack of consent by either the house or the senate .

this section describes these developments and the impact they have had on the incidence of recess appointments .

background the constitution does not specify the length of time that the senate must be in recess in order for the president to make a recess appointment .

over the last century , recesses both within and between sessions have tended to become shorter than recesses between sessions of congress commonly used to be .

this circumstance has brought to prominence the question of how long a recess must be before it may be appropriate for the president to take advantage of his constitutional power to fill vacancies through recess appointments .

over time , the department of justice , through opinions of attorneys general and the office of legal counsel , has offered differing views on this issue .

prior to the 2014 u.s. supreme court opinion just discussed , no settled understanding appeared to exist .

one view , which was discussed by attorney general harry m. daugherty in a 1921 opinion , implied that a linkage might be established between the meaning of "the recess of the senate," for recess appointments clause purposes , and the meaning of "adjourn for more than three days," for purposes of the adjournments clause .

in the opinion , daugherty argued that the president had the authority to make a recess appointment during an intrasession recess of 29 days .

he stated , if the president is empowered to make recess appointments during the present adjournment , does it not necessarily follow that the power exists if an adjournment for only 2 instead of 28 days is taken ? .

i unhesitatingly answer this by saying no .

under the constitution neither house can adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other .

in 1993 , a brief submitted by the department of justice in the case of mackie v. clinton articulated this argument more fully .

arguing that the recess during which the recess appointment at issue in the case was made was of sufficient length , the brief stated , if the recess here at issue were of three days or less , a closer question would be presented .

the constitution restricts the senate's ability to adjourn its session for more than three days without obtaining the consent of the house of representatives... .

it might be argued that this means that the framers did not consider one , two and three day recesses to be constitutionally significant.… apart from the three - day requirement noted above , the constitution provides no basis for limiting the recess to a specific number of days .

whatever number of days is deemed required , that number would of necessity be completely arbitrary .

pursuant to the adjournments clause , congress generally provides for an intrasession recess of more than three days by adopting a concurrent resolution .

this form of measure is appropriate for each house to consent to a recess of the other , because it requires adoption by both houses , but not action by the president .

these resolutions typically specify the date or range of dates on which each of the chambers will adjourn and the date upon which each chamber will reconvene .

practices implemented unilaterally by the senate the logic of the argument laid out in the department of justice brief appears to underlie congressional practices that were first implemented during the 110 th congress .

from november 2007 through the end of the george w. bush presidency , the senate structured its recesses in a way that was intended , at least initially , to prevent the president from making recess appointments .

the approach involved the use of pro forma sessions , which are short meetings of the senate or the house held for the purpose of avoiding a recess of more than three days and therefore the necessity of obtaining the consent of the other house .

normally , it is understood that during a pro forma session no business will be conducted .

on november 16 , 2007 , the senate majority leader announced that the senate would "be coming in for pro forma sessions during the thanksgiving holiday to prevent recess appointments. .

the senate recessed later that day and pro forma meetings were convened on november 20 , 23 , 27 , and 29 , with no business conducted .

the senate next conducted business after reconvening on december 3 , 2007 .

during the remainder of 2007 and 2008 , similar procedures were followed during most other periods that would otherwise have been senate recesses of a week or longer in duration , including not only intrasession recesses , but also the period of sine die adjournment at the end of 2007 .

the senate pro forma session practice appears to have achieved its stated intent during the final 14 months of the bush administration: president bush made no recess appointments between the initial pro forma sessions in november 2007 and the end of his presidency .

the senate did not use the pro forma session practices during or after the first session of the 111 th congress .

toward the end of the second session , however , the senate structured its 2010 pre - election break as a series of shorter recesses separated by pro forma sessions .

in this case , the use of the practice reportedly stemmed from a lack of agreement between the senate majority leader and the senate minority leader regarding the disposition of pending nominations over the break .

president obama did not make any recess appointments during this period .

the procedures used by the senate during the 110 th and 111 th congresses supplemented the adjournment procedures typically used by the senate and the house .

in each of the instances where the pro forma session practice was used during these congresses , the two chambers also adopted a concurrent resolution of adjournment .

in each case , the schedule of pro forma sessions was established in the senate by unanimous consent within the terms provided for in the concurrent resolution .

senate practices necessitated by the absence of house consent to adjourn during the first few months of the 112 th congress , the house and senate passed concurrent resolutions of adjournment prior to periods of absence of more than three days .

during this time , the senate did not use the pro forma session practice during the resulting recesses .

during the middle of the first session of the 112 th congress , a new related practice appeared to emerge .

on may 25 , 2011 , in a letter to speaker of the house john boehner , 20 senators urged him "to refuse to pass any resolution to allow the senate to recess or adjourn for more than three days for the remainder of the president's term. .

the letter stated that "president obama has used recess appointments to fill powerful positions with individuals whose views are so outside the mainstream that they cannot be confirmed by the senate of the united states," and it referred to the senate practices of 2007 as "a successful attempt to thwart president bush's recess appointment powers. .

the request of the senators appeared similarly intended to block president obama from using the recess appointment power .

in a june 15 , 2011 , letter to the speaker of the house , the house majority leader , and the house majority whip , 78 representatives requested that "all appropriate measures be taken to prevent any and all recess appointments by preventing the senate from officially recessing for the remainder of the 112 th congress. .

between may 12 , 2011 , and the end of that year , no concurrent resolution of adjournment was introduced in either chamber .

during periods of extended absence , the senate used pro forma sessions to avoid recesses of more than three days .

appointments during a three - day recess between two pro forma sessions as previously discussed , on january 4 , 2012 , during a three - day recess between pro forma sessions of the senate on january 3 and january 6 , 2012 , the white house announced president obama's intent to make four recess appointments .

the recess and pro forma sessions had been provided for as part of the senate schedule for the period of december 20 , 2011 , through january 23 , 2012 , established by unanimous consent on december 17 , 2011 .

this schedule , similar to those agreed to before extended senate breaks in earlier months , provided for a series of pro forma sessions with intervening three - and four - day recesses .

under the requirements of section 2 of the twentieth amendment to the constitution as well as the provisions of the senate schedule agreed to on december 17 , 2011 , the second session of the senate of the 112 th congress convened on january 3 , 2012 .

president obama's recess appointments , announced on january 4 , 2012 , occurred during the first adjournment following the beginning of the session and would be considered intrasession recess appointments .

in an opinion regarding the lawfulness of these appointments , the office of legal counsel at the department of justice argued that "the president may determine that pro forma sessions at which no business is to be conducted do not interrupt a senate recess for the purposes of the recess appointments clause. .

however , the constitutionality of three of the four recess appointments was challenged .

as noted above , in a june 26 , 2014 , opinion , the u.s. supreme court addressed this question , concluding that , for purposes of the recess appointments clause , "the senate is in session when it says it is , provided that , under its own rules , it retains the capacity to transact senate business. .

furthermore , the court held that the president may use the recess appointment power essentially only during a recess of 10 days or longer .

a senate recess of 3 days "is not long enough to trigger the president's recess appointment power," and a recess of more than 3 days but less than 10 is "presumptively too short to fall within the clause" but "leaves open the possibility that a very unusual circumstance could demand the exercise of the recess - appointment power during a shorter break. .

this implies that the senate would determine if and when it will adjourn for a recess of 10 days or longer and thus allow for the possibility of recess appointments .

under the adjournments clause of the constitution , however , such a determination requires the consent of the house .

consequently , either the senate or the house can unilaterally prevent a senate adjournment of 10 days or longer that would permit the president to exercise his recess appointment authority .

