children who are placed in foster care are at a higher risk of having a medical , social , or behavioral disability than children in the general population .

the abuse or neglect most experience before entering foster care can create physical and mental health issues , and the trauma of being removed from their parents may also incline children in foster care to social or behavioral health concerns .

the social security act addresses some of the health care needs of children in foster care — through provisions in titles pertaining to child welfare ( titles iv - b and iv - e ) and those in the title pertaining to the medicaid program ( title xix ) .

federal child welfare policy expects state child welfare agencies to maintain health care records of children in foster care and to develop a strategy that addresses the health care needs of each child .

states must provide medicaid coverage to children who are eligible for the title iv - e federal foster care program or , if applicable , eligible through other medicaid eligibility pathways .

effective january 1 , 2014 , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) created a new mandatory medicaid pathway for young adults up to age 26 if they were in foster care at age 18 and were receiving medicaid .

this new mandatory coverage category for youth aging out of foster care is distinct from the aca medicaid expansion requirements in section 2001 of the aca that are related to coverage for most non - elderly adults with annual incomes below 133% of the federal poverty level .

for that group , the u.s. supreme court's 2012 decision in national federation of independent business ( nfib ) v. sebelius effectively made state participation in aca medicaid expansion voluntary .

however , the supreme court's decision leaves enforcement of other provisions of the aca intact , including the new coverage group created by the aca for youth aging out of foster care .

accordingly , all states were expected to comply with the new mandatory coverage category for youth who have aged out of foster care as of january 1 , 2014 .

the aca made additional changes outside of medicaid to assist adults in obtaining private health insurance , which may benefit young adults who age out of foster care and families who are served by child welfare agencies .

this report begins with a discussion of major findings .

it then briefly describes the foster care population and their unique health - related issues .

next is an overview of the federal programs and policies in three areas — child welfare , medicaid , and private health insurance — that directly or indirectly address some of the health care needs of such children and young adults .

appendix a discusses selected research on the health care needs of children in foster care and those who leave foster care due to age or placement in a permanent adoptive family .

appendix b shows medicaid services spending , in selected years , for "foster care" children ( as that group is defined in medicaid eligibility and claims data ) .

appendix c summarizes the major mandatory and optional medicaid eligibility pathways for current and former foster children .

approximately 35% to 60% of children placed in foster care have at least one chronic or acute physical health condition that needs treatment , including growth failure , asthma , obesity , vision impairment , hearing loss , neurological problems , sexually transmitted diseases , and complex chronic illnesses .

as many as one - half to three - fourths show behavioral or social competency problems that may warrant mental health services .

studies indicate that many health and mental health care issues persist and that — relative to their peers in the general population — children who leave foster care for adoption and those who age out of care continue to have greater health care needs .

 ( for more information , see " health care needs of children in foster care " and appendix a . ) .

federal child welfare policy includes health - related provisions .

for example , child welfare agencies must ensure that the health care records of children in foster care are periodically reviewed and updated .

in addition , states must develop a strategy that addresses the health care needs of each child in foster care including , among other things , health care screenings and oversight of prescription medicines .

states must also ensure that young people aging out of foster care are provided a copy of their health records , and information about health insurance options and designating other individuals to make health care decisions on their behalf in the event that they are unable to do so .

 ( for more information , see " child welfare policies addressing the health care needs of children in foster care and those aging out of foster care ." ) .

federal child welfare law requires cooperation between state child welfare and medicaid agencies to ensure that the health needs of children in foster care are properly identified and treated .

given the distinct roles played by the child welfare and medicaid agencies , understanding precisely what cooperation means and how it should occur remains a question .

to date , federal guidance on this matter has primarily focused on monitoring psychotropic medication use and improving access to psychosocial mental or behavioral health screening and services .

 ( for more information , see " child welfare policies addressing the health care needs of children in foster care and those aging out of foster care ." ) .

state child welfare and state medicaid agencies refer to different , albeit overlapping , populations when describing who is in foster care .

for child welfare agencies , children in foster care include all those under the state agency's care and placement responsibility ( on a round - the - clock basis ) without regard to whether they are eligible for title iv - e foster care assistance .

by contrast , the state medicaid agency principally counts as a "foster care" child any individual eligible for title iv - e assistance ( whether foster care maintenance payments , adoption assistance , or kinship guardianship assistance ) .

for policy makers and researchers this difference in who is counted as being in foster care makes it difficult to understand the type and level of medicaid services provided to children currently living in foster care versus those who have left foster care for new permanent homes .

the difference in meaning of the same term may also introduce challenges for administrators seeking to work across agencies to ensure access to appropriate services for children in foster care .

 ( for more information , see " varying definitions of children in foster care ." ) .

analysis of state - reported medicaid claims shows that fee - for - service remains the most common form of payment arrangement for medicaid services provided for "foster care" children .

however , there has been strong growth in the use of managed care arrangements to provide medicaid services to "foster care" children ( as described by the medicaid agency ) .

the share of medicaid services spending provided through managed care arrangements increased from a little more than 5% of total medicaid services spending for "foster care" children in fy2001 to close to 18% in fy2010 .

among medicaid services provided on a fee - for service basis , spending on "prescribed drugs" generally grew from fy2001 through fy2008 but appears to have leveled off since that time .

several other fee - for - service categories have been consistently important for medicaid "foster care" children across the fy2001-fy2010 time period .

these are "other services" ( which includes support for certain home and community based waiver services and other items ) , "clinic services," "inpatient mental health facilities," "inpatient hospital services," and "rehabilitative services. .

 ( for more information , see " crs analysis of medicaid spending for foster care children ." ) .

as of january 1 , 2014 , the modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) rule is used in determining eligibility for most of medicaid's non - elderly and non - disabled populations .

in transitioning to magi , the aca directed states to establish income eligibility thresholds for children that are not lower than the effective income eligibility levels that were applicable in the state on the date of enactment of the aca .

several policies work to ensure that children who would have been eligible prior to the aca , including those in foster care or those who left foster care for adoption , legal guardianship , or via aging out , do not lose access to medicaid .

 ( for more information , see " aca income counting rule , protections for children , and exemptions ." ) .

the aca created a new mandatory medicaid pathway ( beginning january 1 , 2014 ) for young adults up to age 26 if they were in foster care at age 18 and were receiving medicaid .

unlike most medicaid eligibility pathways , eligibility for former foster youth who aged out of care must be provided without regard to the youths' income and assets .

in addition , states may not require mandatory enrollment in medicaid alternative benefit plans for these individuals , but former foster care youth may be subject to premiums and cost - sharing .

proposed regulations interpret the law to mean that a youth must be enrolled in medicaid at the time he or she ages out of foster care ( as opposed to at any time while the child was in foster care ) .

in addition , proposed regulations and subsequent guidance do not require states to cover eligible foster youth who aged out of care in another state , but permit states to do so .

final regulations on these issues are pending .

 ( for more information see , " young adults who were formerly in foster care " and " implementing the new eligibility pathway ." ) .

as of january 1 , 2014 , the aca requires states to extend medicaid coverage to certain non - elderly adults with annual income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( i.e. , the aca medicaid expansion group ) .

however , in june 2012 the u.s. supreme court held in nfib vs. sebelius that the federal government cannot terminate current medicaid federal matching funds if a state refuses to expand its medicaid program to include the aca medicaid expansion group .

the supreme court's ruling effectively allows states to choose whether or not to provide medicaid coverage to this new eligibility group .

as of august 2014 , a total of 27 states and the district of columbia have chosen to do this .

more states may choose to do so at any time .

in states that elect to include the aca medicaid expansion group in their medicaid state plans , the expansion may enable more family members with children in foster care — or otherwise involved with child welfare — to qualify for medicaid .

 ( for more information , see " eligibility " and " possible coverage for child welfare - involved families ." ) .

the aca made additional changes outside of medicaid to assist childless adults and children and their families ( eg , children in foster care who are vulnerable to losing medicaid upon returning home ) in obtaining and maintaining medicaid eligibility , and in obtaining private health insurance .

the aca includes private health insurance reforms that prohibit insurance industry practices such as denying health insurance based on health factors and excluding coverage for preexisting health conditions .

these and other provisions are designed to provide protection to potentially vulnerable groups with a high prevalence of preexisting conditions , which could include youth previously in foster care .

 ( for more information , see " selected private health insurance reforms under the aca ." ) .

the aca also requires the establishment of health insurance exchanges , which are currently in operation in every state and the district of columbia .

exchanges provide qualified individuals and small businesses access to private health insurance plans .

in general , the exchange plans provide comprehensive coverage and meet all applicable market reforms specified in the aca .

to make exchange coverage more affordable , eligible individuals may receive financial assistance in the form of premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

these aca provisions may provide additional options to young adults who age out of foster care and / or families who are served by child welfare agencies to access private health insurance .

 ( for more information , see " selected private health insurance reforms under the aca ." ) .

children in foster care are children that the state has removed from their homes and placed in another setting that provides round - the - clock care ( eg , foster family home , group home , child care institution ) .

placement in foster care means that a judge has determined that the child's removal from his or her home was necessary because the home was "contrary to the welfare" of the child and , accordingly , the judge has given responsibility for the child's "care and placement" to the state child welfare agency .

the large majority of children enter foster care because of neglect or abuse at the hands of their parents .

however , in some instances a child's behavior may also be a reason for entry into foster care ; this is more often true for older children .

during fy2013 , some 641,000 children spent at least one day ( 24 hours ) in foster care and 238,000 left the system , resulting in more than 402,000 of those children remaining in care on the last day of that fiscal year .

although there is variation at the state level , the national foster care caseload has generally been in decline for more than a decade .

across the nation , there were 122,000 fewer children in foster care on the last day of fy2013 as compared to the last day of fy2002 ( when 524,000 were in care ) .

foster care is intended to be a temporary placement for children , and a primary goal of child welfare agencies is to expeditiously find a permanent family for them .

for most children who enter foster care , permanency is achieved through returning to their parents ( after services have been provided to make this a safe and appropriate permanency home for the child ) .

when reunification is not possible or appropriate , however , children must remain in care until a new permanent adoptive family , legal guardian , or "fit and willing" relative can be identified .

for some children , no new permanent family is identified .

these children , who leave foster care when they reach the state's age of majority , are said to have "aged out" of care .

this typically occurs at age 18 but may occur a year or more later ( usually no later than age 21 ) if the state chooses to extend foster care custody .

of the approximately 238,000 children who left foster care custody during fy2013 , most — almost six out of every 10 ( 59% ) — returned to their biological parents or went to live with another "fit and willing" relative while another 29% ( 131,000 ) left care for new permanent homes via adoption or legal guardianship .

however , another 10% ( 23,000 ) aged out of foster care custody without reunification or placement in a new permanent family .

the number of youth who age out of foster care each year initially increased over the past decade , rising from 19,000 in fy2002 to nearly 31,000 in fy2009 , as the share of foster care exits attributable to aging out grew to 11% .

the number of children aging out of foster care may have stabilized in recent years due to an expected decrease in the number of children in foster care ages 10 through 17 .

the majority of federal child welfare policy and funding is provided via programs authorized in title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act .

under two formula grant programs included in title iv - b — the stephanie tubbs jones child welfare services program and the promoting safe and stable families program — the federal government provides funds to state child welfare agencies for provision of a wide range of child welfare - related services to children and families .

overall , the focus of those services is to support and strengthen families ( whether biological , adopted , or extended ) in ways that ensure children's safety , permanence ( with a stable family ) , and well - being .

funding is provided on a discretionary or capped entitlement basis and states may generally choose to serve any child or family they believe would benefit from these services .

the exact number of children and families served via these programs is not known .

however , most are believed to access services following an investigation or other child protection agency response to an allegation of child abuse or neglect .

in fy2012 , state child protection agencies conducted some 2.1 million child abuse and neglect investigations or assessments , involving some 3.8 million children .

many states mandate that services be provided during the investigation as needed .

in addition , roughly 1.2 million of these children received services after the conclusion of the investigation — either in the home ( 79% of those receiving post - investigation services ) or via removal to foster care ( 21% ) .

the title iv - e program has three main components: foster care , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance .

states that choose to operate a title iv - e program ( all states do ) must provide foster care maintenance payments to each eligible child in foster care and must enter into an adoption assistance agreement with parents of each eligible adopted child .

states are not required to provide kinship guardianship assistance to eligible children who leave foster care for placement with a legal ( relative ) guardian .

however , states may elect to offer this assistance ( in which case any child eligible for kinship guardianship , as defined in the state's title iv - e plan , must be served ) .

not all children in foster care and not all those leaving care for guardianship or adoption are eligible for federal assistance under title iv - e , and eligibility for title iv - e varies by each of these components .

 ( the various title iv - e eligibility criteria are summarized in the context of medicaid eligibility in a subsequent discussion. ) .

funding for the title iv - e program is authorized as an open - ended entitlement ; states are entitled to federal reimbursement for a part of each eligible cost incurred on behalf of an eligible child .

in fy2013 , close to 608,000 children received title iv - e assistance on an average monthly basis , and more than two - thirds of these children ( 71% ) had exited foster care for adoption and were receiving adoption assistance .

finally , under the chafee foster care independence program ( section 477 , title iv - e of the social security act ) state child welfare agencies receive funds to provide independent living services — such as mentoring , tutoring , substance abuse prevention , and preventive health services — to youth who are expected to age out of foster care ( without placement in a new permanent family ) , those who have recently aged out , and those who left foster care for adoption or kinship guardianship at age 16 or older .

services are intended to improve these youths' ability to transition from foster care custody to successful adulthood .

funding is provided on a discretionary and capped entitlement basis .

each of these child welfare programs is jointly funded by the state and the federal government , and many program details are determined at the state level .

the children's bureau within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , administration on children , youth , and families ( acyf ) , administers these child welfare programs at the federal level ; individual state child welfare agencies administer them on a day - to day basis .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care , covering more than 58 million people in fy2013 .

the medicaid program is jointly funded by states and the federal government and many program details are determined at the state level .

the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) is responsible for medicaid program administration at the federal level , but individual state medicaid agencies administer their own programs on a day - to - day basis .

states have the option to impose premiums or other cost sharing requirements for some medicaid beneficiaries and to enroll some in medicaid alternative benefit plans ( abps ) , which typically cover fewer services than traditional medicaid benefit packages .

however , children who are in foster care ( like most non - disabled children who are medicaid eligible ) and those who leave foster care for adoption or legal guardianship ( provided they are title iv - e eligible ) must remain free of any beneficiary cost - sharing requirements .

additionally states are not permitted to require mandatory enrollment of these children in medicaid abps .

federal policy differs somewhat for youth who are eligible under the new mandatory medicaid pathway for former foster youth who have aged out of care .

while states may not require their mandatory enrollment in medicaid abps , former foster youth who aged out of care may be subject to alternative premiums and cost - sharing .

the major medicaid eligibility pathways available to children and youth currently or formerly in foster care are the focus of this section .

notably , four pathways are specifically available for this population — a mandatory pathway for children if they qualify for the title iv - e program ( whether in foster care or after leaving foster care for adoption or legal guardianship ) ; an optional pathway for certain children who are adopted ( primarily from foster care ) and who receive adoption assistance funded wholly by the state ; as of january 1 , 2014 , a mandatory pathway for young adults up to the age of 26 who "aged out" of foster care at age 18 ( or 19 , 20 , or 21 years of age if the state extends federal foster care to that older age ) ; and an optional pathway for "independent foster care adolescents" up to the age of 21 who were in foster care at age 18 .

current and former foster children and youth may also qualify for medicaid through other mandatory and optional pathways that are available to eligible individuals based primarily , but not exclusively , on disability or income .

a number of eligibility groups that existed in medicaid statute and regulations prior to the enactment of the aca were consolidated in 2014 as a result of the transition to the aca income counting rule .

implementation of the aca income counting rules as they relate primarily to children in or formerly in foster care are discussed first in this section .

this is followed by a look at each of the medicaid eligibility pathways available for these children and youth , including those that were consolidated beginning in 2014 and the applicable income counting rules .

 ( for additional information on those pathways see table c - 1 of appendix c . ) .

finally , this section addresses possible medicaid coverage for the families who come into contact with child welfare services .

according to a national survey of children in families who come into contact with the child welfare system , approximately 63% of those who were insured had medicaid coverage and another 26% had private insurance .

the remaining children ( 10% ) were uninsured .

at the three - year follow - up , those with private insurance remained at 26% , those with medicaid coverage increased slightly to 67% , and those without insurance declined to 6% .

private health insurance also plays a significant role for children who are adopted or who age out of foster care .

with respect to adopted children who were previously in foster care , a survey of adoptive parents found that 94% were continuously insured for the prior 12 months , with 37% through private health insurance .

a separate study of former foster youth in three states showed that by age 26 , nearly six out of 10 had health insurance .

of those who had coverage , just over 20% had private insurance from an employer or through the individual health insurance market ( see table a - 1 in appendix a ) .

furthermore , the research literature has found that individuals with a child welfare history may struggle to maintain health insurance or have medical conditions that limit their ability to obtain insurance .

the prevalence of chronic conditions in persons that have been in foster care has been estimated to be between 44% and 82% .

a study of such youth ages 18 through 20 in eight midwestern counties found that 67% lost health insurance coverage within an average of three months of leaving foster care and only about one - fourth of those regained coverage after an average period of eight months .

separately , hhs is tracking health and other outcomes of youth who were in foster care at age 17 .

in fy2013 , when the first cohort of surveyed youth had reached age 19 , nearly nine out of ten had health insurance ( primarily through medicaid ) ; however , youth who were no longer in foster care were less likely than youth who remained in care at age 19 to have coverage ( 80% versus 99% ) .

given the role private insurance plays in the lives of many individuals with experience in the child welfare system , the rules governing that market for health insurance are relevant to this population , especially those with physical and / or mental health care needs .

prior to the aca , the ability of many individuals to gain and maintain coverage in the private market was limited to some degree by the health status of the individual .

for example , prior to health care reform , some insurance applicants with a preexisting condition could be denied coverage altogether ; be issued coverage that excluded benefits that would treat the preexisting condition ; or be charged more in premiums because of that condition .

the aca establishes federal requirements that apply to private health insurance , among other provisions .

the reforms affect insurance offered to groups and individuals , impose requirements on sponsors of coverage , and , collectively , establish a federal floor with respect to access to coverage , premiums , benefits , cost - sharing , and consumer protections .

the aca insurance reforms discussed in this section may be particularly relevant for young adults who were formerly in foster care , children who leave care and are reunited with their families , parents of children who are or were in foster care , and parents of children who are adopted from foster care .

children age 18 and older who were formerly in foster care , including those who are adopted , may have expanded private insurance coverage opportunities through the health plan of an insured parent .

the aca requires health plans that provide dependent coverage to extend that existing coverage to children under age 26 .

aca regulations further clarified that a health plan may not deny or restrict coverage for a child who has not attained age 26 "based on the presence or absence of the child's financial dependency ( upon the participant or any other person ) , residency with the participant or with any other person , student status , employment , or any combination of those factors. .

moreover , health plans "may not limit dependent coverage based on whether a child is married. .

still , young adults who leave foster care ( and are otherwise ineligible under medicaid ) may not necessarily gain coverage under this reform measure , given that some of these young people may not have relationships ( or may have strained relationships ) with their parents or their parents may not have access to health insurance .

health insurance exchanges ( "marketplaces" ) operate in every state and the district of columbia ( dc ) , per the aca statute .

essentially , exchanges are designed to sell health plans to individuals ( and small businesses ) interested in obtaining private health insurance .

in general , exchange plans provide comprehensive coverage and meet all applicable market reforms specified in the aca .

given that nearly all individuals are allowed to purchase insurance in the exchanges , parents of children who return home from foster care and of children adopted from care , as well as individuals that have aged out , may possibly access coverage this way ( as long as they meet the eligibility criteria ) .

in tandem with these exchanges , the aca established new federal tax credits .

currently , certain low - to - middle income individuals and families may qualify for these credits to make exchange coverage more affordable .

in addition , some of those tax credit recipients will receive subsidies to reduce their out - of - pocket spending on medical expenses .

such financial assistance may be particularly relevant to youth who age out and the parents of children who return home from foster care or are adopted from care .

a number of the aca's insurance reforms are designed to provide protection to potentially vulnerable groups with a high prevalence of preexisting conditions , such as youth previously in foster care .

among the aca's reforms are provisions that will subject many health plans to the following requirements: the aca requires certain types of coverage to be offered on a guaranteed issue basis .

in general , "guaranteed issue" in health insurance is the requirement that a plan accept every applicant for health coverage as long as the applicant agrees to the terms and conditions of the insurance offer ( such as the premium ) .

the aca prohibits plans from basing eligibility or coverage on health status - related factors .

such factors include health status , medical condition ( including both physical and mental illness ) , claims experience , receipt of health care , medical history , genetic information , evidence of insurability ( including conditions arising out of acts of domestic violence ) , disability , and any other health status - related factors determined appropriate by the secretary of hhs .

the aca prohibits plans from excluding coverage for preexisting health conditions .

in other words , plans may not exclude benefits based on health conditions for any individuals .

a preexisting health condition is a medical condition that was present before the date of enrollment for health coverage , whether or not any medical advice , diagnosis , care , or treatment was recommended or received before such date .

the aca imposes adjusted ( or modified ) community rating rules on the determination of premiums .

adjusted community rating rules prohibit plans from pricing health insurance products based on health factors but allow it for other key characteristics such as age .

the aca's rating rules restrict premium variation to the following factors: coverage for individual or family , geography , and limited premium variation allowed for age and tobacco use .

the vast majority of the aca's reforms to the private health insurance market are currently in effect .

at the same time , individuals who were formerly in foster care or who have otherwise been in contact with the child welfare system may still face barriers to obtaining private health insurance .

while individuals may no longer be denied insurance due to health factors or be offered coverage that excludes treatments for preexisting health conditions , the cost of purchasing and using private insurance may still be high for some , even if such individuals qualify for the premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies established under the aca .

on the other hand , the exchanges and insurance market reforms provide options for private health insurance that may not have existed for some individuals prior to aca enactment .

moreover , former foster youth who are no longer eligible for medicaid may possibly avail themselves of the financial assistance provided through the exchanges , thus giving them another source of subsidized coverage .

the complexity of the private insurance market may lead to difficulties for this population to assess all the insurance options potentially available to them .

the aca provides consumer assistance for prospective enrollees in exchanges .

specifically , the aca requires exchanges to perform outreach to help individuals ( and small businesses ) make informed decisions about their insurance options , including the operation of "navigator" programs .

navigators carry out public education activities ; provide information to prospective enrollees about insurance options and federal assistance ; and examine enrollees' eligibility for other federal or state health care programs , such as medicaid .

a variety of organizations may become navigators , including labor unions , trade associations , chambers of commerce , and other entities ; however , it is not immediately clear which entities are best suited to assist this population .

finally , staff in child welfare and medicaid agencies and those who run the exchanges must be trained to understand the aca and its implementation in their state to enable them to best assist applicants in obtaining insurance .

appendix a .

research on the health needs of certain children and youth formerly in foster care as discussed in the body of this report , health care needs of children in foster care are considerable .

research on health care needs of children who age out of foster care and those who leave foster care for adoption are discussed in greater detail in the following section .

many of these former foster care children and youth are counted as "foster care" children under the medicaid data reporting system .

thus , the type and prevalence of their health care needs affects our understanding of medicaid use by "foster care" children .

as of july 1 , 2014 states are required to submit medicaid program data via a revised reporting system .

in this new system ( t - msis ) former foster youth who aged out of care are counted separately from children who are in foster care .

however , many children who leave foster care for adoption are expected to continue to be included in the medicaid "foster care" children population .

young adults who were formerly in foster care the research literature regarding children who age out of foster care shows that physical and mental health problems persist into adulthood .

two studies — the northwest foster care alumni study and the midwest evaluation of the adult functioning of former foster youth — have tracked outcomes for a sample of youth across several domains , either prospectively ( following youth in care and as they age out ) or retrospectively ( examining current outcomes for young adults who were previously in care and comparing these outcomes to those of young people in the general population ) .

researchers with the northwest foster care alumni study interviewed and reviewed the case files of 479 foster care youth who were in public or private foster care any time from 1988 to 1998 in oregon or washington .

the study compared the mental health status and education and employment outcomes for the foster care alumni to those of the general population .

over 54% of foster care alumni had at least one mental health problem — depression , social phobia , panic disorder , and post - traumatic stress disorder , among others — compared to 22.1% of the general population .

about one - quarter of the alumni experienced post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) .

this figure is greater than the occurrence of ptsd among vietnam or iraq war veterans , which is about 15% .

foster care alumni tended to have recovery rates similar to their counterparts in the general population for major depression , panic syndrome , and alcohol dependency , but lower rates of recovery for other disorders such as generalized anxiety disorder , ptsd , social phobia , and bulimia .

few foster care alumni studies are prospective , meaning that they follow youth while in care through the time they leave care and beyond .

the midwest evaluation is an ongoing study that tracks approximately 600 former foster youth in three states — illinois , iowa , and wisconsin .

table a - 1 displays the physical health and mental health outcomes for alumni at ages 25 and 26 compared to their same - age peers in the general population .

overall , youth formerly in foster care reported having more negative health outcomes than their general population peers and participating in counseling and substance abuse treatment more often .

they were also less likely than their peers to be covered by employers' health care plans , and more likely to have public health insurance .

separately , hhs data of current and former foster youth at age 19 show differences in health insurance coverage depending on whether the youth was still in foster care .

among 19-year - olds who were still in care in fy2013 , 99% had medicaid coverage .

this is compared to 80% of youth who were no longer in foster care .

children adopted from foster care children adopted from foster care are those children who were removed from their biological parents – typically because of abuse or neglect – and for whom reuniting with those biological parents was determined not possible or not in the child's best interest .

roughly 50,000 to 55,000 children leave foster care for a permanent adoptive family each year .

the large majority of these children ( 84% in fy2013 ) were determined by the state to have "special needs" that made it "reasonable" for the state to conclude the child would not be adopted without provision of an adoption subsidy and / or medical assistance .

greater health and mental health needs a nationally representative survey conducted in 2007 found children who were adopted – whether from foster care , domestically by private arrangement , or from another country – tended to have greater health and mental health needs than children in the general population .

further , among all adopted children , those who were adopted from foster care had the greatest needs .

for example , 19% of all children in the nation were reported by their parents as having special health care needs in 2007 , compared to 39% of all children who were adopted and 54% of children adopted from foster care .

additionally , among children ages 6 through 17 , about 1 in 10 ( 10% ) in the general population had been formally diagnosed with attention deficit disorder ( add ) or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( adhd ) at some point and , at the time of the 2007 survey , the parents of about 1 in 25 children ( 4% ) considered their child's diagnosed add / adhd condition to be moderate or severe .

the comparable rates among all adopted children in this age range was more than 1 in 4 ever diagnosed ( 26% ) and roughly 1 in 8 with a current moderate or severe condition ( 14% ) ; for those in this age range who were adopted from foster care , more than 1 in 3 had ever received an add / adhd diagnosis ( 37% ) and fully 1 in 5 ( 20% ) had a current moderate or severe condition as reported by their adoptive parents .

the 2007 survey also found that 2% of all adopted children ( ages 8 through 17 ) had spent some time in a residential psychiatric facility or hospital following their adoption ; the comparable share reported for children adopted from foster care was 7% .

 ( because this question is linked specifically to services provided after a child was adopted there is no comparable percentage for children in the general population. ) .

table a - 2 shows these and additional data on the health and mental health needs of children adopted from foster care compared to all adopted children and children generally .

more likely to have insurance coverage at the same time , children who are adopted are more likely to have had continuous ( over past 12 months ) health insurance coverage than children in general .

the 2007 survey of adopted parents found that 85% of all children had this continuous coverage , compared to 91% among all adopted children and 94% of children adopted from foster care .

federal law provides that the children adopted from foster care who have "special needs" ( which may be but are not necessarily related to health or mental health needs ) are eligible for medicaid ( or a comparable state benefit plan ) .

not surprisingly then , public health insurance is the most common form of coverage among children adopted from foster care .

nearly 6 in 10 ( 59% ) were reported by their adoptive parent as covered by medicaid or chip – roughly double the 3 in 10 ( 29% ) children generally who were covered by those public programs .

although 37% of children adopted from foster care were covered by private insurance coverage , some of these privately insured children were also enrolled in medicaid .

parents of children adopted from foster care reported that 65% had ever received a medicaid benefit , over half ( 55% ) used medicaid for dental care , and nearly one out of three ( 32% ) used medicaid to pay for mental health services .

in those instances where a child is covered by both medicaid and private insurance , the law provides that medicaid is the payer of last resort .

this means that the private insurer must pay any covered benefits first .

however , medicaid coverage could supplement those benefits ( if the private insurance benefits are exhausted ) and it might wholly fund services not covered by the adopted children's private insurance carriers ( eg , many private insurers do not cover residential psychiatric treatment ) .

appendix b. medicaid services spending for "foster care" children children for whom these spending data are reported in the medicaid statistical information system ( msis ) include those determined to be a "foster care" child under msis based on their medicaid eligibility pathway .

these children principally include those who are eligible for federal title iv - e assistance whether they are in foster care or have left that care for adoption or legal guardianship .

they may also include children who are receiving state - funded adoption assistance as well as some children who have aged out of foster care .

children who are in foster care but who are not eligible for title iv - e assistance do not appear to be included in this category .

appendix c. medicaid eligibility for current and former foster children and yout .

