quality gaps in the care delivered by the u.s health care system result in preventable mortality and morbidity and contribute costs to the system .

multiple indicators show that quality of care could be improved ; these indicators include high rates of healthcare - associated infections ( hais ) and a lack of adherence to evidence - based guidelines , among others .

for example , approximately 100,000 people die each year from hais , at an estimated cost ranging from $28.4 to $45.0 billion dollars .

in addition , a 2007 study found that only 46.5% of children receive care recommended by evidence - based guidelines , and a similar study conducted in 2003 concluded that adults receive only 55% of indicated care .

the 2010 national healthcare quality report , released annually by the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) of the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , found that health care quality is suboptimal , especially for low - income individuals and certain minority groups .

quality of care also varies geographically ; for example , a recent study found that high - quality , low - cost hospitals were less likely to be small or located in the south .

although no single definition of high - quality health care has been agreed upon , the institute of medicine ( iom ) provided a framework for considering the quality of care , based on six domains: ( 1 ) effective , ( 2 ) efficient , ( 3 ) equitable , ( 4 ) patient - centered , ( 5 ) safe , and ( 6 ) timely .

numerous efforts have been undertaken in recent years to improve the quality of health care ; despite this , the consensus remains that progress in quality improvement across the health care system has been variable and , in some cases , slower than anticipated .

many efforts that aim to improve the quality of care focus on increasing health care providers' accountability for the care they provide .

this includes , in some cases , a focus on improving the value of health care ; that is , the ratio of desired or positive outcomes to long - term costs .

in all cases , efforts include accountability to an external actor , for example the public , regulators , or payers .

policymakers have used three basic policy approaches in an effort to enhance provider accountability , among other things .

these include  ( 1 ) payment incentives , ( 2 ) public reporting of performance data , and ( 3 ) quality assurance through regulation and accreditation .

these approaches are used for several purposes , including to determine appropriate reimbursement , to drive market share , and to demonstrate quality and cost - efficient performance .

payment incentives and public reporting encourage providers to change their behavior to improve quality and / or value .

regulatory oversight and accreditation of providers , on the other hand , first serve an oversight function and generally rely on mandating certain behavior , as opposed to incentivizing it ( in addition to having an increasing focus on improving quality ) .

this report focuses on payment incentives and public reporting , specifically .

many payment incentive and public reporting policies rely on quality measurement .

for example , payment incentives based on provider performance rely on a comprehensive set of quality measures that can directly or indirectly measure clearly identified outcomes , among other things .

quality measures that highlight meaningful differences in provider performance , and that address outcomes of interest to patients , facilitate the effectiveness of publicly reporting quality performance data .

policymakers have taken steps to address these measurement needs , for example through support for health services research or the development of quality measures in areas in which they do not currently exist .

in some cases , these measurement needs were not adequately addressed prior to the implementation of policies ; this contributed to initial provider questions about the effectiveness of such policies .

improving the quality of health care involves all components of the health care system ; therefore , policies supporting ( 1 ) an adequate and appropriately trained health care workforce ; ( 2 ) interoperable health information technology ; and ( 3 ) a robust evidence base , informed by health services research , are all relevant .

in addition , improving the quality of care may be closely tied to other broad policy goals , such as ( 1 ) reducing health care disparities , ( 2 ) improving the affordability of health care , and ( 3 ) improving the health status of communities .

however , a full discussion of these interactions is beyond the scope of this report .

ongoing congressional interest in enhancing the quality of health care is likely given the federal role in the delivery and financing of health care through , for example , medicare , medicaid , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , the veterans health administration ( vha ) , and the indian health service ( ihs ) .

this interest is reflected to date by significant legislative activity in this area , and most recently , by the passage of the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 , p.l .

111-152 ) .

the aca contains numerous provisions , directed at both the financing and delivery of care , that use the three policy approaches outlined above to target improvement in the quality of care .

this report begins with a discussion of the role of quality measurement in policies to enhance provider accountability and presents selected policies addressing quality measurement in this context .

it then provides an overview of payment incentives and public reporting of performance data to improve quality , along with selected policy examples for each approach .

policies based on payment incentives and public reporting generally require the assessment of some combination of ( or both ) absolute and relative provider performance .

these determinations rely on quality measures to determine current performance , as well as to monitor progress in performance .

they also rely on information about the effectiveness of various interventions , care delivery models , treatment modalities , and therapeutics , and their links to health outcomes .

identifying desired outcomes , and evaluating the link between interventions and identified outcomes , relies on health services research .

for example , comparative effectiveness research ( cer ) may contribute to identifying desired outcomes by providing evidence about the effectiveness , harms , and benefits of treatment options for specific conditions .

where quality measures are not available , or clearly identified outcomes are lacking , policies to enhance accountability through payment incentives or public reporting may be of limited value .

in addition , simply making measures available or identifying outcomes are , on their own , unlikely to serve as sufficient impetus for change , or for comprehensive and well - coordinated change ; instead , it is the application of policy approaches , using this information , that most often brings about desired changes .

several considerations arise when considering the use of quality measures in policies aiming to enhance provider accountability through payment incentives or public reporting .

these include , among others ( 1 ) the availability of a comprehensive set of quality measures , ( 2 ) the strength of the evidence base supporting the measures , ( 3 ) the national quality forum ( nqf ) - endorsement status of the measures , and ( 4 ) the relative mix of different measure types .

the effectiveness of policies that are based on quality measurement is at least partially determined by the comprehensiveness of available quality measures and , specifically , measures that span diseases and conditions , care settings , and provider types .

nqf , a private , nonprofit membership organization concerned with improving health care quality performance measurement and reporting , notes that , "[t]here is a strong need for the development of quality and cost measures that will ensure broad transparency on the value of care and support performance - based payment and quality improvement around the most prevalent conditions and health risks that account for the greatest share of health care spending. .

identifying measure gaps is a part of achieving that aim .

in march of 2010 , at the direction of the hhs , nqf convened the measure prioritization advisory committee to identify measure gap domains and sub - domains , among other things .

this effort was part of a larger effort to develop a measure development and endorsement agenda .

in a recent gao report , hhs officials noted that critical measure gaps exist with respect to their health care quality programs and initiatives ; in addition , the aca established new , and expanded the scope of existing , hhs quality programs and initiatives , increasing the need to fill existing measure gaps .

in policies that have an accountability component , measures that are based on a robust body of evidence may be preferred .

for example , experts suggest that clinical process quality measures should be based on "a strong foundation of research showing that the process addressed by the measure , when performed correctly , leads to improved clinical outcomes. .

the evidence should consist of more than a single study and be a majority randomized trials , thus reflecting a higher standard than that used for the development of practice guidelines ( practice guidelines may serve as the basis for the development of quality measures ) .

research has suggested that high levels of performance on clinical process quality measures does not always correlate with a commensurate improvement in clinical outcomes .

quality measures may be endorsed by nqf ; that is , candidate measures are evaluated against a specified set of criteria , and if these are met , the measure receives nqf's endorsement .

for use in policies aiming to enhance accountability , nqf - endorsed measures are generally preferred .

however , the endorsement process is lengthy and deliberative , and this can affect the availability of endorsed measures for end users ( eg , hhs ) .

if statute does not specifically require the use of nqf - endorsed measures , policymakers may face decisions about balancing the need to move programs forward with waiting for endorsed measures to become available .

there are a number of different types of quality measures available , and policies may include a mix of these types , depending on the purpose or goal of the specific policy .

types of quality measures include , among others ( 1 ) structure , ( 2 ) process , ( 3 ) outcome , and ( 4 ) patient experience of care ( see textbox 1 ) .

there is an increasing focus on shifting away from clinical process quality measures to outcomes measures ; for example , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) notes that it is seeking to "move as quickly as possible to using primarily outcome and patient experience measures" in its public reporting and value - based payment systems .

however , clinical process quality measures are still the most commonly used type of measure in most measurement activities ( for both accountability and quality improvement purposes ) .

the ability to directly compare the performance of providers is an essential component of many payment incentive and public reporting policies that aim to enhance provider accountability ; at a basic level , the creation of incentives to improve quality relies on being able to make distinctions between providers .

quality measurement allows for the generation of provider - specific performance information , which , in turn , allows for these distinctions to be made based on relative comparisons between providers ( as well as monitoring of improvement in individual provider performance ) .

given the central importance of quality measurement in payment incentive and public reporting policies , policymakers have taken steps to support the development of measures , and specifically in gap areas ( see textbox 2 ) .

for example , comparative performance information allows , among other things , payers and purchasers to selectively reward higher - quality performance ( payment incentive ) ; payers and purchasers to evaluate relative outcomes associated with new delivery models to guide payment incentives ( payment incentive ) ; providers to improve their own performance ( public reporting ) ; and patients to choose providers or care that best meets their needs ( public reporting ) .

despite the role of quality measurement in payment incentive and public reporting policies that aim to enhance provider accountability , and an increasing focus on these policies overall , questions remain about the link between quality measurement and actual quality of care .

as discussed before , the link between clinical process quality measures and outcomes is not always clear .

experts suggest that more systematic surveillance efforts are needed to better understand trends , links between process and outcome , and facility - by - facility differences in performance .

in addition , the meaning of quality to consumers may differ from the definition used by policymakers or regulators .

for example , consumers value access , the availability of their providers , cost , and provider choice , among other things ; these factors are variably captured in policy efforts that use quality measurement .

consumers may also value health outcomes differently , complicating efforts to define and measure quality .

emphasis has been placed on changing the way health care is paid for , away from a system where payment is simply a transaction based on the unit of care provided , to one where higher - quality , lower - cost care is preferentially rewarded .

this policy approach , representing a shift from volume - based or fee - for - service ( ffs ) payment to value - based payment , is often referred to as value - based purchasing or value - driven health care .

value - based purchasing may be defined as modifying reimbursement to encourage health care providers , through joint clinical and financial accountability , to deliver higher quality care at lower total cost .

such efforts may modify payment through payment incentives .

these incentives may include adjustments to payment ( generally in the form of reductions ) as well as performance - based payments ; in addition , direct payment , generally in the form of a monthly fee , may be made for a desired activity ( eg , care coordination ) that is not itself the actual provision of care .

payment incentives may be based on the reporting of , or performance on , a set of quality measures .

for this reason , payment incentives may rely integrally on quality measurement .

in addition , payment modification may create incentives that are directive ; that is , incentives to modify the delivery of specific clinical care processes ( eg , by linking payment to specific clinical process quality measures ) .

they also may create incentives that are non - directive ; that is , incentives to modify overall delivery of care that link payment to performance on an outcome ( eg , rates of hospital readmissions or healthcare - associated infections [hais] ) , but that rely on individual providers to implement care delivery changes of their choice to improve performance on these outcomes .

this section begins by discussing the role of the medicare program in this area and then summarizes the modification of payment through incentives .

this discussion focuses on those payment incentives that have improving quality or value as their primary goal , rather than those aimed solely at altering resource use .

in addition , it addresses mechanisms for the modification of payment , as opposed to different models of payment ( eg , capitation , shared savings ) ; many of the payment incentives discussed here could theoretically be applied in the context of different payment models .

policymakers have undertaken efforts to enhance provider accountability through the public reporting of performance information ; these efforts have generally occurred in concert with policies that modify payment to incentivize higher quality .

public reporting , in this context , may be defined as "the objective measurement and public disclosure of physician and hospital performance. .

the objectives of public reporting are numerous , but include , among others ( 1 ) increasing the accountability of health care organizations , professionals , and managers ; and ( 2 ) maintaining standards or stimulating improvements in the quality of care provided .

in addition , public reports are intended to encourage consumer participation through the facilitation of informed decision making .

the impact of public reporting on both consumer decision making , as well as quality improvement efforts by providers , is unclear .

regardless , a number of efforts are underway in the medicare program to make performance information publicly available , largely at the direction of congress ; these include websites providing comparative information about hospitals , nursing homes , and physicians , for example .

this section discusses the theory underlying public reporting , factors influencing consumers' use of performance information to guide decision making , and the effect of public information on provider quality improvement efforts .

theoretically , making information on provider performance public serves to correct an existing information asymmetry ; that is , an imbalance in information between the provider and user of a service , in this case , health care services .

however , this information imbalance could , in fact , be exacerbated by the release of inaccurate information ; additionally , this would have the potential to harm the reputation of providers .

assumptions underlying the public release of performance information include the contention that consumers want to make use of the data , and that they in fact will .

the public provision of performance information is expected to facilitate informed decision making among consumers with respect to their health care .

this modified decision making , in turn , is expected to increase market share for those better performing providers .

this would create a feedback loop that would reward higher performing providers financially .

with respect to health care providers , public reporting of performance information is "expected to fuel professional desire to improve care and improve quality , either out of concern for public image or in an effort to maintain professional norms and standards of self - governance. .

in practice , the theory underlying public reporting of performance information is complicated by a number of other factors related to consumer decision making in health care .

this decision making may be influenced by ( 1 ) characteristics of the performance information itself ( eg , how user - friendly it is ) ; ( 2 ) characteristics of the consumer herself ( eg , health literacy ) ; and ( 3 ) factors that are important to the consumer but unrelated to performance information or objective quality of care ( eg , referrals from family members or friends ) .

characteristics of the performance information itself that influence its use by consumers include , among others ( 1 ) awareness of the information , ( 2 ) relevance of the information , and ( 3 ) usability of the information ( eg , its presentation ) .

data suggest that the public's familiarity with public sources of performance information is generally low ; for example , one survey found that only 6% of the public had heard of cms's hospital compare website ( see textbox 4 ) .

studies have indicated that in some cases , consumers find performance information to be of limited relevance ; specifically , for example , information must apply to conditions that are relevant to the consumer and must distinguish between high - quality and low - quality care in a clear manner .

finally , although a consumer's ability to use performance information is affected by the way in which the performance information is presented , it also is dependent on personal characteristics of the consumer herself , such as her ability to understand technical clinical process quality measures .

consumer decision making in health care is also known to be influenced by a number of factors unrelated to performance information .

these factors include , for example , referrals from trusted family or health care providers , hospital location , and cost ( eg , varying insurance cost - sharing ) .

these competitive factors may outweigh use of performance information in decision making altogether , in some cases .

public reporting aims to both motivate quality improvement activities by health care providers and to facilitate consumer participation in their health care through informed decision making .

studies suggest that consumers are generally not making use of performance information in their health care decisions .

for example , one survey found that only 7% of the public had seen and used quality information about hospitals , and only 6% had seen and used quality information about physicians .

this is likely due , at least in part , to the presentation of the information , the actual information being presented , and other factors that are also valued by the consumer ( eg , hospital location ) .

the impact of the public reporting of performance data on motivating quality improvement efforts by providers is unclear .

one study found , for example , that the release of performance information is not correlated with an increase in performance on clinical process quality measures .

this study also found , however , that hospitals receiving publicly available performance reports on both an early and delayed basis undertook quality improvement initiatives in response to this information .

that is , many hospitals initiated quality improvement efforts upon learning about the public reporting activity from hospitals in the group receiving early feedback , but before receiving their own hospital - specific feedback .

