the current budget situation has prompted congress to examine a variety of revenue raising options .

repealing or modifying some or all of the long list of so - called tax expenditures is often included as part of those options .

the exclusion from income of the interest paid on state and local government debt is one such tax expenditure .

there are three primary types of proposals that include changes to state and local government bonds — capping the preference , eliminating the preference , and changing the preference to a direct issuer subsidy .

these three types can be seen in the following proposals .

the president's fy2013 budget proposal would include partial elimination of the tax preference by capping the preference at the 28% marginal tax rate .

the simpson - bowles ( sb ) deficit reduction plan proposes complete elimination of the tax preference .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) "revenue options" report proposes changing the tax exclusion for investors to a direct tax subsidy to issuers .

one of the cited reasons for the elimination ( or at least modification ) of the tax exclusion for interest on state and local government bonds ( tax - exempt bonds ) is that the preference is a financially and economically inefficient tool for inducing public capital investment .

in short , the federal revenue loss is greater than the subsidy to state and local governments .

thus , modifying , eliminating , or reducing the tax preference could generate federal revenue and make the federal tax code more economically efficient .

policymakers must weigh a variety of competing concerns when evaluating these proposals to modify tax - exempt bonds .

issuers , such as governments and certain private entities , benefit from lower cost of borrowing and relatively high - income investors benefit from the resulting tax - free income .

with the proposals presented here , issuers would likely encounter higher borrowing costs and relative wealthy investors would lose a significant tax preference .

in particular , the top 10% of all earners realize more than 77% of the total reported tax - exempt interest income .

the reduced benefits accruing to issuers and these investors , however , should be weighed against the benefit of a potentially more efficient ( and to some , equitable ) federal income tax .

the impact of changes to the tax treatment of the interest on state and local government debt can be assessed from three perspectives to analyze: the size of the tax expenditure , the distribution of the tax - exempt interest income , and the value of the tax - exemption to issuers .

as discussed above , three types of proposals are examined here .

the first , capping the benefit of the tax - exemption to the 28% marginal tax rate , was included in the president's 2013 budget .

the second , eliminating the tax - exemption while broadening the income tax base and lowering rates , was included in the simpson - bowles deficit commission report .

the third , replacing the tax - exemption for investors with a direct payment to the issuer , was proposed in the congressional budget office publication , "revenue options. .

variants of this last proposal include so - called tax credit bonds where the issuer or investor receives a tax credit rather than a tax exclusion .

for example , the president's fy2013 budget includes reinstating one type of tax credit bond , the build america bond ( bab ) , which expired december 31 , 2010 .

under current law , there is a significant transfer of federal tax revenue to tax - exempt bond issuers and investors .

investors benefit from the exclusion of interest on the bonds from taxable income and the above market rate of return offered by most tax - exempt bonds .

state and local governments , non - profit hospitals , educational institutions , and a variety of other entities all benefit from lower interest rates than otherwise would be the case .

importantly , the federal revenue loss to the federal government exceeds the benefit received by the issuer .

the three proposals reviewed here would all reduce the benefit received by issuers and investors while increasing revenues for the federal government .

as a result , under these proposals , issuers will face higher borrowing costs and investors will lose one option for earning tax - free income .

the proposals do differ in the relative impact on investors and issuers .

the fy2013 budget proposal to cap the benefit to the 28% tax bracket would be felt relatively equally between issuers and investors and would not address the inefficiency of using tax - exempt bonds to encourage investment in public capital .

the sb tax reform plan would eliminate the tax preference thereby eliminating the economic inefficiency generated by the current tax preference , but would also eliminate the relative benefit of tax - exempt bonds for both issuers and investors .

the cbo proposal also eliminates the tax preference for investors , but would preserve the issuer preference albeit at a lower level .

the economic inefficiency arising from the current tax preference would also be eliminated by the cbo proposal .

the cbo proposal can be modified to yield a roughly equivalent subsidy to the current tax - exempt bond preference for issuers .

balancing the loss of tax preferences for issuers and investors against the benefit of a more economically efficient tax code and a smaller deficit is the critical challenge for congress .

