since 2009 , the european union ( eu ) has faced a sovereign debt and financial crisis that many consider one of the biggest current threats to the global economy .

concerns have focused on the sustainability of public deficits in some eurozone countries , but the eurozone has also faced a number of related economic challenges , including weaknesses in the eurozone banking system , slow or negative economic growth , rising unemployment , and persistent trade imbalances within the eurozone .

the economic crisis has also become a political crisis .

a number of national governments have fallen as a direct or indirect result of the crisis , and the crisis has strained relations among european leaders and institutions .

the obama administration has repeatedly called for swift and robust european responses — specifically advocating that more substantial financial assistance be made available to struggling economies .

the united states has found , however , that it has limited ability to affect european policy decisions on this issue .

the crisis has bolstered interest in trade and investment liberalization between the united states and the eu , as a way of promoting economic recovery in both economies .

in february 2013 , the obama administration and eu officials announced plans to launch talks on a transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) .

some members of congress have expressed concern about the possible effects of the crisis on the u.s. economy , the appropriate role of the international monetary fund ( imf ) in the crisis , and the implications of the crisis for future u.s. - eu cooperation on foreign policy issues .

committees in both the house and the senate have held hearings on the crisis and issues relating to its impact on the u.s. economy , and have exercised congressional oversight of u.s. policy responses .

this report provides a brief analysis of the eurozone crisis and issues of particular congressional interest .

for discussion about sovereign debt in advanced economies , including a comparison of the eurozone and the united states , see crs report r41838 , sovereign debt in advanced economies: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the eurozone crisis broke in late 2009 , when a new greek government revealed that previous governments had been misreporting government budget data .

fears quickly spread that the fiscal positions and debt levels in a number of eurozone countries were unsustainable .

in may 2010 , greece received a financial assistance package from other eurozone governments and the imf in order to avoid defaulting on its debt .

investors became increasingly nervous about public finances in ireland and portugal , and as their borrowing costs increased , the two countries also requested european - imf financial assistance packages , finalized in december 2010 and may 2011 , respectively .

weaknesses in the eurozone banking system , economic contraction and rising unemployment in the periphery countries , and persistent trade imbalances within the eurozone compounded concerns about public finances in some eurozone periphery countries .

greece required a second assistance package , finalized in march 2012 .

over the past two years , european leaders and institutions have pursued a set of unprecedented policy measures to respond to the crisis and stem contagion , particularly to italy and spain , the third - and fourth - largest economies in the eurozone .

described in greater detail below , the response measures have been broadly characterized as failing to provide a comprehensive and clear policy response to the crisis , with the crisis cycling through periods of relative calm followed by intense market pressure .

however , a pledge by the european central bank ( ecb ) in september 2012 to intervene more aggressively has been credited with sustaining improved market sentiment , with many analysts remarking that the crisis may have "turned a corner. .

still , many challenges remain , particularly related to slow or negative economic growth and high unemployment .

recent developments in italy and cyprus could also undermine recent market stability .

the economic crisis has also turned into a political crisis .

for eurozone countries under the most market pressure , the crisis has provoked protests and backlash against austerity measures .

in the economically stronger economies that have been providing financial assistance , there has been resentment against what is perceived as "bailing out" other countries that have failed to implement "responsible" policy choices .

governments in many european countries have fallen as a direct or indirect result of the crisis .

additionally , disagreements among germany , france , and the ecb over the appropriate crisis response , and complex eu policy - making processes , are seen as having exacerbated anxiety in markets .

more broadly , the crisis has exposed problems in the structure of the eurozone , which many economists have long debated .

the eurozone has a common monetary policy and currency , without creating a fiscal union , and therefore it does not have a centralized budget authority or system of fiscal transfers across member states .

possibly , under a tight fiscal union , a central budget authority could control spending in different eurozone member states , and use fiscal transfers to smooth out asymmetric shocks within the eurozone .

such measures are currently being debated in europe , but are politically contentious .

additionally , the crisis has illustrated the policy constraints facing the governments of struggling eurozone countries in responding to the crisis: as members of the eurozone , they cannot use currency depreciation to promote export - led growth , which some argue has been helpful for other countries , such as iceland , in reviving economic growth following financial crises .

