the constitution requires a count of the u.s. population every 10 years .

based on the census , the number of seats in the house of representatives is reapportioned among the states .

thus , at least every 10 years , in response to changes in the number of representatives apportioned to it or to shifts in its population , each state is required to draw new boundaries for its congressional districts .

although each state has its own process for redistricting , congressional districts must conform to a number of constitutional and federal statutory standards , including the voting rights act ( vra ) of 1965 .

the vra was enacted under congress's authority to enforce the 15 th amendment , which provides that the right of citizens to vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race , color , or previous servitude .

in a series of cases and evolving jurisprudence , the u.s. supreme court has interpreted how the vra applies in the context of congressional redistricting .

these decisions inform how congressional district boundaries are drawn , and whether legal challenges to such redistricting plans will be successful .

this report provides a legal overview of section 2 of the vra , a key provision affecting congressional redistricting , and selected supreme court case law .

it discusses sections 4 and 5 , and the recent supreme court decision holding section 4 ( b ) unconstitutional , shelby county v. holder .

section 4 contained a coverage formula that identified states and jurisdictions that were required to gain federal approval or "preclearance" to proposed redistricting plans under section 5 .

the report also provides an overview of selected legislation in the 113 th and 114 th congresses that would establish additional requirements and standards for congressional redistricting , and amend the vra to , among other things , reinstitute a coverage formula for section 5 preclearance .

congressional district boundaries in every state are required to comply with section 2 of the vra .

section 2 provides a right of action for private citizens or the government to challenge discriminatory voting practices or procedures , including minority vote dilution , the diminishing or weakening of minority voting power .

specifically , section 2 prohibits any voting qualification or practice — including the drawing of congressional redistricting plans — applied or imposed by any state or political subdivision that results in the denial or abridgement of the right to vote based on race , color , or membership in a language minority .

the statute further provides that a violation is established if: based on the totality of circumstances , it is shown that the political processes leading to nomination or election in the state or political subdivision are not equally open to participation by [members of a racial or language minority group] in that its members have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate in the political processes and to elect representatives of their choice .

in shelby county v. holder the u.s. supreme court invalidated section 4 ( b ) of the vra .

section 4 ( b ) contained a formula prescribing which states and jurisdictions with a history of discrimination were required to obtain federal approval or "preclearance" under section 5 before changing any voting law , including redistricting plans .

section 5 and the court's ruling in shelby county are discussed below .

as a result of the court's decision , the nine states , and jurisdictions within six states , that were previously covered under the formula are no longer subject to the vra's preclearance requirement .

the covered states were alabama , alaska , arizona , georgia , louisiana , mississippi , south carolina , texas , and virginia .

the six states containing covered jurisdictions were california , florida , michigan , new york , north carolina , and south dakota .

it does not appear , however , that the court's decision affected section 3 ( c ) of the act , known as the "bail in" provision , under which jurisdictions can be ordered to obtain preclearance of voting laws if a court finds that violations of the 14 th or 15 th amendment justifying equitable relief have occurred .

section 5 of the vra was enacted to eliminate possible future denials or abridgements of the right to vote .

it required prior approval , known as "preclearance," of a proposed change to any voting qualification , standard , practice , or procedure , including congressional redistricting plans .

it applied only to those states or political subdivisions that , as specified by the formula invalidated by the supreme court in shelby county , were considered "covered" jurisdictions .

although the court invalidated only the coverage formula in section 4 , by extension , section 5 has been rendered currently inoperable .

before implementing a change to "any voting qualification or prerequisite to voting , or standard , practice , or procedure with respect to voting" — which includes congressional redistricting plans — section 5 required a covered jurisdiction to obtain "preclearance" approval for the proposed change .

covered jurisdictions could seek preclearance from either the u.s. attorney general or the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

in order to be granted preclearance , the covered jurisdiction had the burden of proving that the proposed voting change "neither has the purpose nor will have the effect of denying or abridging the right to vote on account of race or color," or membership in a language minority group .

moreover , as amended in 2006 , the statute expressly provided that its purpose was "to protect the ability of such citizens to elect their preferred candidates of choice. .

unlike certain other provisions of the vra , the preclearance requirements were enacted to be temporary .

from its original date of enactment in 1965 , and with each subsequent reauthorization in 1970 , 1975 , 1982 , and 2006 , the preclearance requirements have contained expiration dates .

as a result of the 2006 amendments to the act , the preclearance requirements were scheduled to expire in 2031 .

by a 5 to 4 vote , in shelby county v. holder , the u.s. supreme court decided that congress's decision in 2006 to reauthorize the section 5 preclearance requirement , without modifying the coverage formula in section 4 ( b ) , was unconstitutional .

the court determined that the coverage formula's application to certain states and jurisdictions departed from the principle of equal sovereignty among the states without justification in light of current conditions .

according to the court , the coverage formula was "based on 40-year old facts having no logical relation to the present day. .

therefore , it concluded that the coverage formula could no longer be used as a basis for subjecting certain states and jurisdictions to the section 5 preclearance requirement .

in the current term , the u.s. supreme court is considering a case involving redistricting commissions .

in arizona state legislature v. arizona independent redistricting commission , the supreme court is evaluating whether the elections clause of the constitution , article i , section 4 , and a federal law , codified at 2 u.s.c .

section 2a ( c ) , permit a commission — instead of a state legislature — to draw congressional district boundaries .

a ruling is expected by june 2015 .

the following provides an overview of selected legislation that would establish additional requirements and standards for congressional redistricting .

the following provides an overview of selected legislation that would amend the voting rights act .

h.r .

885 , the "voting rights amendment act of 2015" would: modify the current "bail in" provision in section 3 ( c ) of the vra .

under current law , section 3 ( c ) generally provides that if a court finds that violations of the 14 th or 15 th amendment justifying equitable relief have occurred in a state or political subdivision , the court shall retain jurisdiction for a period of time that it deems appropriate and during that period , no electoral change can be made until the court determines that the change neither has the purpose , nor will it have the effect , of denying or abridging the right to vote based on race , color , or language minority status ; in addition , if the state or political subdivision submits a proposed electoral change to the attorney general , and the attorney general has not issued an objection within 60 days , the new electoral procedure may be enforced .

the legislation would add to the types of violations that would qualify for "bail in. .

under the legislation , violations of the following would qualify for "bail in": the 14 th or 15 th amendment ; the vra , with the exception of violations of section 2 ( a ) that are based on a requirement that an individual provide photo identification as a condition of receiving a ballot ; or any federal voting rights law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , or membership in a language minority group .

establish a new coverage formula for section 5 preclearance .

the formula would cover any state , and all its political subdivisions , that during the past 15 years had five or more voting rights violations , at least one of which was committed by the state itself ( as opposed to a political subdivision within the state ) .

it would also cover specific political subdivisions that during the past 15 years had three or more voting rights violations , or one or more voting rights violations and "persistent , extremely low minority turnout," to be determined by specified voter turnout data from the past 15 years .

each calendar year , the attorney general would be required to update the list of voting rights violations attributable to each state and political subdivision for the previous calendar year .

the legislation would provide that a voting rights violation occurred in a state or political subdivision if , in a final judgment: any court of the united states determined that a denial or abridgment of the right to vote on account of race , color , or membership in a language minority group in violation of the 14 th or 15 th amendment occurred ; or any court of the united states determined that a voting qualification or standard , practice , or procedure was imposed "in a manner that resulted or would have resulted in the denial or abridgement of the right to vote based on race or color , or in contravention of the guarantees set forth in subsection ( f ) ( 2 ) , in violation of section 2" of the vra ; or any court of the united states denied a request for a declaratory judgment under section 3 ( c ) or 5 of the vra ; or the attorney general interposed an objection under section 3 ( c ) or 5 , other than an objection to a voting qualification requiring photo identification require public notice of voting changes .

within 180 days of an election , if a state or political subdivision changes any prerequisite to voting or standard , practice , or procedure that affects voting in federal elections , the legislation would require the state or political subdivision , within 48 hours of such change , to provide reasonable public notice in the state or political subdivision , and on the internet .

it would require public notice of the allocation of polling place resources , and changes relating to demographics and electoral districts , including redistricting and changing from district - based elections to at - large elections .

provide authority to assign observers .

the legislation would amend section 8 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) of the vra to provide that observers could be assigned if , in the attorney general's judgment , the assignment is necessary to enforce , in addition to the 14 th or 15 th amendment , any provision of the vra or any other federal law protecting the right of citizens to vote .

it would amend section 8 ( a ) of the vra to provide that observers could be assigned if the attorney general certifies , with respect to a political subdivision , receipt of meritorious complaints that efforts to violate section 203 of the vra , ( bilingual election requirements ) , are likely to occur or , in the attorney general's judgment , such assignment is necessary to enforce the guarantees of section 203 .

modify standards under which a court can grant injunctive relief .

under current law , the attorney general can institute an action for injunctive relief in cases where there has been or is about to be a violation of section 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 10 , 11 , or 12 ( b ) of the vra .

the legislation would amend section 12 ( d ) in such a manner to permit , in addition to the attorney general , an aggrieved person to institute an action for injunctive relief ; and that violations of the following would qualify for injunctive relief: the 14 th or 15 th amendment , the vra , or any federal voting rights law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , or membership in a language minority group .

it would require a court to grant relief if it determines that , on balance , the hardship imposed on the defendant by the relief will be less than the hardship imposed on the plaintiff if the relief were not granted .

in making its determination , a court would be required to consider several factors , including whether the qualification , prerequisite , standard , practice , or procedure in effect prior to the change was adopted as a remedy for a federal court judgment , consent decree or admission , or served as a ground for dismissal or settlement of a claim , regarding discrimination based on race or color in violation of the 14 th or 15 th amendment , a violation of the vra , or voting discrimination based on race , color , or membership in a language minority group in violation of any other federal or state law ; the change was adopted less than 180 days prior to the election ; and the defendant failed to provide adequate notice of the change as required under federal or state law .

h.r .

3899 and s. 1945 , the "voting rights amendment act of 2014," were identical to the bill introduced in the 114 th congress , discussed above .

