ten years after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , policymakers continue to grapple with the definition of homeland security .

prior to 9 / 11 , the united states addressed crises through the separate prisms of national defense , law enforcement , and emergency management .

9 / 11 prompted a strategic process that included a debate over and the development of homeland security policy .

today , this debate and development has resulted in numerous federal entities with homeland security responsibilities .

for example , there are 30 federal entities that receive annual homeland security funding excluding the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) estimates that 48% of annual homeland security funding is appropriated to these federal entities , with the department of defense ( dod ) receiving approximately 26% of total federal homeland security funding .

dhs receives approximately 52% .

congress and policymakers are responsible for funding homeland security priorities .

these priorities need to exist , to be clear and cogent , in order for funding to be most effective .

presently , homeland security is not funded on clearly defined priorities .

in an ideal scenario , there would be a clear definition of homeland security , and a consensus about it ; as well as prioritized missions , goals , and activities .

policymakers could then use a process to incorporate feedback and respond to new facts and situations as they develop .

this report examines how varied , and evolving , homeland security definitions and strategic missions may affect the prioritization of national homeland security policy and how it may affect the funding of homeland security .

to address this issue , this report first discusses and analyzes examples of strategic documents , their differing homeland security definitions , and their varying homeland security missions .

prior to 9 / 11 , federal , state , and local governments responded to domestic terrorist attacks in an ad hoc manner .

these terrorist attacks , and the governments' responses , however , did not significantly affect how policymakers perceived , defined , and prioritized security as related to the homeland .

two examples of these domestic terrorist attacks are the 1993 world trade center ( wtc ) and the 1995 alfred murrah federal building bombings .

on february 26 , 1993 , radicalized islamic terrorists detonated a bomb beneath the wtc .

in response , president clinton ordered his national security council to coordinate the bombings' response and investigation .

the cia's counterterrorist center and the national security agency , along with the fbi , were among the numerous federal agencies that participated in the investigation .

this use of the national security council was an ad - hoc response specifically to this event , and it did not result in the development of strategic documents .

on april 19 , 1995 , timothy mcveigh exploded a bomb - laden truck in front of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city .

following this bombing , president clinton directed the department of justice ( doj ) to assess the vulnerability of federal facilities to terrorist attacks or violence and to develop recommendations for minimum security standards .

these standards , however , were not a wide - ranging strategy for u.s. homeland security strategy .

it was the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks that initiated the debate and development of a broader homeland security strategy .

the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks on new york city , pennsylvania , and washington , dc , were a watershed event .

as with the 1993 wtc and 1995 oklahoma city bombings , the federal , state , and local government's response to the 9 / 11 terrorists attacks was ad hoc .

in new york city , first responders included such entities as the new york police and fire departments , and port authority and wtc employees .

following the attack , federal entities such as the fbi , dod , and elements of the intelligence community ( ic ) coordinated their efforts in investigating and tracking down the responsible terrorists .

however , following the 9 / 11 initial response and subsequent investigations , it was determined that there was a need to reorganize the government to prepare for , mitigate against , respond to , and recover from future attacks .

this decision to reorganize the government resulted in an evolution of homeland security definitions and missions .

the debate over and development of homeland security definitions persist as the federal government continues to issue and implement homeland security strategy .

all of the strategic documents in this report define homeland security as security efforts , however , each one defines these efforts in different terms .

policymakers are faced with a complex and detailed list of risks , or threats to security , for which they then attempt to plan .

however , managing those risks 99% of the time with even a single failure may lead to significant human and financial costs .

homeland security is essentially about managing risks .

the purpose of a strategic process is to develop missions to achieve that end .

before risk management can be accurate and adequate , policymakers must ideally coordinate and communicate .

that work to some degree depends on developing a foundation of common definitions of key terms and concepts .

it is also necessary , in order to coordinate and communicate , to ensure stakeholders are aware of , trained for , and prepared to meet assigned missions .

at the national level , there does not appear to be an attempt to align definitions and missions among disparate federal entities .

dhs is , however , attempting to align its definition and missions , but does not prioritize its missions ; there is no clarity in the national strategies of federal , state , and local roles and responsibilities ; and , potentially , funding is driving priorities rather than priorities driving the funding .

dhs is aligning its definition and missions in the quadrennial homeland security review , the bottom - up review , and the 2012 strategic plan ; however , dhs does not prioritize the missions .

dhs prioritizes specific goals , objectives , activities , and specific initiatives within the missions , and prioritizes initiatives across the missions .

there is still no single national homeland security definition , nor is there a prioritization of national homeland security or dhs missions .

there is no evidence in the existing homeland security strategic documents that supports the aligning and prioritization of the varied missions , nor do any of the documents convey how national , state , or local resources are to be allocated to achieve these missions .

without prioritized resource allocation to align missions , proponents of prioritization of the nation's homeland security activities and operations maintain that plans and responses may be haphazard and inconsistent .

another potential consequence of the absence of clear missions is that available funding then tends to govern the priorities .

congress may decide to address the issues associated with homeland security strategy , definitions , and missions , in light of the potential for significant events to occur similar to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks and hurricane katrina .

many observers assert that these outstanding policy issues result from the varied definitions and missions identified in numerous national strategic documents .

additionally , they note that these documents do not consistently address risk mitigation associated with the full range of homeland security threats .

from this perspective one piece missing from these documents , and their guidance , is a discussion of the resources and fiscal costs associated with preparing for low risk , but high consequence threats .

specifically , congress may choose to consider a number of options addressing the apparent lack of a consensus homeland security definition that prioritizes missions by requiring the development of a more succinct , and distinct , national homeland security strategy .

one of these options might be a total rewrite of a national homeland security strategy .

this option would be similar to the bush administration's issuance of national homeland security strategies in 2002 and 2007 .

such a strategy could include a definitive listing of mission priorities based on an encompassing definition that not only includes dhs specific responsibilities , but all federal department and agency responsibilities .

a strategy that includes priorities could improve congress's and other policymakers' ability to make choices between competing homeland security missions .

this option would also be a departure from the current administration's practice of including national homeland security guidance in the national security strategy .

another option would be to build upon the current approach by requiring the administration to develop the national security strategy that succinctly identifies homeland security missions and priorities .

alternatively , congress may determine that the present course of including national homeland security guidance in the national security strategy is adequate , and may focus strictly on dhs activities .

this option would entail dhs further refining its quadrennial homeland security review which it has begun to do with its 2012 strategic plan .

it has been argued that homeland security , at its core , is about coordination because of the disparate stakeholders and risks .

many observers assert that homeland security is not only about coordination of resources and actions to counter risks ; it is also about the coordination of the strategic process policymakers use in determining the risks , the stakeholders and their missions , and the prioritization of those missions .

without a general consensus on the physical and philosophical definition and missions of homeland security , achieved through a strategic process , some believe that there will continue to be the potential for disjointed and disparate approaches to securing the nation .

from this perspective general consensus on the homeland security concept necessarily starts with a consensus definition and an accepted list of prioritized missions that are constantly reevaluated to meet risks of the new paradigm that is homeland security in the 21 st century .

these varied definitions and missions , however , may be the result of a strategic process that has attempted to adjust federal homeland security policy to emerging threats and risks .

