in the fall of 2011 and early 2012 , the obama administration announced that it would be intensifying the u.s. role in the asia - pacific region .

to do this , it intends to raise the region's priority in u.s. military planning , foreign policy , and economic policy .

with u.s. troops gone from iraq and poised to be drawn down in afghanistan , administration officials say they plan to "rebalance" u.s. attention toward planning for future challenges and opportunities , such as those represented in the asia - pacific region .

as president barack obama stated in a november 2011 address to the australian parliament , his goal is to ensure that "the united states will play a larger and long - term role in shaping this region [the asia - pacific] and its future. .

the ultimate goal , according to national security advisor tom donilon , is to promote u.s. interests by helping to shape the norms and rules of the asia - pacific region , to ensure that "international law and norms be respected , that commerce and freedom of navigation are not impeded , that emerging powers build trust with their neighbors , and that disagreements are resolved peacefully without threats or coercion. .

as part of its proclaimed "strategic turn" toward asia , since the fall of 2011 the united states has , among other steps: announced new troop deployments to australia , new naval deployments to singapore , and new areas for military cooperation with the philippines ; stated that , notwithstanding reductions in overall levels of u.s. defense spending , the u.s. military presence in east asia will be strengthened and be made "more broadly distributed , more flexible , and more politically sustainable" ; released a new defense planning document that confirmed and offered a rationale for the rebalancing to asia while retaining an emphasis on the middle east ; joined the east asia summit ( eas ) , one of the region's premier multinational organizations ; and secured progress in negotiations to form a nine - nation trans - pacific strategic economic partnership ( tpp ) free trade agreement ( fta ) .

the administration's increased emphasis on the asia - pacific region appears to have been prompted by four major developments: the growing economic importance of the asia - pacific region , and particularly china , to the united states' economic future ; china's growing military capabilities and its increasing assertiveness of claims to disputed maritime territory , with implications for freedom of navigation and the united states' ability to project power in the region ; the winding down of u.s. military operations in iraq and afghanistan ; and efforts to cut the u.s. federal government's budget , particularly the defense budget , which threaten to create a perception in asia that the u.s. commitment to the region will wane .

as with any assertion of a new strategy , the "rebalancing" toward the asia - pacific will produce a number of foreseeable benefits and risks .

the latter are likely to be brought into sharp relief by ongoing efforts to reduce the federal government's debt and budget deficit .

the most high - profile and concrete elements of the administration's announced "rebalancing" toward the asia - pacific have come in the military realm .

in addition to the new u.s. deployments to australia and singapore , administration officials have announced they will "of necessity rebalance [the u.s. military] toward the asia - pacific region. .

moreover , president obama , secretary of defense leon panetta and other administration officials have stated that , notwithstanding reductions in planned levels of u.s. defense spending resulting from the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , the united states intends to maintain and strengthen its military presence in the region .

president obama emphasized this point during his november 2011 speech to the australian parliament: as we consider the future of our armed forces , we've begun a review that will identify our most important strategic interests and guide our defense priorities and spending over the coming decade .

so here is what this region must know .

as we end today's wars , i have directed my national security team to make our presence and mission in the asia pacific a top priority .

as a result , reductions in u.s. defense spending will not — i repeat , will not — come at the expense of the asia pacific .

[emphasis added] beyond new deployments and the identification of the region as a high - priority area for the dod , several features of the approach are notable: a broader d istribution of forces : one aim of the rebalancing effort , which accelerates changes underway since the george w. bush administration , is to make the u.s. defense posture in asia "more broadly distributed," as president obama has stated , by strengthening the u.s. military presence in the southern part of the western pacific .

the guiding premise appears to be that it is much more advantageous to the united states , and a better reflection of the way in which states in the region view their interests , to strengthen the u.s. military presence in the increasingly vital southern part of the region on the basis of a much more flexible model than in northeast asia .

as discussed below , it is unclear to what extent the "pivot" is linked to the controversial plan to build up u.s. forces on the island of guam .

in the national defense authorization act , p.l .

112-81 , congress zeroed out the administration's request for the guam military construction program pending a review of costs .

increased flexibility : the shift in focus toward the south will be carried out by what officials describe as a more "flexible" approach to deployments in the region , in which u.s. deployments will be smaller , more agile , expeditionary , self - sustaining , and self - contained .

in contrast to a reliance on the large permanent bases in japan and south korea , u.s. forces in the south will carry out operations mainly through rotational deployments of military units of various kinds to different parts of the region .

measures to sustain the u.s. presence include a substantially expanded and widely varied range of naval access agreements ; expanded training exercises ; and other , diverse means of engagement with foreign militaries .

the model seeks to avoid large expenditures on permanent new bases and to build security systems that are less rigid than cold war , european - style treaty regimes .

enhancing partners' capabilities : a corollary effort is strengthening the independent security capacity of key "partner states" through more flexible security assistance mechanisms and through cooperative counter - terrorism , counter - drug , and counter - insurgency operations .

the white house and dod have stressed their desire to increase training and joint exercises with allies and new military partners , in order to "ensure collective capability and capacity for securing common interests. .

as part of this move , the u.s. is reinvigorating its formal u.s. alliances — particularly those with australia , japan , the philippines , and south korea — and the relationship with close strategic partner singapore .

simultaneously , the obama administration is expanding the george w. bush administration's push to diversify the range of u.s. partners to include india , indonesia , new zealand , and vietnam .

in addition to strengthening u.s. alliances and building deeper relationships with emerging partners there are two other major strands of the obama administration's asia - pacific diplomacy , both of which are significant elements of the "rebalancing" effort: deepening engagement with asia - pacific multilateral institutions ; and successfully managing the u.s. - china relationship .

these efforts build on the administration's efforts , begun in 2009 , to upgrade u.s. diplomatic visibility and presence in east asia .

as shown in table 2 , in her first three years in office , secretary of state clinton made far more visits to countries in east asia and the pacific than her three predecessors .

economics and trade are both causes of and instruments for the pivot toward the asia - pacific .

historical trends and most future projections indicate that the greater asia - pacific region is rising in importance in the global economy and world trade .

the region has been actively pursuing greater economic integration at a pace exceeding that of other parts of the globe .

as shown in " the economic rise of asia ," the asia - pacific region has become more vital to the global and u.s. economies as well .

accordingly , the obama administration has increased the u.s. focus on economic and trade relations in the asia - pacific .

among other motivations , the region plays a crucial role in president obama's national export initiative .

four of the ten emerging export markets targeted in the 2011 national export strategy – china , india , indonesia , and vietnam – are part of the asia - pacific region .

additionally , heightened u.s. economic engagement – for instance , through participating in the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) fta talks – demonstrate that the united states wishes to remain a major force in the region's economic and geopolitical dynamics .

significant elements of the obama administration's trade policy in the region are a continuation of policies of the clinton and george w. bush administrations .

both previous administrations supported the granting of normal trade relations ( ntr ) and membership in the world trade organization to china , taiwan , and vietnam .

additionally , president clinton elevated the importance of the asia - pacific economic cooperation forum in 1993 and initiated fta negotiations with singapore that eventually were concluded under the bush administration .

president bush concluded a similar agreement with australia , initiated ultimately unsuccessful fta negotiations with malaysia and thailand , signed an fta with south korea , and announced the intent to enter into talks with the existing tpp .

indeed , the obama administration's decision to pursue the south korea - u.s. fta ( which was successful , after some modifications were negotiated ) and the tpp shows the continuity of the united states' fta policy in asia .

regional dynamics will likely determine the extent to which future regional economic integration will follow a path consistent with a u.s. - style free trade agreement ( a binding , comprehensive agreement that liberalizes trade and investment only to parties to the agreement ) or an alternative path involving agreements narrower in scope , open to all of asia while possibly excluding the united states , and more accommodating to sensitive domestic political constraints .

whether the united states is included in or excluded from any future broader asia - pacific economic agreement will almost certainly have implications for u.s. strategic and diplomatic relations in the region .

the importance of u.s. economic interests in the asia - pacific region has significant security and military implications .

with an increasing volume of u.s. exports and imports flowing in and out of the region , it has become critical that the united states maintains free navigation from the arabian sea across to the eastern edge of the pacific ocean .

this has been one of the arguments made for u.s. interest in a peaceful resolution of the territorial disputes over the south china sea .

the administration's "rebalancing" toward asia and the pacific comes in the midst of profound changes in global economic , political , and security relationships .

the breadth of issues is as great as at any time in recent history , encompassing security relations , economics and trade , the u.s.' ability to compete and create jobs in the face of ever - stiffer global competition , global financial stability , and even fundamental questions about political and economic models , given the rise of china and other emerging economies .

in the context of such global challenges , a revitalized focus on asia potentially reflects the administration's willingness to make far - reaching strategic choices , involving judgments that explicitly downgrade concerns about some challenges to u.s. security , while elevating others .

whether the administration has set the right priorities , whether its perceptions of global trends are sufficiently hedged , and whether the risks it is willing to countenance are appropriate , all are critical matters for members of congress to consider .

budgetary q uestions: one pervasive aspect of the "pivot" is the changes it implies for u.s. budget priorities , particularly in the regional distribution of those priorities .

in its upcoming appropriations bills for fy2013 , congress will explicitly or implicitly address the fiscal implications of the pacific pivot .

funding for troop deployments in australia , and possibly for other military partnerships in singapore , the philippines , and elsewhere , needs congressional approval .

congress will also face decisions on funding for the administration's plan for relocating the marine air base on okinawa to a different part of the island and for shifting several thousand marines from okinawa to the u.s. territory of guam .

similarly , the air - sea battle ( asb ) concept being developed by the defense department will have budgetary implications that congress may wish to consider .

congress may also debate new naval capabilities , such as more advanced cruise missiles on attack submarines , as well as the dispersal and hardening of forward - based forces , more long - range strike capacity , and enhancing both offensive and defensive measures for cyberwar and in space .

on the broadest level , congress will face questions about whether current plans for defense spending will leave the united states able to meet the regional commitments implied in the "pivot," along with commitments elsewhere in the world , including the middle east .

while the budgetary implications are greatest in the defense budget , they extend across myriad aspects of u.s. policy towards the asia - pacific region .

if the "pivot" involves a concerted effort to increase u.s. engagement across the region and to tie together diplomatic , security and economic policy , it will also affect budgets for non - military programs in the asia - pacific , including international assistance , energy cooperation , economic development and other foreign assistance programs , many of which are funded through the foreign operations appropriations process .

congress will have the opportunity to consider whether such programs should receive the same prioritization that the defense budget has been given , and whether the u.s. has sufficient resources to fund them .

potential l egislative i ssues: there are numerous areas in which the policies the administration has announced may lead to a need for legislative action .

for example , if the tpp talks are successful , congress will be asked to pass reconciling legislation to bring current u.s. trade policy in line with the provisions of the new trade agreement .

the obama administration may decide to approach congress for trade promotion authority prior to the conclusion of the tpp negotiations .

as the terms of the agreement — and the outstanding issues — become more apparent , congress may decide to exercise its oversight authority to ascertain more about the dynamics of the negotiations and investigate the preferences and concerns of the interested parties in the united states .

if the tpp negotiations falter , congress may be approached for its support for some other regional trade initiative .

among other legislative options , congress could choose to consider ratification of the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) , which would affect the strategic dynamics of u.s. policy towards maritime disputes and freedom of passage in the south and east china seas .

if congress deems that the government of burma has moved sufficiently on political reforms , it could also choose to lift or waive certain sanctions against that country .

strategic q uestions: broadly , congress will have a role through its oversight function to ask whether the administration , through the "pivot," is pursuing goals that are productive , realistic and reachable .

through force posture hearings in its armed services committees , congress will assess whether the u.s. has sufficient resources to meet its military goals in the asia - pacific , and whether these decisions will limit the u.s.'s ability to meet its strategic aims elsewhere .

indeed , congressional action across a wide range of issues will affect the ways the region reacts to the policies that make up the "pivot. .

on china in particular , congressional action will influence the tone of the bilateral relationship in ways that will affect strategic dynamics across the region .

many members of congress seek greater access for u.s. goods and services in the chinese market , more flexibility in chinese exchange - rate management , improvements in human rights and in the protection of intellectual property , and more cooperation from beijing in applying international pressure on iran , north korea , syria , sudan and other countries .

actions that congress takes to pursue these goals will likely affect the ways china views u.s. policy , and thus its response to the "pivot. .

appendix a .

the economic rise of asia some historical and current economic trends support making the asia - pacific region a higher priority in u.s. foreign policy .

the international monetary fund's ( imf ) most recent regional economic forecasts project over 6.75% real growth in 2012 for the asia - pacific region as a whole , higher than any other region .

over the last 30 years , asia has become increasingly important for international merchandise trade , both as a destination for exports and a source of imports ( see table a - 1 ) .

asia's share of global exports and imports nearly doubled between 1980 and 2010 .

the rise of asia as a leading center for world trade has made the trade routes across the indian and pacific oceans critical to the health of the global economy ( see figure a - 1 ) .

although the cross - atlantic corridor remains the world leader , asia - pacific trade corridors ( including flows through the strait of malacca ) have risen in importance .

asian nations are major holders of outstanding u.s. federal debt .

as of december 2011 , china , hong kong , japan , and taiwan were among the top 10 foreign holders of federal debt , with combined holdings of $2.5 trillion , or 28.6% of total outstanding federal debt .

asia is widely viewed as playing a vital role in the prospects for a u.s. economic recovery .

not only is asia a major component of the president's national export initiative , but asia may also become an increasingly important source for foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in the united states , as well as a continued destination for u.s. fdi .

at the same time , major asia companies from china , hong kong , japan , south korea , and singapore may constitute some of the leading competitors for u.s. companies venturing further into the global market .

appendix b .

selected documents and speeches hillary clinton , "america's pacific century," foreign policy , november 2011 , at http: / / www.foreignpolicy.com / articles / 2011 / 10 / 11 / americas_pacific_century .

tom donilon , "america is back in the pacific and will uphold the rules," financial times , november 27 , 2011 , at http: / / www.ft.com / cms / s / 0 / 4f3febac - 1761-11e1-b00e - 00144feabdc0.html#axzz1lvbgzfyec .

president barack obama , "remarks by president obama to the australian parliament," november 17 , 2011 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / the - press - office / 2011 / 11 / 17 / remarks - president - obama - australian - parliament .

president barack obama and prime minister gillard of australia , "remarks by president obama and prime minister gillard of australia in joint press conference," november 16 , 2011 , at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / the - press - office / 2011 / 11 / 16 / remarks - president - obama - and - prime - minister - gillard - australia - joint - press .

u.s. department of defense , sustaining u.s .

global leadership: priorities for 21 st century defense , january 2012 , at http: / / www.defense.gov / news / defense_strategic_guidance.pdf .

two useful briefings about the new dod "strategic guidance" are: "defense strategic guidance briefing from the pentagon," january 5 , 2012 , at http: / / www.defense.gov / transcripts / transcript.aspx ? transcriptid=4953 ; and "defense strategic guidance media roundtable at the pentagon," january 5 , 2012 , at http: / / www.defense.gov / transcripts / transcript.aspx ? transcriptid=4954 .

u.s. department of defense , annual report to congress [on] military and security developments involving the people's republic of china 2011 , washington , 2011 , at http: / / www.defense.gov / pubs / pdfs / 2011_cmpr_final.pdf .

u.s. department of defense , "background briefing on air - sea battle by defense officials from the pentagon," november 9 , 2011 , at http: / / www.defense.gov / transcripts / transcript.aspx ? transcriptid=4923 .

