t he bureau of prisons ( bop ) is the largest correctional agency in the country in terms of the number of prisoners under its jurisdiction .

bop was established in 1930 to house federal inmates , professionalize the prison service , and ensure consistent and centralized administration of the federal prison system .

bop must confine any offender convicted and sentenced to a term of imprisonment in a federal court .

changes in federal criminal justice policy since the early 1980s — enforcing a growing number of federal crimes , replacing indeterminate sentencing with a determinate sentencing structure through sentencing guidelines , and increasing the number of federal offenses subject to mandatory minimum sentences — led to rapid growth in the federal prison population .

the total number of inmates under bop's jurisdiction increased from approximately 25,000 in fy1980 to over 219,000 in fy2013 .

between fy1980 and fy2013 , the federal prison population increased , on average , by approximately 5,900 inmates annually .

however , since the peak in fy2013 , the number of inmates in the federal prison system decreased each subsequent fiscal year to approximately 192,000 inmates in fy2016 .

generally , the increase in the federal prison population necessitated an increase in appropriations for bop's operations and infrastructure .

in fy1980 , congress appropriated $330.0 million for bop ; by fy2016 , the total appropriation for bop reached $7.479 billion , which was the largest nominal appropriation ever for bop .

appropriations for bop have generally continued to increase since fy2013 ( fy2017 was the exception ) even though the prison population has decreased since that time .

increasing appropriations for bop , despite the declining prison population , could be the result of a growing per capita cost of incarceration or bop's need to maintain staffing levels commensurate with the size of the prison population .

this report provides an overview of bop's appropriations since fy1980 .

specifically , this report examines trends in bop's total appropriations , changes in funding for bop's appropriations account , and trends in funding for the decision units under bop's appropriations accounts .

the report provides a brief analysis of how the administration's requested funding for bop compares to enacted appropriations .

it also discusses changes in the per capita cost of incarceration and how appropriations for bop have changed relative to those for the department of justice , both issues that have been of interest to policymakers .

as noted above , appropriations for bop have continued to increase even though the federal prison population has decreased in recent years .

this trend might be partly explained by the increasing per capita cost for incarceration .

as show in figure 4 , the nominal per capita cost of incarceration has increased from approximately $22,000 per inmate in fy2000 to almost $35,000 in fy2016 , a 61% rise .

from fy2000 to fy2012 , the per capita cost of incarceration roughly increased at the same rate as inflation .

however , since fy2013 increases in the per capita cost have started to outstrip inflation .

the increasing per capita cost of incarceration is partly due to inflationary pressures , such as the increasing cost of health care , food , clothing , and utilities .

however , it is notable that the per capita cost of incarceration has increased at a greater rate than inflation since fy2013 , which coincides with the decreasing prison population .

stable or increasing obligations combined with a decreasing prison population will result in increasing per capita costs because the shared inmate expenses are dispersed across fewer inmates .

per capita costs are not equivalent to marginal costs ( i.e. , what it costs bop to incarcerate one additional inmate ) .

for example , if the per capita cost of incarceration is $22,000 per inmate and bop's prison population decreased by 1,000 inmates , it does not mean that bop would save $22 million .

per capita costs do not equate to marginal costs because per capita costs reflect the total amount bop obligates in a fiscal year divided by that fiscal year's average daily population .

some costs ( eg , food and clothing expenses ) would decrease if bop incarcerated fewer inmates .

however , obligations also account for items like staff salaries , which might not change until the prison population decreases to a point where bop could close prisons and reduce staff .

for example , if all of bop's high security facilities hold 10% more inmates than their rated capacity and bop's prison population decreases to a point where these facilities hold the same number of inmates as their rated capacity , it is likely that bop would not reduce staffing at those prisons , which would mean that obligations for high security facilities for that fiscal year would not decline significantly .

one concern among some policymakers is that bop's expanding budget is starting to consume a larger share of the department of justice's ( doj ) overall annual appropriations .

figure 5 shows what proportion of doj's annual discretionary budget was dedicated to bop .

bop's overall budget is more susceptible to fluctuations due to changes in year - to - year appropriations for bop's b&f account .

the trend lines ( the dashed lines in the figure ) show that since fy1980 , both bop's total budget and the s&e account have , in general , encompassed a growing share of doj's annual appropriations .

the noticeable spike in bop's share of doj's annual appropriations in fy1990 was the result of congress appropriating more than $1 billion for the b&f account .

in addition , the decrease in bop's share of doj's appropriations observed in fy2009 , a break in a general upward trend that started in fy2000 , was the result of congress appropriating an additional $4 billion for doj under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

appendix a. bop appropriations: total and by decision unit appendix b. bop per capita cost .

