the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility criteria .

these benefits and services include , among other things , hospital and medical care , disability compensation and pensions , education , vocational rehabilitation and employment services , assistance to homeless veterans , home loan guarantees , administration of life insurance as well as traumatic injury protection insurance for servicemembers , and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

the department carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical and prosthetic research programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for , among other things , providing compensation , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries ; providing grants to states for establishing , expanding , or improving state veterans cemeteries ; and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

the bva reviews all appeals made by veterans or their representatives for entitlement to veterans' benefits , including claims for service connection , increased disability ratings , pensions , insurance benefits , and educational benefits , among other things .

this report provides a preliminary analysis of the president's budget request for fy2013 for the programs administered by the va .

the information provided in this report is based on the president's budget proposal provided to congress on february 13 , 2012 .

the report begins with a brief introduction to the department's budget .

next , it provides funding levels requested by the president for fy2013 for va health related programs .

this is followed by a discussion of funding levels requested for mandatory programs and administration , including programs such as construction of va facilities and information technology .

this not an exhaustive discussion of va's budget request for fy2013 .

to provide some context to the discussion that follows , this section briefly introduces the various accounts that fund the department .

the va's budget is composed of both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatory funding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , education , vocational rehabilitation , life insurance , and burial benefits , among other benefits and services .

discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services with a majority of funding going toward providing medical care to veterans .

according to the president's budget documents , in fy2012 the total va budget authority was approximately $127.0 billion .

the fy2013 budget request for the va is for approximately $140.3 billion in budget authority .

the va's health care program is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

the appropriation accounts used to support va health care programs include ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration ( currently known as medical support and compliance ) , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

in addition to the direct appropriations accounts mentioned above , the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-272 ) , enacted into law in 1986 , gave the va the authority to bill some veterans and most health care insurers for non - service - connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the va health care system to help defray the cost of delivering medical services to veterans .

the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) gave the va the authority to retain these funds in the medical care collections fund ( mccf ) .

the funds deposited into the mccf would be available for medical services for veterans .

these collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended .

in 2009 , congress passed the veterans health care budget reform and transparency act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-81 ) that authorized advance appropriations for three of the four accounts that comprise the vha: medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities .

the medical and prosthetic research account is not funded as an advance appropriation , but is funded through the regular appropriations process .

the medical services account funds health care services provided to eligible veterans and beneficiaries in va's medical centers , outpatient clinic facilities , contract hospitals , state homes , and outpatient programs on a fee basis .

the medical support and compliance account funds management and administration of the va health care system , including financial management .

the medical facilities account includes funds for the operation and maintenance of the va health care system's capital infrastructure ( excluding construction ) , such as costs associated with utilities , facility repair , laundry services , and groundskeeping .

 table 2 shows the va budget for mandatory benefit programs and administration as reported by the va for fy2011 through fy2013 .

the changes in certain accounts between fy2011 and fy2013 may reflect changes due to law , regulations , or other factors as discussed below .

the disability compensation category includes payments for a number of benefits , such as disability compensation ; dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) ; pension benefits for low - income disabled or elderly combat veterans and their survivors ; burial benefits ( allowances , flags , headstones , etc .

 ) ; and a clothing allowance for certain disabled veterans .

the large increase ( $10.5 billion , or 20.5% ) between fy2012 and fy2013 is overstated due to the impact of carryovers ( unobligated balances ) .

there was a large carryover between fy2011 and fy2012 of $12.9 billion , of which $9.9 billion is anticipated to be obligated in fy2012 ( for a total obligation in fy2012 of $61.2 billion ) , leaving a carryover of $3.0 billion into fy2013 .

the carryover has been the result of lower than anticipated retroactive payments associated with the recent presumptions related to agent orange .

in general , the average payments for benefits , including disability compensation , pension , and survivor benefits are expected to increase due to the annual cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) .

the readjustment benefits category reflects a number of benefits related to the transition of servicemembers from active duty status to veteran status , as well as disabled veterans , including education benefits , vocation rehabilitation , financial assistance for adaptive automobiles and equipment , and housing grants .

the increase in readjustment benefits between fy2012 and fy2013 reflects increases in two programs: ( 1 ) the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ( primarily due to the cola ) and ( 2 ) the veterans retraining assistance program that was established by p.l .

112-56 .

the insurance ( mandatory ) category includes supplemental funding for national service life insurance ( nsli ) , service - disabled veterans insurance ( s - dvi ) , and veterans mortgage life insurance ( vmli ) .

the increase between fy2012 and fy2013 for insurance reflects the deaths associated with the nsli and s - dvi programs and the increase in the maximum coverage under the vmli program .

the housing and other mandatory benefits category includes guaranteed and direct loan programs for veterans , native american housing loans , and various proprietary receipts ( from the public ) .

the decrease in the mandatory housing category between fy2012 and fy2013 reflects the timing of the re - estimates for the programs .

the fy2013 re - estimates will not be completed until the end of fy2012 and will be reflected in the fy2014 budget submission .

because of the timing of the re - estimates , the fy2012 housing category is $1.3 billion higher than the original budget submission .

this is a new category reflecting a proposal for legislation to create a veterans job corps .

the increase in the vba general operating expenses between fy2012 and fy2013 is primarily due to an increase in personal services costs , associated with personnel and the proposed cost - of - living adjustment .

the information technology category includes maintenance and improvements to the information technology of all va functions .

for fy2013 , the administration's budget requests $3.3 billion for information technology , an increase of $216 million over the fy2012 enacted level of $3.1 billion .

the major construction category , which is for construction related projects for all va components in which the total project cost is $10 million or more , reflects a decrease of 9.7% between fy2012 and fy2013 .

the minor construction category , which is for construction related projects for all va components in which the total project cost is less than $10 million , reflects an increase of 25.9% between fy2012 and fy2013 .

