policymakers have expressed concern about the ability of small and young firms , in particular , to secure equity financing for growth and job creation .

indeed , over the past decade , many sources have reported a precipitous decline in the number of initial public offerings ( ipos ) in the united states — particularly for small companies .

the recent decline in ipos raises several questions: what has caused such a decline ? .

what are the implications for the u.s. economy , and particularly for job creation ? .

are foreign exchanges outcompeting u.s. exchanges ? .

at the same time , while ipos appear to have fallen in the united states for a variety of reasons , the amount of private stock offerings has increased during this period .

to what extent is this a viable replacement for ipos ? .

this report analyzes the factors contributing to the decline in ipos and discusses whether that decline is significant ; the differences between an ipo involving the sale of shares to the public versus a private stock offering for sophisticated investors ; and the potential economic implications of a rise in private versus public stock offerings .

on april 5 , 2012 , the jumpstart our business startup act ( jobs act ; p.l .

112-106 ) , which is broadly aimed at boosting capital formation , was enacted .

this report describes key elements of the jobs act and provides a background discussion of key policy issues of relevance to the legislation .

companies can be categorized into two groups: privately held companies and publicly held companies .

most businesses are privately held companies that have either not distributed any ownership shares or have a small number of shareholders with limited ability to transact in shares .

although the preponderance of larger companies , such as apple , general electric , google , and facebook , are publicly held firms , a number of larger companies , like ikea , hallmark cards , and mars candy , are privately held .

among other things , the jobs act seeks to make it easier for firms to list publicly traded shares through ipos .

at the same time , while the number , and total dollar amount , of ipos in the united states has fallen noticeably , the dollar amount of private , or restricted , stock offerings has risen .

a study by the sec's chief economist in 2011 , which focused on the aggregate size of securities offerings , found that private offerings grew by nearly 50% from 2009 to 2010 , from about $950 billion to about $1.4 trillion .

the study also found that between 2009 and 2010 , aggregate public equity issuances fell by 11% , from $1.27 trillion to $1.133 trillion .

in addition , the sec study also found that aggregate amount of private stock issuances ( at more than $905 billion ) surpassed debt issuances ( about $851 billion ) in 2010 , a trend that reportedly continued through the first quarter of 2011 .

when a privately held firm conducts an ipo , its first widespread sale of company stock to the investing public , it becomes a publicly held firm whose shares are then subsequently traded on the secondary securities market through a securities exchange .

ipos enable such firms to raise equity capital , which may enable them to expand .

in exchange for the right to broadly distribute their shares , the publicly held companies are subject to an assortment of rules and regulations , such as a board of directors requirement , and having to comply with various securities and exchange commission ( sec ) enforced registration and financial disclosure filing requirements ( such as filing quarterly and annual reports ) .

although many privately held firms go public on their own , others become publicly held companies as part of the exit - payoff strategy of venture capital firms who have been incubating them through funding and managerial support .

according to ipo data published by a law firm , venture capital - backed ipos accounted for 46 of the 142 ipos in 2010 .

another kind of private to public strategy can involve an independent or venture capital - backed privately held company becoming part of an existing publicly held firm through an acquisition by such an entity .

there is also a corporate "middle ground" between the privately held companies with no shared equity ownership and the publicly held firms with widely dispersed equity ownership .

these are generally small companies who pursue specific limited or restricted stock offerings , sometimes known as private stock offerings .

because of the limited nature of the offerings , they are not subject to the full array of sec registration and disclosure requirements and the attendant compliance costs associated with unlimited public offerings .

such "private stock offerings" cannot be sold widely to the public , but only to certain "sophisticated" investors .

the purpose of allowing such restricted stock offerings is to make it easier for small or growing companies to raise capital , while continuing to protect ordinary retail investors .

as such , the sec has established certain exemptions from the registration and disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws for companies that either seek to raise only a small amount of equity capital ( less than $5 million ) or to sell shares only to a limited number of sophisticated investors , rather than to the general public .

among the sec regulations that exempt certain small businesses from some of the registration and disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws , regulation a and regulation d are especially important .

regulation a allows the sec , through the issuance of rules and regulations , to exempt any class of securities from registration under the securities act of 1933 if it finds that the exemption is in the public interest and the issue of securities does not exceed $5 million during any 12-month period .

the jobs act increases this threshold to $50 million , a potential boost to the ability of small firms to raise equity capital .

however , it also increases the number of potential firms who in conducting such offerings would do so in the context of reduced required disclosures and thus potentially reduced investor protections .

several advantages are often associated with remaining a privately held company vis - à - vis becoming a public company .

by the same token , other advantages are commonly ascribed to companies that have gone public via an ipo in contrast to remaining a privately held company .

key advantages associated with each of these are described below .

members of the 112 th congress introduced an assortment of bills with a number of broadly connected goals .

the bills address the perceived decline in ipos by modifying various federal securities laws and attempt to stimulate markets for both public and private stock offerings by amending federal securities laws .

several such bills helped form the basis for the jumpstart our business startups act ( jobs act ; p.l .

112-106 ) , which was signed into law on april 5 , 2012 .

among other things , the jobs act relaxes statutory restrictions on launching ipos , eases the regulatory and disclosure obligations of firms it identifies as "emerging growth companies," reduces restrictions on promotional communications surrounding private offerings , and establishes a higher shareholder number requirement before a private company becomes subject to public company reporting requirements .

this section summaries key provisions of the jobs act and describes both their implementation timetable and developments to date .

broad consensus among academics is that since about 2000 , there has been a marked decline in ipos in the united states , particularly by domestic companies , as compared with the period from about 1980 to 2000 .

in many respects , this observed decline has been a significant impetus behind much of the aforementioned legislation — both in its own terms and as a symbol of the perceived erosion of domestic capital markets , particularly for small - and medium - sized firms .

the following sections examine various perspectives on both the nature of the ipo decline , its possible causes , its implications , and questions over its ultimate significance .

on the issue of the ipo decline , a 2011 study , for instance , found that in the period from 1980 to 2000 , there were , on average , 311 ipos per year ; but in the decade since 2000 , an average of only 102 firms per year have gone public .

the study also noted that of the 7,443 ipos identified from 1980 to 2009 , only 12% of them , or 921 ipos , occurred between 2001 and 2009 .

the drop in ipos is even more marked if economic growth is taken into account .

all else equal , a larger economy would be expected to have more ipos , rather than fewer .

the recent decline in ipos is also confirmed by the data presented in figure 1 and figure 2 below , collected by the law firm wilmer cutler pickering hale & dorr llp , using sec data .

other studies have found a similar , pronounced drop in ipos .

for instance , the financial advisory firm grant thornton , using another dataset , found an annual average of roughly 500 ipos during the years before the dotcom bubble burst around 2000 ; but that figure fell to just 61 ipos in 2009 , and 153 ipos in 2010 .

reports also indicate that companies are waiting longer to do ipos .

between 1997 and 2001 , the average age of a domestic company that did an ipo was about five and a half years , compared with an average of nine years for companies that went public between 2006 and 2011 .

although most research has found a decline in u.s. ipos , there are differences in how observers define the notion of "decline. .

some studies challenge the view that there is a broad "decline" in u.s. public stock markets more generally , focusing instead on various aspects of the u.s. stock markets beyond the number of , and proceeds from , u.s. ipos .

this includes some research published by the federal reserve bank of new york , commentary by securities and exchange commission ( sec ) officials based on their review of studies of public equities markets , and reports that a significant number of china - based firms have listed on the nasdaq and the new york stock exchange in recent years ( which is discussed further below ) .

nevertheless , research suggests a particularly pronounced drop in the numbers of ipos and market share of ipos for small companies — an issue addressed in a number of the capital markets bills in congress .

small companies have seen the average volume of their ipos decline from 165 ipos per year from 1980 to 2000 to 72 ipos per year from 2001 to 2009 .

before 1998 , according to observers , smaller ipos constituted about 80% of the total number of yearly ipos , but since 1998 , that percentage has been in the 20% range .

how does this compare with trends for other markets overseas ? .

some have argued that the ability of some foreign stock exchanges , such as the united kingdom's alternative investment market ( aim ) , to successfully market and brand themselves as lower - cost , attractive venues for smaller firms has helped to lure ipos away from u.s. exchanges .

another study in 2011 found that firms in countries with weaker governance , investor protections , and other legal institutions are less likely to go public with an ipo in their home country , and are more likely to go public globally , in a country with stronger institutions .

if true , this trend should tend to boost u.s. listings by companies from some foreign countries .

indeed , it could be argued that an example of this is evidence that suggests that former state - owned chinese firms that have gone public have become a growing portion of global and u.s. ipos in recent years .

another study found that the market share of u.s. ipos by foreign companies as a percentage of the total has increased in this decade , partly due to the low number of u.s. companies going public .

for instance , in 1988 , 8.3% of the total of 109 ipos in the united states were by foreign companies , and none of the total ipos were by chinese companies in particular .

by 2010 , 34.4% of the total of 128 domestic ipos were by foreign companies , and 25.8% of the ipos were by chinese companies .

while there is little evidence that supports concerns that foreign companies are fleeing the united states , the domestic ipo market does not appear to have kept pace with the united states' share of economic growth worldwide .

a 2011 study by doidge et .

al .

found that in the 1990s , the yearly average number of u.s. ipos comprised 27% of all ipos in the world , while the united states accounted for 27% of world gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

since 2000 , however , they found that the u.s. share of all ipos has fallen to 12% whereas the u.s. share of worldwide gdp has averaged 30% .

analysis such as the doidge study generally suggests that there has been an overall numerical decline in the number of yearly domestic ipos and the nation's share of overall ipos as well .

the doidge study and others have tended to attribute the drop in u.s. ipo activity vis - à - vis the rest of the world to a combination of lower u.s. ipo activity by u.s. firms , and the growth of ipos in other countries during this period , particularly in emerging markets .

some evidence suggests that other developed countries may face a similar situation .

for example , both germany and france saw their respective ipo volumes drop by more than 50% from 2002 to 2007 relative to the 1994- 2001 period , even as average ipo proceeds in those countries more than doubled , according to one study .

this may indicate that , as in the united states , some other developed countries may also be losing smaller ipo deals .

at the same time , however , others have noted an increase in the number of ipos in hong kong , tokyo , and australia , and some have observed slight increases in the united kingdom and italy .

an apparent decline in the u.s. share of ipos worldwide leads to several corollary questions: what are the implications , if any , for the u.s. economy , and particularly for job creation ? .

what are the causes of this decline ? .

are legislative measures such as the jobs act helpful for addressing it ? .

when examining legislation like the jobs act , which is aimed at stimulating ipos , it is useful to analyze some of the major arguments as to why ipos have fallen .

broadly speaking , arguments as to the root causes of the decline in u.s. ipos tend to fall into two camps .

the first camp argues that regulatory factors are to blame and that the united states has a burdensome , costly regulatory scheme affecting public companies .

the second camp focuses on developments in market infrastructure — some of which derive from regulatory changes affecting stock trading , but some of which do not , and might be more difficult to address through legislation alone .

evidence indicates a marked decline in u.s. ipos over the past decade , particularly for smaller firms .

this has raised concerns among policymakers over the economic implications of such a decline , particularly for job creation in the united states .

although studies show that younger firms ( i.e. , startups ) are particularly important for job creation , most have not addressed the question of whether the form of growth financing for young firms — for example , through acquisition , or through ipos — is a factor in creating jobs .

in addition , although statistics show a decline in ipos , the number and proceeds from private stock offerings , particularly under regulation d , have risen .

the implications for the economy and for job creation of a rise in private offerings concurrently with a fall in ipos are less clear .

on one hand , the stock of public companies is believed to benefit from a "liquidity premium," implying better share pricing and greater ease of capital - raising .

a company's debt - to - equity ratio often declines after an ipo , meaning it may be able to obtain more favorable terms for loans .

also , some research indicates that going public can help a company attract new human capital and make potentially advantageous corporate acquisitions .

however , others note the added pressure on public companies to produce short - term earnings results potentially at the expense of long - term growth .

some research has also suggested that public companies tend to select less novel research projects .

as discussed earlier , one aim of the jobs act was to make it easier for companies to conduct both public and private share offerings , by relaxing certain requirements for ipos and for private offerings sold only to accredited investors .

a concern of some when easing such requirements is maintaining adequate investor protections .

the executive branch agency charged with overseeing and ensuring investor protections is the sec , and the chair of the sec , as well as an sec commissioner separately , have voiced such concerns regarding the level of investor protections from such changes required by the jobs act .

this section describes key aspects of the federal securities registration and disclosure requirements in the securities act of 1933 and the securities exchange act of 1934 .

the securities act of 1933 makes it illegal to offer or sell securities to the public unless they have been registered with the sec .

registration covers only the securities actually being offered and only for the purposes of the offering in the registration statement .

the registration consists of two basic parts: ( 1 ) the prospectus , which must be provided to every purchaser of the securities , and ( 2 ) supplemental information , which contains information and exhibits that do not have to be provided to purchasers but are available for inspection by the public at the sec .

section 7 of the 1933 act , referring to schedule a , sets forth the information that must be contained in the registration statement .

the schedule requires a great deal of information , such as the underwriters , the specific type of business , significant shareholders , debt and assets of the company , and opinions as to the legality of the issue .

section 10 ( a ) of the 1933 act specifies the information that the prospectus must contain .

there are also numerous regulations issued by the sec that provide further details about the registration process under the 1933 act .

certain transactions and securities are exempted from the registration process .

the exempted transactions include private placements , intrastate offerings , and small offerings .

the commission may , by rules and regulations , exempt any class of securities if it finds that such an exemption is in the public interest and the issue of securities does not exceed $5 million .

among other exempted securities are government securities and short - term commercial paper , securities for which it is believed that other , adequate means of government regulation exist .

the securities exchange act of 1934 is concerned with many different areas , one of which is the ongoing process of disclosure to the investing public through the filing of periodic and updated reports with the sec .

any issuer that has a class of securities traded on a national securities exchange or has total assets exceeding $1 million and a class of equity securities with at least 500 or 750 shareholders , depending upon certain factors , must register under the 1934 act with the commission .

every issuer required to register under the 1934 act must file periodic and other reports with the sec .

section 12 requires the filing of a detailed statement about the company when the company first registers under the 1934 act .

section 13 requires a registered company to file annual and quarterly reports with the sec .

these reports must contain essentially all material information , financial and otherwise , about the company that the investing public might need in making a decision about whether to invest in the company .

the sec has issued extensive regulations to specify information that these required reports must provide .

some exemptions from these reporting requirements are provided .

exemptions include securities of an issuer organized and operated exclusively for religious , educational , benevolent , fraternal , charitable , or reformatory purposes and not for profit ; securities issued by a mutual or cooperative organization supplying a commodity or service primarily for the benefit of its members and operating as a nonprofit ; and securities issued by a registered investment company .

failure to disclose material information is actionable .

for example , section 18 ( a ) of the securities exchange act grants an express private right of action to investors who have been injured by reliance upon material misstatements or omissions of facts in reports that have been filed with the sec .

section 10 ( b ) of the 1934 act , the general antifraud provision , and rule 10b - 5 , issued by the sec to carry out the statutory fraud prohibition , provide for a cause of action for injuries that have been caused by omissions , misrepresentations , or manipulations of material facts in statements other than those filed in documents with the sec .

