the 28 member - state european union ( eu ) has been a major natural gas consumer and importer for decades .

as europe's natural gas production has declined in recent years , its vulnerability to imported natural gas has increased .

this has left it more dependent as a whole on its main supplier , russia , which has shown an inclination to use its resources for political ends .

natural gas , unlike oil , which is a global commodity , is a regional commodity with regional buyers and sellers exerting more influence .

over the past decade , some european officials have become increasingly concerned about the potential for cutoffs or curtailments of russian natural gas supplies to europe .

at least until recently , most russian natural gas exports to europe flowed through ukraine and belarus .

fragile and sometimes hostile relations between kyiv , minsk , and moscow have in the past resulted in interruptions in the flow of natural gas to parts of europe , as happened in 2006 and 2009 .

some countries in eastern europe , which are in some cases almost exclusively reliant on russian gas imports , have been particularly susceptible to these fluctuations .

ongoing russian aggression in ukraine has not resulted in a cutoff of natural gas supplies to europe , but has nevertheless revived questions about russian reliability .

in response to past supply cutoffs and the potential for future energy supply interruptions , european leaders , sometimes with the support of the united states , have sought to increase their energy security by exploring supply diversification options .

a key eu response in this regard has been the so - called southern strategy or southern corridor to transport natural gas from the caspian region and central asia .

although the long - time centerpiece of this strategy , the proposed nabucco natural gas pipeline , is no longer considered a commercially viable project , it has been replaced by the planned smaller - scale trans - anatolian natural gas pipeline ( tanap ) , which would connect to the trans adriatic pipeline ( tap ) , which goes from the turkish border through greece and albania , and ends in italy .

a second aspect of europe's energy security policies involves europe's own fragmented internal energy market .

in 2011 , european heads of state pledged to complete the integration and liberalization of the internal european energy market by 2014 ; ensure all european member states are connected to a europe - wide energy supply grid by 2015 ; boost energy efficiency throughout europe ; and better coordinate external energy policies .

these goals were reinforced in early 2015 , with the adoption of a proposal for a new eu "energy union" ( discussed below ) .

european leaders hope that further market liberalization and interconnection of electric grids and pipelines will , among other things , allow member states to share and trade energy more flexibly than at present , mitigating the impact of supply interruptions and overdependence on a single supplier .

although european countries have generally supported the goal of supply diversification , some governments have continued to enhance energy ties with russia , including by seeking to develop new supply routes that bypass countries such as ukraine .

at various times , u.s. policymakers and critics of russian energy policy have argued that such actions could undermine development of a unified european diversification strategy .

a key enhancement of european - russian energy ties was the construction of the nord stream pipeline , which directly connects russia and germany , russia's largest importer .

russia has also announced the turkish stream pipeline , across the black sea , connecting russia to turkey at its border with europe .

the stated goal of turkish stream is to supply natural gas to europe , not turkey .

while these pipeline projects bypass transit states such as ukraine and belarus , they also bypass eu member states like poland and lithuania that are more critical of russian policies .

the russian - backed projects are also widely seen as rivals to other pipelines supported by the eu .

the opening of nord stream in 2012 and the proposal for turkish stream highlight challenges europe faces in diversifying its natural gas supplies: russia has demonstrated a willingness to go to great lengths to maintain its hold on european market share of natural gas .

however , while some european countries , germany included , maintain that projects such as nord stream enhance european energy security by providing alternate routes for russian supplies , a number of eu member states , including poland and lithuania , opposed nord stream and have questioned russia's reliability as an energy supplier .

critics tend to argue , for example , that projects like nord stream could give moscow additional political and economic leverage in its dealings with countries that have been bypassed by the pipeline .

gazprom and a consortium of european companies , including e.on of germany , shell , omv of austria , basf / wintershall of germany , and engie of france , have proposed an expansion of nord stream .

despite its dependence on russian natural gas , some analysts argue that europe is well positioned geographically to benefit from recent changes in global natural gas development .

since the advent of shale gas in the united states , the world appears to be potentially awash in natural gas .

a 2011 study commissioned by the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) showed that technically recoverable shale gas resources worldwide may exceed current global natural gas reserves .

other key developments and possible alternatives to russian natural gas are outlined below: north africa's large gas supplies could pose a credible partial alternative to russian natural gas supplies .

however , political upheaval has heightened uncertainty about the viability of needed investments and the reliability of supplies .

both libya and egypt have large natural gas reserves , but production and exports have been hampered by domestic policies and unrest , and while egypt has just made a new large natural gas discovery , it began importing lng in 2015 to meet domestic needs .

algeria , the largest exporter of natural gas in north africa and the third - largest supplier to europe behind russia and norway , may also hold large volumes of undeveloped shale gas in addition to substantial conventional reserves .

a terrorist attack and ensuing hostage crisis at a natural gas facility in algeria in january 2013 highlighted security concerns that could present a key obstacle to further development of these resources , however .

the caspian region may hold the greatest potential for new natural gas supplies for europe , but currently supplies in central asia must transit russia to arrive in the european market .

the delays in expanding and fully developing southern corridor natural gas pipelines to europe , including trans - caspian links , have caused central asian countries to look east rather than west to bypass russia and open new markets .

liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports pose an additional alternative to russian natural gas .

in 2014 , lng comprised almost 12% of the eu's natural gas imports and 11% of its consumption .

the eu has lng import capacity to meet its peak winter demand for natural gas , but during most of the year the facilities are underutilized .

nevertheless , some countries are considering building additional lng import terminals to diversify their sources of natural gas , eg , lithuania , which opened its lng import terminal at the end of 2014 .

in addition to lng import terminals , the eu could benefit from strategically located natural gas storage facilities in order to manage import capacity during non - peak periods , as well as more pipeline interconnections to move natural gas where it is needed .

eu officials have identified both improvements as priorities and they are being pursued , but not without some difficulty .

the prospect of significant u.s. lng exports may pose an opportunity for the united states to play a bigger role in european energy security and global natural gas markets .

the united states is to begin exporting liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from the lower - 48 states at the end of 2015 .

the sabine pass liquefaction project , which is located in cameron parish , la , and owned by houston - based cheniere energy , is scheduled to begin operations in december 2015 .

contracts for initial production have been signed for capacity at the terminal with bg group ( based in the united kingdom but now owned by royal dutch shell ) , gas natural fenoso ( spain ) , kogas ( south korea ) , and gail ( india ) , with future capacity contracted with total ( france ) and centrica ( united kingdom ) .

although contracts have been signed with european companies , there is a likelihood that most of those exports will head to asia , which tends to pay the highest prices for lng .

additionally , u.s. lng contracts do not include an oil - indexed formula , which could pressure other countries , including russia , to follow suit .

russian companies , including state - controlled natural gas giant gazprom , have adamantly defended oil - indexed natural gas prices .

two regions — central asia and north africa — hold great potential to produce more natural gas than they currently do , and given the proximity of both to europe ( see figure 4 ) offer possible alternatives to russian supplies .

as noted above , central asia has been a focus of u.s. and european efforts to provide europe an alternative to russia for natural gas through the southern corridor .

north africa already has multiple pipelines to europe and lng export terminals .

the main issue for this region is whether the mena nations , with existing reserves and infrastructure , can increase production and delivery of additional supplies to europe .

there has been tremendous growth in lng liquefaction over the last few years , mainly in qatar , and more capacity is projected to be added by industry .

even the united states has multiple proposed lng liquefaction projects at various stages of regulatory approval .

the addition of more liquefaction capacity could provide the eu with other alternative suppliers even though their ability to use lng is currently constrained by a lack of infrastructure .

there are alternatives to russian natural gas for europe to choose from , but it would be difficult , if not impractical , for europe to consider replacing all russian natural gas imports .

some eu countries and companies also appear reluctant to shift significantly from the status quo .

some of europe's larger natural gas companies have major financial interests in maintaining russian supplies and do not see a problem in depending so much on russia .

russia not only holds the largest supplies of natural gas globally , but already has significant infrastructure connecting its resources to europe , while some of the alternatives remain constrained .

a major test for the eu in developing a more coherent energy policy could be how to balance these views with those of member states that are highly dependent on russian energy and are concerned by the leverage russia could exert on parts of europe if no alternatives are found to alleviate at least some of that dependence .

although supplying natural gas to europe from the caspian region and central asia has been a goal of multiple u.s .

administrations and the eu , it is far from being achieved in volumes significant to counter russian exports .

some observers view the fact that the state department has not appointed a new special envoy for eurasian energy since early 2012 as one indication of the administration's waning interest in the southern corridor natural gas effort .

in addition , given the interest in combating climate change both in europe and in some quarters of the united states , some analysts believe that increasing the flow of caspian natural gas to china , where pipelines already exists , could have greater benefits .

in this view , chinese natural gas imports could help reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions by , for instance , limiting the use of coal in china's electric power sector .

in north africa , the ongoing turmoil in libya and the evolving government in egypt are key factors for natural gas development .

both countries have large natural gas resources , but historical political constraints have limited the development of these resources .

the united states and europe are in a position to aid both countries in reforming their regulatory regimes governing natural gas development as well as establishing oversight by non - governmental organizations and their respective parliaments .

and u.s. and european energy companies seem eager to help further develop energy infrastructure and production in both countries .

redirecting u.s. and european efforts from central asia to mena as an alternative to russian natural gas supplies could improve the chances of more natural gas reaching europe in the short run .

meanwhile , new discoveries in the eastern mediterranean pose a potential new source of european natural gas .

however , neither israel nor cyprus has any experience in developing large scale natural gas projects .

both countries could benefit from the u.s. and european experience in developing their resources , both on a federal and state level .

