u.s. employers in various industries argue that they need to hire foreign workers to perform low - skilled jobs .

a threshold question about importing temporary lower - skilled workers , sometimes referred to as guest workers , is whether u.s. employers need foreign workers for lower - skilled positions , or whether there is a sufficient number of available u.s. workers who could fill these jobs .

this question gains salience in times of high u.s. unemployment .

the issue of whether u.s. employers need foreign workers is often stated in terms of whether there are domestic labor shortages in particular industries and occupations .

questions about the existence of labor shortages are difficult to answer definitively because of various factors .

the issue of labor shortages in seasonal agriculture , in particular , has been a longstanding concern and is receiving renewed attention .

the farm labor shortage issue , however , is surrounded by many unanswered questions , including the following: would more u.s. workers be willing to become farm workers if wages were raised and the terms of work were changed ? .

if so , would such wage and other changes make the u.s. agricultural industry uncompetitive in the world marketplace ? .

alternatively , would there be an adequate supply of authorized u.s. farm workers if new technologies were developed and implemented ? .

in the past , guest workers have been imported to address u.s. worker shortages during times of war .

during world war i , for example , tens of thousands of mexican workers performed mainly agricultural labor as part of a temporary worker program .

the controversial bracero program , which began during world war ii and lasted until 1964 , brought several million mexican agricultural workers into the united states .

at its peak in the late 1950s , the bracero program employed more than 400,000 mexican workers annually .

today , the united states imports guest workers in much smaller numbers to perform temporary agricultural and nonagricultural labor .

in current guest worker programs , issues of need for foreign workers are addressed on an individual basis through a process of labor certification .

guest worker programs remain controversial .

some view them as a necessary source of legal workers and call for their reform and expansion .

others view them , in their current form , as "inherently abusive" and argue that if they are to be allowed to continue operating , they must be thoroughly overhauled .

this report discusses existing visa programs for temporary lower - skilled workers , including regulatory changes since 2008 .

it covers legislative efforts to reform current programs and to create new guest worker visas .

it further identifies and explores key policy considerations to help inform congressional action on guest worker programs .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 , as amended , enumerates categories of aliens , known as nonimmigrants , who are admitted to the united states for a temporary period of time and a specific purpose .

nonimmigrant visa categories are identified by letters and numbers , based on the sections of the ina that established them .

among the major nonimmigrant visa categories is the "h" category for temporary workers .

the h category includes h - 2a and h - 2b visas for guest workers , as well as visas for higher - skilled temporary workers .

foreign nationals can also perform lower - skilled temporary work on certain other nonimmigrant visas .

policy discussions about guest worker programs necessarily involve consideration of unauthorized workers , who have traditionally performed lower - skilled work in a variety of industries .

it is widely believed that most unauthorized aliens enter and remain in the united states in order to work .

the pew hispanic center ( center ) , which regularly analyzes data and issues reports on the unauthorized alien population in the united states , has estimated that there were 8.0 million unauthorized workers in the u.s. civilian labor force in march 2010 .

these unauthorized workers accounted for 5.2% of the civilian labor force .

since the 1990s , a variety of legislative proposals have been put forth concerning guest workers .

some proposals would reform existing programs , while others would establish new guest worker programs for agricultural and nonagricultural workers .

over the years , some proposals have been introduced in congress as stand - alone bills , while others have been part of larger comprehensive immigration reform measures .

recently , congressional interest in the area of guest worker programs has been focused mainly on temporary agricultural workers .

this focus stems , in part , from concerns of members of congress that legislative efforts to make e - verify or another electronic employment eligibility verification system mandatory , as discussed above , would lead to agricultural worker shortages .

generally speaking , as discussed above , guest worker programs try to achieve two goals simultaneously: to be responsive to legitimate employer needs for labor and to provide adequate protections for u.s. and foreign temporary workers .

dol explicitly addressed the idea of balancing the needs of employers and workers in its 2011 proposed rule on the h - 2b visa ( the precursor to the 2012 final rule ) .

supplementary information accompanying the 2011 proposal stated: although the department still seeks to maintain an efficient system , it has in this new rule struck a balance between reducing processing times and protecting u.s. worker access to these job opportunities .

the balancing of broad guest worker program goals is reflected , in practice , in the particular provisions that proposals include on a range of component policy considerations , such as program administration , the labor market test , and wages , among others .

the following discussion focuses on the h - 2a and h - 2b programs and related legislative proposals .

it also references the j - 1 swt program , which provides participating employers with seasonal labor but , as noted above , is not characterized as a temporary worker program under immigration law .

for many years , there has been broad dissatisfaction with existing guest worker programs and periodic activity to enact reform .

the last time congress considered significant reform to lower - skilled temporary worker programs , it did so in the context of comprehensive immigration reform legislation , in which guest worker programs were an ancillary focus .

today's discussions about possible guest worker reform are focused more squarely on the programs themselves and on the needs of employers and workers .

the tension between these often competing needs lies at the core of the debate about how to proceed with reform .

the h - 2a and h - 2b regulations issued by the george w. bush administration and the obama administration reflect very different views about how to balance employer and worker needs , as do recent legislative proposals .

it would seem , however , that in the current environment some type of compromise on employer and worker needs — in the policy areas highlighted here and / or in other areas — may be essential to achieving significant guest worker reform legislatively .

appendix a. dol h - 2a and h - 2b labor certifications by state appendix b. dol h - 2b labor certifications by occupation in fy2010 , dol approved 3,726 h - 2b labor certification applications .

for these applications , dol approved requests for a total of 86,596 h - 2b positions .

a majority of h - 2b requests certified by dol are for workers in a few occupations .

table b - 1 shows that in fy2010 , 64.0% of certified requests were for 10 occupations .

one occupation , landscape laborer , accounted for 26.8% of the total number of workers certified .

appendix c. h - 2a and h - 2b visa issuances appendix d. dhs and dol regulations on h - 2a and h - 2b nonimmigrants and their employment in the united states h - 2a regulations: dhs the 2008 dhs final rule on the h - 2a visa made various changes to prior regulations .

it modified previous limitations on an h - 2a worker's period of stay in the united states .

under prior regulations , an h - 2a worker who had spent three years in the united states had to remain outside the country for six months before he or she could again be granted h - 2a status .

the dhs rule reduced this waiting period to three months .

the dhs h - 2a rule extended the period of time from 10 days to 30 days that an h - 2a worker could remain in the united states after the h - 2a petition expired in order to prepare to depart or to seek an extension of stay based on a subsequent job offer .

in another change , the dhs rule allowed an h - 2a worker who was awaiting an extension of stay based on a petition filed by a new employer ( and accompanied by an approved labor certification ) to begin the new job before the extension of stay was granted , provided that the new employer was a registered user in good standing of e - verify , the electronic employment verification system administered by uscis .

the dhs rule also established new requirements under the h - 2a program .

it instituted a prohibition on payments by prospective h - 2a workers to employers , recruiters , or other employment service providers where the payments are a condition of obtaining h - 2a employment .

in addition , the dhs rule limited participation in the h - 2a program to nationals of countries designated annually by dhs , with the concurrence of dos .

h - 2a regulations: dol the 2010 dol rule on the h - 2a visa reversed key changes to the h - 2a labor certification process made by the 2008 rule , while retaining other changes made by that earlier rule .

the 2010 rule reinstated the type of supervised labor certification process that had been in place prior to the 2008 rule's establishment of an attestation - based certification process .

under the 2010 rule , a prospective h - 2a employer must submit a job order to the state workforce agency ( swa ) serving the area of intended employment before filing a labor certification application .

the job order has to be submitted between 60 and 75 days before the employer's date of need for workers , and it has to include the job qualifications and requirements as well as the required minimum benefit and wage provisions .

either the swa or dol can require the employer to submit documentation in support of any job qualification specified in the job offer .

once reviewed and cleared by the swa , the job order becomes the basis for recruiting u.s. workers to fill the employer's job openings .

the employer then must file a labor certification application with dol at least 45 days before the date of need .

the 2010 rule further required dol to establish an electronic registry of h - 2a jobs and to post the job order on the registry once the labor certification application was accepted .

as part of the labor certification process , h - 2a employers have to offer and provide required wages and benefits to h - 2a workers and workers in corresponding employment .

the 2010 rule redefined corresponding employment for h - 2a purposes as the employment of non - h - 2a workers by an employer who has an approved h - 2a labor certification in any work included in the job order or in any agricultural work performed by the h - 2a workers .

with respect to wages , the 2010 dol rule amended existing regulations to require h - 2a employers to pay their workers the highest of four wage rates: the federal or applicable state minimum wage , the prevailing wage rate , the adverse effect wage rate ( aewr ) , or the agreed - upon collective bargaining wage .

the 2010 rule reversed changes made by the 2008 rule to the methodology for calculating the aewr .

it reinstated the wage requirements in effect prior to the 2008 rule , with the addition of the collective bargaining wage .

explaining the addition of the collective bargaining wage , the 2010 rule stated: this amendment requires employers to use a collective bargaining wage if it is the highest wage , thus avoiding the potential payment of a collective bargaining wage that is less than the other wages .

at the same time , it acknowledges the role of the collectively bargained wage as a potential legitimate wage .

the 2010 rule also reinstated the fifty - percent rule in its pre - 2008 rule form .

the fifty - percent rule requires an h - 2a employer to hire any qualified u.s. worker who applies for a position until 50% of the period of the work contract under which the h - 2a workers are employed has elapsed .

the 2008 rule took initial steps to phase out this requirement .

h - 2b regulations: dhs dhs's 2008 rule on the h - 2b visa revised prior regulations in various ways .

it changed the definition of temporary employment for h - 2b purposes to require the prospective h - 2b employer to establish that his or her need for the worker would end in the "near , definable future. .

while the 2008 rule stated , as did the prior regulation , that the employer's need will generally be for a period of one year or less , it also provided that in the case of a one - time occurrence , the employer's need could last up to three years .

the dol final rule discussed above further clarified that except in the case of a one - time occurrence , an h - 2b labor certification application based on an employer's need lasting more than 10 months would be denied , absent unusual circumstances .

dhs's 2008 h - 2b rule further amended prior regulations to require that an employer have an approved labor certification before the employer could submit a petition for h - 2b workers .

previously , an employer whose h - 2b labor certification application was denied by dol could submit an h - 2b petition to dhs containing countervailing evidence .

in response to this new requirement for an approved certification , dol established an appeals process in cases of h - 2b labor certification denials .

other changes to dhs's h - 2b regulations mirrored changes to its h - 2a regulations .

the h - 2b rule , like the h - 2a rule , reduced from six months to three months the amount of time that a worker who had spent three years in the united states had to remain outside the country before he or she could again be granted h - 2b status .

the dhs h - 2b rule instituted a prohibition on payments by prospective h - 2b workers to employers , recruiters , or other employment service providers where the payments are a condition of obtaining h - 2b employment .

dhs's h - 2b rule also limited participation in the h - 2b program to nationals of countries to be designated annually by dhs , with the concurrence of dos .

h - 2b regulations: dol the 2012 rule discussed here is not in effect , as described above .

the h - 2b program is currently operating under the 2008 dol final rule issued by the bush administration .

the 2012 dol rule reversed changes made to the h - 2b labor certification process under the 2008 rule and reinstituted a certification - based model .

it also bifurcated the labor certification application process into distinct registration and application phases and revised application timetables .

under the 2012 final rule , dol must assess an employer's temporary need for h - 2b workers in the registration phase .

a prospective h - 2b employer is required to submit an h - 2b registration 120 days to 150 days before the initial date of need for workers and must receive registration approval before filing a labor certification application .

a registration approval could be valid for up to three years .

the labor market test is administered by dol in the subsequent application phase to determine whether u.s. workers are available to fill the job opportunities .

under the 2008 rule , dol made simultaneous determinations on temporary need and the labor market test .

under the 2012 rule , the employer must file the labor certification application and the job order 75 to 90 days before the date of need .

the swa is required to keep the job order open and continue referring u.s. workers for the job opportunity until 21 days before the date of the employer's need .

under the 2008 rule , the swa had to keep the job order open for at least 10 days .

under the 2012 dol h - 2b rule , the electronic job registry that was created for posting h - 2a job orders was expanded to include h - 2b job orders .

under the rule , once dol accepts the labor certification application , the job order is posted on the online registry .

the 2012 final rule made a variety of other changes to the h - 2b labor certification process .

the 2008 regulations provided that , except in cases of a one - time occurrence , labor certification applications with a period of employer need of more than 10 months would generally be denied .

in the 2012 final rule , dol shortened this maximum period to nine months , maintaining that this new maximum "definitively establishes the temporariness of the position , as there is an entire season in which there is simply no need for the worker ( s ) . .

along similar lines , the 2012 rule limited the participation of job contractors in the h - 2b program to cases in which they can demonstrate their own temporary need for workers , not that of their employer - clients .

in addition , the 2012 rule required employers to provide workers engaged in corresponding employment with at least the same protections , wages , and benefits as those provided to h - 2b workers .

corresponding employment , as defined under the rule , included , with some exceptions , employment of non - h - 2b workers performing substantially the same work included in the job order or substantially the same work performed by h - 2b workers .

under the 2008 regulations , this "equal treatment" requirement was limited to workers hired in connection with an h - 2b labor certification application during the prescribed recruitment period .

furthermore , the 2012 final rule required employers to pay or reimburse workers for transportation and visa costs , and to offer a three - fourths guarantee similar to that under the h - 2a program , in which h - 2b employers must guarantee payment of wages for at least three - fourths of the contract period .

appendix e. h - 2b wage requirements dol h - 2b wage rule chronology on october 5 , 2010 , dol issued proposed regulations to change the methodology for determining the prevailing wage for h - 2b workers .

dol issued a final rule on january 19 , 2011 .

the effective date of the final rule was january 1 , 2012 .

a court ruling invalidated the january 1 , 2012 , effective date .

therefore , on june 28 , 2011 , dol issued a proposed rule to change the effective date of the new wage methodology .

on august 1 , 2011 , dol issued a final rule setting september 30 , 2011 , as the effective date for the new wage methodology .

in response to two lawsuits that sought to prevent the implementation of the new wage methodology , dol announced on september 28 , 2011 , that it was postponing the effective date of the new wage rule for 60 days , until november 30 , 2011 .

on november 18 , 2011 , the president signed h.r .

2112 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-55 ) .

the bill stated that dol could not use funds appropriated by the act to "implement , administer , or enforce" the new wage methodology before january 1 , 2012 .

the bill did not prevent the new wage methodology from going into effect as planned on november 30 .

dol determined , however , that if the new wage methodology went into effect , it would not be able to issue wage determinations .

accordingly , the department delayed the effective date of the new methodology until january 1 , 2012 .

on december 23 , 2011 , the president signed h.r .

2055 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

the act prevented dol from using funds provided by the act "to implement" the new wage methodology for the remainder of fy2012 .

in response , dol announced that it was postponing the effective date of the new wage methodology until october 1 , 2012 .

on september 28 , 2012 , the president signed h.j.res .

117 , the continuing appropriations resolution , 2013 ( p.l .

112-175 ) .

the act prohibits dol from using funds to implement the new wage methodology until march 27 , 2013 .

in response , dol announced that it was postponing the effective date of the new wage methodology until march 27 , 2013 .

comparison of wage methodology under current and new dol regulations table e - 1 compares the wage methodology under the current and new regulations for determining the prevailing wage for h - 2b workers .

the last column of the table identifies some of the changes that may affect the wages of h - 2b workers .

wage rates under current methodology under current regulations , dol uses data from its occupational employment statistics ( oes ) survey to provide four wage rates based on the level of education , experience , and supervision that the employer requires for the job .

these four skill levels are labeled level i , ii , iii , and iv .

the level i and iv wage levels ( hourly and annual ) are estimated by dol's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) directly from oes wage data .

the level i wage is the average wage for the bottom third of the earnings distribution .

the level iv wage is the average of the top two - thirds of the earnings distribution .

the level ii and level iii wages are calculated from the level i and iv wages .

to illustrate the four wage levels , assume that the level i and level iv hourly wages estimated from oes wage data are $10.00 and $22.00 , respectively .

the difference between the level iv and level i wage is $12.00 .

dividing this difference by three and adding the result to the level i wage yields a level ii wage of $14.00 ( i.e. , $12.00 ÷ 3 = $4.00 .

$10.00 + $4.00 = $14.00 ) .

subtracting the result from the level iv wage yields a level iii wage of $18.00 ( i.e. , $22.00 - $4.00 = $18.00 ) .

