under programs administered by the department of transportation's ( dot's ) federal highway administration ( fhwa ) , certain highway and bridge projects may be eligible to receive federal - aid funding .

as a condition of receiving those funds , a project sponsor ( eg , a local or state transportation agency ) must meet certain standards and requirements applicable to activities completed at every stage of project development .

although the names of those stages may vary somewhat from state to state , those stages generally include initial project planning , preliminary design / engineering and environmental review , final design and rights - of - way acquisition , construction , and facility operation and maintenance .

each stage of project development is initiated and completed largely at the state or local level , with fhwa having ultimate responsibility for ensuring that individual projects comply with requirements applicable to federal - aid highways .

also , each development stage involves a range of activities that will affect the time it takes to deliver the project .

required elements of the preliminary design and environmental review stage will vary by project , but generally include processes necessary to identify and demonstrate compliance with environmental requirements applicable to that project .

when there is debate over the time it takes to complete federally funded highway projects , particularly debate over activities that may expedite or delay project delivery , various elements of the environmental review stage of project development have been the focus of attention .

however , whether or the degree to which elements of that process may delay projects is unclear .

the two most recent laws authorizing dot programs included requirements intended to expedite the environmental review process that focused primarily on procedures necessary to demonstrate compliance with the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§4321 et seq. ) .

current legislation to authorize dot programs in the house and the senate ( the american energy and infrastructure jobs act of 2012 ( h.r .

7 ) and moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century ( map - 21 ; s. 1813 ) ) also include provisions intended to expedite project delivery that focus primarily on the nepa process .

despite the focus on the nepa process , it is unclear whether or how changes to that process would result in faster highway project delivery .

available evidence regarding potential causes of project delays associated with environmental compliance is largely anecdotal and specific to unique , individual projects .

still , that evidence , while limited , points to issues or requirements apart from nepa as more common causes of project delays .

this report identifies issues relevant to the debate over the role of the environmental review process in transportation project delivery .

it identifies social and environmental issues that led congress to enact the range of requirements that now make up the environmental review process , as well as selected requirements applicable to its implementation ( particularly nepa requirements ) .

the report also identifies complexities in tying the environmental review process to federal - aid highway project delivery time .

in particular , it identifies issues that make it difficult to determine the time it takes to complete the project development process , in general , or individual stages of development ( eg , activities related explicitly to environmental reviews ) ; or to identify root causes of project delays tied to specific elements of the environmental review process .

this report also discusses various approaches identified by transportation stakeholders as those that have expedited the environmental review process and overall project delivery .

information and issues in this report were selected to help members of congress and their staff understand the nepa compliance process as well as additional environmental compliance requirements that may be affected by h.r .

7 and map - 21 .

discussion of specific legislation is provided separately in crs report r42445 , surface transportation reauthorization legislation in the 112 th congress: map - 21 and h.r .

7 , major provisions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

activities that may take place during the environmental review process and how that process is implemented will vary from project to project , from state to state .

the environmental review process does not involve compliance with a single federal compliance requirement .

it involves processes necessary to demonstrate compliance with a potentially wide array of requirements applicable to projects approved under the federal - aid highways program .

broadly , for federally funded highway projects , it involves two separate , but related processes — preparing appropriate documentation required under nepa ; and identifying and demonstrating compliance with any additional state , tribal , or federal environmental requirements applicable to that project .

for a given project , how nepa and other environmental compliance requirements must be demonstrated will largely depend on the degree to which the proposed project would have adverse effects on communities , natural or cultural resources ( eg , wetlands , endangered species habitat , historic sites , parks , or recreation areas ) , or special status land ( eg , farmland , floodplains , or coastal zones ) .

compliance with those requirements may include obtaining a permit , approval , study , or some level of analysis or consultation from an agency outside dot .

nepa was intended , in part , to ensure that federal agencies would consider the environmental impacts of an action among other factors ( eg , economic or community benefits ) in the federal decision - making process .

nepa has two primary aims — to assure that federal agencies consider the environmental effects of their actions before proceeding with them and to involve the public in the decision - making process .

nepa does not require an agency to elevate environmental concerns above other factors in the overall federal decision - making process .

if the adverse environmental effects of a proposed action are adequately identified and evaluated , an agency is not constrained by nepa from deciding that other project benefits outweigh the environmental costs and moving forward with the action .

in contrast , other requirements applicable to federal - aid highways may dictate or somehow affect the outcome of a project decision .

for example , other federal laws may require the selected project alternative to be the one with the least impact to a particular resource , prohibit fhwa approval of a project alternative that uses certain resources , require certain mitigation measures to limit a project's impacts , or require that certain activities take place in accordance with certain criteria ( eg , as specified in a permit or approval ) .

to understand why a complex array of requirements may apply to highway projects , it is useful to understand the social and environmental concerns that led congress to enact the various laws that now form the framework of the environmental review process .

each requirement included within that process represents past efforts by congress to minimize adverse impacts from federally funded highway projects or to minimize adverse impacts to certain communities or resources that congress identified as needing some level of protection .

the current debate over the environmental review process frequently centers around the effect that completion of that process has on project delivery .

the debate rarely recognizes the issues that led congress to enact the requirements that now make up that process .

requirements included within the environmental review process , and procedures to demonstrate compliance with them , have evolved over the past 50 years .

however , many of the requirements that are subject to particular scrutiny today were enacted between 1966 and 1972 .

during the 1950s and 1960s , the public was becoming increasingly aware of and concerned about the impacts that human activity were having on the environment .

increasing attention turned to the effect that federally funded programs and projects were having on the human , cultural , and natural environment .

one federal program that generated particular concern was the development and construction of the interstate highway system .

the federal - aid highway act of 1956 ( p.l .

84-627 ) authorized and provided revenue sources for the construction of the national system of interstate and defense highways ( commonly known as the interstate highway system , interstate system , or the interstate ) .

the interstate system is a network of limited - access roads including freeways , highways , and expressways forming part of the national highway system of the united states .

construction of the interstate system took approximately 35 years and resulted in a network of roads and bridges that currently includes over 45,000 miles of rural highways , suburban and urban freeways , and bridges .

although the connection of rural , urban , and suburban communities resulted in a host of economic and cultural benefits , construction of the interstate system also brought certain adverse impacts to both the human and natural environment .

those impacts were seen particularly in the construction of the urban freeways .

planning for such projects often involved locating freeways within available open space or where land acquisition costs were relatively low .

"available open space" often meant historic sites , parks , or recreation areas .

adverse impacts to those resources from highway projects drew increased attention from newly formed stakeholder groups with an interest in environmental protection and historic preservation .

project planning that involved lower land acquisition costs often meant property acquisitions in densely populated , working - class or high - poverty neighborhoods .

resulting urban freeway projects had a disproportionate impact on the urban poor .

one such example involved a segment of i - 95 north of miami .

the route selected by local transportation officials cut through the inner - city community of overtown , a once - thriving african - american community known as the "harlem of the south. .

a 2009 fhwa report discussing lessons learned in complying with environmental requirements describes the project as follows: in 1957 , the overtown community was almost decimated by the development of the i - 95 and i - 395 freeways .

the constructed roadway had a disastrous impact on the economic and social structure of the community .

the community continues to shoulder the lingering effects of those negative impacts , and as a result there is also persistent anger towards and distrust of [the florida department of transportation] .

opposition to other urban freeway projects led to "freeway revolts" spearheaded by newly established environmental and social justice groups .

freeway revolts took place in cities like baltimore , boston , los angeles , new orleans , new york , reno , and san francisco .

as a result , a significant number of projects were abandoned or significantly scaled back due to widespread public opposition , especially by those whose neighborhoods would be disrupted or who would displaced by the proposed freeways .

by the mid to late 1960s , congress began to enact legislation intended to address the growing public concern over projects implemented under the federal - aid highways program .

during that period , congress also enacted legislation in response to increasing awareness and concern over the impacts of all federal actions — not just federal highway projects .

also during the 1960s and into the 1970s congress began to enact a wide range of laws intended to identify , prohibit , control , or mitigate adverse impacts of human activities to specific community , natural , or cultural resources that congress identified as in need of certain protection .

this report identifies and summarizes requirements that have been identified as those most commonly applicable to federally funded highway projects .

the individual requirements discussed above were enacted by congress after a particular concern arose or need was identified .

for an individual project , several requirements involving similar compliance directives could apply .

for example , depending on its impacts , a project may be subject to different public hearing or notification requirements under separate federal regulatory or statutory requirements .

the environmental review process is intended to function as the mechanism under which potentially duplicative requirements are identified and coordinated ( including duplicative state or tribal requirements ) .

specifically , it is dot policy that , to the fullest extent possible , any investigation , review , and consultation necessary to demonstrate environmental compliance be coordinated as a single process .

the environmental review process is that single process .

it forms the framework under which all applicable compliance requirements intended to protect the human , natural , or cultural environment are identified and demonstrated .

further , the nepa compliance process forms the framework for completing the environmental review process .

in the past , suggestions made by transportation stakeholders to expedite project delivery , as well as legislative options proposed by some members of congress , have focused on requirements established specifically under nepa .

however , examples of individual projects delayed by environmental requirements more often involve issues associated with environmental compliance obligations established under separate state or federal requirements .

in identifying and determining the potential effectiveness of nationally applicable approaches to expedite the environmental review process , it is necessary to distinguish between what is required explicitly under nepa versus other federal environmental requirements .

to understand how the environmental review process may affect project delivery , it is useful to understand how the process fits into overall project development , as well as the challenges associated with measuring each stage of that development .

it is also useful to recognize root causes of delay in completing the environmental review process , as well as how the process can lead to more efficient project development .

there is little debate that delays in transportation project delivery can result in higher project costs , as well as delay potential positive economic advantages such as bringing project - related jobs to the community .

also , it is known that completing the environmental review process takes time , sometimes years for complex , major projects .

meeting environmental compliance requirements may result in project delays or , at least , a project taking longer than anticipated by its sponsor .

however , what is unclear is whether or what specific elements of the environmental review process routinely delay project delivery .

the time it takes to complete the nepa process is often the focus of debate over project delays attributable to the environmental review process .

however , the influence of environmental requirements established under title 23 and other federal law call into question the degree to which changes in the nepa process will expedite the environmental reviews and accelerate project delivery .

further , although there are no comprehensive data and available information tends to be anecdotal , when delays in the environmental review process have been identified , they primarily stemmed from local or project - specific issues ( eg , project complexity , changes in state priorities , or late changes in project scope ) .

regardless of potential changes to the nepa process or the overall environmental review process , local factors will strongly influence project delivery time .

state or local decision makers will continue to have the most significant influence on project delivery in their capacity to establish ( and change ) project priorities , allocate available funds , and be influenced by local controversy or project opposition .

a project's environmental review process may be efficiently executed and involve no delays in the process itself , but still take decades or never be completed if local and state issues are acting against the project .

the potential success of efforts intended to expedite the environmental review process would involve evidence that transportation projects were delivered more quickly .

however , considering the limits to measuring the time it takes to complete the environmental review process , the relative success of a particular approach may be gauged in terms of the degree to which state or local transportation agencies find it useful in meeting their environmental compliance obligations .

compared to transportation planning and project development during construction of the interstate highway system , state and local transportation agencies are more inclined to consider a project's effects on communities and resources .

apart from any potential changes to federal environmental review requirements , local and state agency decisions regarding transportation project planning , funding , and development will continue to be strongly influenced by a project's benefits and adverse effects to the environment and the community it serves .

in this report , summary information and conclusions regarding factors applicable to measuring the stages of project development , the time it takes to complete the environmental review process , and primary sources of delay or perceptions among transportation agency officials regarding causes of delay in completing the environmental review process were drawn from data included in the following surveys and studies conducted by fhwa , gao , universities , or transportation organizations: federal highway administration ( available on fhwa's "environmental toolkit: streamlining / stewardship — performance reporting" website , http: / / environment.fhwa.dot.gov / strmlng / es10measures.asp ) .

evaluating the performance of environmental streamlining: phase ii , an fhwa - commission study conducted by the louis berger group , 2003 .

fhwa surveys , reasons for eis project delays and information on timeliness on completing the nepa process .

strategies and approaches for effectively moving complex environmental documents through the eis process: a peer exchange report , prepared for fhwa by dot's john a. volpe national transportation systems center research and innovative technology administration , january 2009 .

fhwa / gallup study on implementing performance measurement in environmental streamlining , "implementing performance measurement in environmental streamlining," may 2007 .

government accountability office .

highway infrastructure: stakeholders ' views on time to conduct environmental reviews of highway projects , gao - 03-534 , may 23 , 2003 .

highway infrastructure: preliminary information on the timely completion of highway construction projects , gao - 02-1067t , september 19 , 2002 .

university and transportation organization studies .

what influences the length of time to complete nepa reviews ? .

an examination of highway projects in oregon and the potential for streamlining , by jennifer dill , center for urban studies , nohad a. toulan school of urban studies & planning , portland state university , submitted for presentation at the 85 th annual meeting of the transportation research board , november 15 , 2005 ( revised ) .

causes and extent of environmental delays in transportation projects , prepared by transtech management , inc. , for the american association of state highway and transportation officials ( aashto ) , december 2003 .

environmental streamlining: a report on delays associated with the categorical exclusion and environmental assessment processes , prepared by transtech management , inc. , for aashto , october 2000 .

