interest in a major reform of the individual income tax that would broaden the base and use the additional tax revenues to lower rates and / or reduce the deficit has increased .

the president's fiscal commission , for example , proposed an individual income tax reform with three objectives: to broaden the base and lower the rates , to contribute to deficit reduction , and to maintain or increase the progressivity of the tax system .

the fiscal commission , a bipartisan group , proposed a major revision that would eliminate or modify most tax expenditures .

the fiscal commission also proposed to use revenues to eliminate aspects of the income tax that have come under criticism , such as the alternative minimum tax .

a congressional proposal from the 112 th congress for income tax reform and base broadening was s. 727 , introduced by senators wyden , begich , and coats .

one way to broaden the tax base is to eliminate or reduce tax expenditures , which have been in the tax code since the passage of the progressive income tax in 1913 .

an understanding of four complex issues surrounding tax expenditures is necessary for an informed debate over broadening the tax base .

first , tax expenditures affect the economic behavior of taxpayers ( efficiency effects ) .

second , changing tax expenditures will change the distribution of tax benefits and the distribution of after - tax income ( equity effects ) .

third , changes to tax expenditures could change the administrative burdens on taxpayers and the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

lastly , many tax expenditures are popular among taxpayers and voters .

each one of these issues presents challenges to broadening the tax base , which could be difficult to overcome .

proposals have also been made to reform the corporate income tax , and the two reform efforts are related since changes in provisions measuring business income ( such as depreciation rules ) would likely apply in both cases .

this report , however , does not focus on corporate tax reform , which is reviewed in other reports , but a brief discussion of individual business - related provisions and their connection to corporate tax reform is included .

there are also proposals for the revision of other existing taxes ( such as the payroll tax or excise taxes ) , for transformation of the income tax into a consumption tax , or for new revenue sources , which are discussed in other reports .

is it possible to repeal or substantially trim most special tax deductions , credits , exclusions , and special rates , also known as tax expenditures ? .

if so , the potential for lower rates or additional revenue would be significant .

for fy2014 , the year used in analyzing these provisions , individual income tax expenditures , which account for most of the potential base broadening provisions , are projected to total over $1.1 trillion .

this amount is equivalent to 74% of the total fy2014 revenue from individual income taxes , and about 7% of gdp .

if used for rate reduction alone , eliminating these tax expenditures could allow tax rates to be reduced by around 43% .

for example , the top 39.6% tax rate could be reduced to about 23% .

if the additional revenue were also used to repeal the alternative minimum tax ( which would require about 16% of the revenue ) , tax rates could be reduced by almost 40% .

as developed further in this report , however , it appears unlikely that a significant fraction of this potential revenue could be realized .

experience from the last four decades suggests that major individual income tax reform is difficult to achieve .

prior to the fiscal commission study in the current obama administration , major income tax reform was addressed in the ford , reagan , and george w. bush administrations .

of the three , only the reagan administration proposal resulted in legislation , the tax reform act of 1986 .

moreover , although the 1986 act was considered a major tax reform , and made significant changes in the corporate tax , the base broadening in the individual income tax was quite limited .

this report examines large tax expenditures and considers the challenges in achieving significant base broadening , whether to finance rate reductions or other revisions to the tax code , or to reduce the deficit .

some special tax benefits may be fulfilling desirable objectives .

for example , 30% of the revenue loss of tax expenditures is from provisions directed at encouraging savings , and many policy makers and analysts believe that taxes on savings should not be increased .

other tax expenditures , such as the exclusion of capital gains on owner - occupied housing , have important economic justifications .

in addition , a number of tax expenditures , accounting for about 11% of the total revenue loss , benefit lower - income individuals , including the exclusion of benefits such as social security and medicare , the earned income credit , and the child credit .

eliminating these provisions would increase the tax burden on low - and moderate - income taxpayers .

furthermore , since many of the recipients of these tax benefits have little or no tax liability , eliminating or reducing these provisions would reduce the progressivity of the income tax system .

the reform of some tax expenditures , representing about 40% of the total revenue loss , faces serious administrative and technical barriers largely because they are in - kind benefits that cannot be easily or fairly valued ( eg , employer - provided health insurance ) .

furthermore , in the case of the reduced tax rates on capital gains , current scoring practices incorporate such large predicted behavioral responses that very little revenue would be projected to be realized .

among the remaining provisions , possibilities for revision could be limited .

for example , itemized deductions ( mortgage interest , state and local taxes , and charitable contributions ) , accounting for 20% of the total revenue loss of tax expenditures , are broadly used and are highly popular provisions ; given public attitudes towards these provisions , eliminating or significantly curtailing them may be difficult .

even narrower provisions may have important constituencies .

the results suggest that most of the revenue that could be gained by eliminating or modifying tax expenditures , as much as 90% , may be difficult to realize .

it may prove difficult to gain more than $100 billion to $150 billion in additional tax revenues through base broadening .

this additional tax revenue , however , is equivalent to about 6% to 9% of projected fy2014 individual income tax , and , consequently , would not allow for significant reductions in tax rates ( about a one or two percentage point reduction , thus reducing the top 39.6% tax rate to 37% ) .

most of the provisions that could be considered for expanding the income tax base are on the tax expenditure list produced by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) , which contains over 200 separate tax provisions .

tax expenditures are revenue losses attributable to provisions that provide a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction , or provide for a credit , preferential tax rate , or deferral of tax liability .

these provisions are measured with reference to a "normal structure" which contains graduated rates , personal exemptions , and standard deductions .

there are provisions that might be considered for base broadening but are not on the list , such as the deduction for moving expenses and for business entertainment .

similarly , while tax expenditures include the exclusion of social security , medicare , and cash public assistance from taxation , they do not include the exclusion of snap ( formerly food stamps ) or medicaid .

nevertheless , tax expenditures are a fairly good inventory of potential sources of tax base broadening .

the concept of tax expenditures was developed to highlight the point that these provisions should be considered as substitutes for direct spending .

consequently , tax expenditures are generally allocated to the functional budget categories ( national defense , international affairs , science and research , and so forth ) .

with this type of organization , a very large fraction of tax expenditures ( about 40% ) falls into the category of housing and commerce , which accounts for less than 1% of direct spending .

this organizational approach , however , can cause portions of a tax provision to appear separately in different functional categories ; an example is the deduction for charitable contributions where separate estimates for contributions to health , education , and all other recipients are made .

when using the tax expenditure list to organize potential base broadening provisions , it is more useful to classify the provisions based on the general kinds of economic behaviors they affect or the general objectives rather than by budget functional categories ( see appendix a ) .

for example , do tax expenditures reduce taxes on savings or labor earnings ? .

or do they affect consumption choices ? .

table 1 , therefore , divides tax expenditures into seven major categories: saving , business investment , consumption , owner - occupied housing ( which is a combination of an investment choice and a consumption choice ) , labor supply , government programs ( which in many cases would have no behavioral effects but are simply income transfers ) , and a category termed structural ( which provides benefits based on family circumstances rather than affecting behavior ) .

most of the consumption - related provisions fall into three major categories: health , education , and charity .

jct's revenue loss estimates were made under a current law baseline , which assumes that the bush tax cuts and the 2009 tax cuts expire as scheduled at the end of 2012 .

for each category , the estimated revenue loss of the provisions in the category is reported in the second column of table 1 , followed by the share of the total revenue loss of all tax expenditures .

the last column provides an approximate adjustment for provisions that would be reinstated if the bush tax cuts , plus provisions enacted in 2009 , were extended , although it does not account for the change in tax rates .

these calculations add back provisions in four areas: the larger and largely refundable child credit ( structural ) , education provisions , earned income credit provisions ( labor supply ) , and lower rates on dividends ( saving ) .

allocating provisions to these seven basic categories is not entirely straightforward .

for example , since owner - occupied housing is both an investment and consumption good , owner - occupied housing subsidies increase the return on investment in housing and reduce the cost of the consumption of housing .

many of the provisions relating to saving and consumption are in the form of an exclusion of employer provided benefits ( pensions and health insurance ) and thus affect labor supply as well as the return to savings or the cost of health spending .

the exclusion of health insurance , for example , is classified under health rather than labor supply because the provision primarily changes the amount spent on health .

the government programs category essentially involves moving money from one pocket to another since direct spending by the government on benefits could replace tax subsidies , although some programs relate to other categories such as savings ( eg , tax exempt bond interest ) and health ( eg , exclusion of medicare ) .

however , the property tax deduction is included in owner - occupied housing , which is consistent with viewing the owner - occupied housing provisions as relating to investment .

savings and business provisions that reduce the tax on the return to capital add up to almost a third of the cost of tax expenditures .

if owner - occupied housing ( which could also be viewed as an investment ) is also included , then the share is almost half ( 44% ) .

many believe the tax burden on capital income should be lowered or eliminated , which could present a challenge to an income tax reform that eliminates or modifies these provisions .

in contrast , provisions that reduce the tax on labor income , without being tied to specific use of that income , account for a much smaller share of the total , even though overall capital income is about a third the size of labor income .

the earned income credit accounts for about two - thirds of the labor supply category .

there are over 200 separate tax expenditures , but the cost is highly concentrated in a relatively small number .

table 2 shows the 20 largest tax expenditures , the category , and the amount and share of the total .

two expenditures , the exclusion of employee health insurance and the exclusion of pensions contributions and earnings , account for a quarter of the total cost .

the top five , adding the mortgage interest deduction , the exclusion of medicare , and the lower capital gains tax rates , account for close to 50% of the total cost , and the top 10 account for 70% .

the top 20 expenditures account for almost 90% of the total cost of all tax expenditures .

table 3 shows the largest 20 tax expenditures after adding back the provisions of the 2001-2003 bush tax cuts and the 2009 tax cuts that are expiring at the end of 2012 .

the child credit ( which would more than double ) moves from the 18 th - largest expenditure to the 9 th , with its share rising from 1.2% to 4.4% .

the lower rate for dividends is now the 19 th - largest expenditure and replaces the exclusion for income earned abroad .

tax expenditures are sometimes criticized because they are viewed as distorting behavior and leading to economic inefficiency .

if the provision , however , addresses a market failure or is otherwise justified by meeting economic policy goals , then that is an argument against reducing or eliminating the provision in income tax reform proposals .

tax expenditures in each of the seven categories are examined in terms of their effects on economic efficiency .

tax expenditures have often been described as having an "upside - down" subsidy feature — that is , higher - income taxpayers benefit to a greater extent than lower - income taxpayers from tax expenditures because of the progressive nature of the income tax system .

the upside - down subsidy is because a taxpayer in the 35% tax bracket receives a 35 cent tax reduction if their taxable income is reduced by $1 while a taxpayer in the 15% tax bracket receives only 15 cent tax reduction .

not all tax expenditures , however , benefit high - income taxpayers ; some are explicitly or implicitly targeted to lower - income taxpayers .

since tax expenditures can affect taxpayers in one part of the income distribution or another , tax expenditures can change the distribution of after - tax income .

the suits progressivity index is employed to summarize the progressivity or regressivity of tax expenditures .

the suits index ranges from −1 to +1 .

the suits index is negative if the benefits from a tax provision are received primarily by taxpayers in the upper part of the income distribution and is said to be regressive .

it is positive if the benefits are received primarily by lower - income taxpayers and is said to be progressive .

the tax benefits are proportionately distributed if the suits index is zero .

the distributional consequences of tax expenditures can depend on features of the tax code that are unrelated to the specific provision , such as the tax brackets and tax rates .

furthermore , the nature of the tax expenditure affects the distribution of tax benefits .

for example , a provision that reduces taxable income may have a different effect than one that reduces tax liability directly .

table 5 reports the suits index for 14 of the 20 largest individual tax expenditures ; the suits index for the other 6 could not be estimated because data are not available .

several tax provisions would be easy to change , which could simplify tax administration and compliance .

these provisions include , in general , deductions , credits , and differential rates that already appear on the tax form .

scaling back deductions ( such as by imposing floors ) would require some minor additional computations but present no significant difficulties .

including certain types of income that do not appear on the tax return ( such as certain exclusions ) can present significant technical challenges that could preclude them from consideration in tax reform proposals .

these serious technical problems arise from two separate , but related , issues: the difficulty of determining the dollar value of certain types of income , and the imposition of taxes without the actual realization of income .

in some cases , there may be potential solutions , but in others , it may be difficult to imagine how the provision might reasonably be enforced .

these technical challenges apply to five of the provisions in table 2 , including the largest two , and account for almost 40% of total tax expenditures: the exclusion of employer health insurance , the exclusion of employer pensions , the exclusion of medicare benefits , the taxation of capital gains at death , and the taxation of the inside buildup of annuities .

these challenges also apply about a third of the smaller provisions in table 4 ( accounting for 1% to 2% of total tax expenditures ) .

it likely would be difficult to reduce or eliminate these tax expenditures because it would be difficult to administer the tax fairly .

many tax expenditures enjoy strong public support of these provisions .

for many large tax expenditures , survey respondents ( from samples of u.s. adults ) support maintaining these tax breaks even if the elimination of the provisions allowed for reducing tax rates .

for example , only 30% of survey respondents support eliminating the deduction for state and local taxes in return for lower tax rates .

the percentage of respondents supporting the elimination of other tax provisions in return for lower tax rates are charitable deductions , 26% ; exclusion of employer provided health insurance , 40% ; child care expenses , 46% ; and exclusion of 401 ( k ) contributions , 39% .

public support for the mortgage interest deduction , however , is not so straightforward .

overall , 93% of respondents think continuing the mortgage interest deduction is very important ( 63% ) or somewhat important ( 30% ) .

furthermore , only one - third of respondents support eliminating or reducing the deduction in exchange for reducing the deficit .

however , almost half of the respondents would exchange the mortgage interest deduction for lower tax rates , and 50% support eliminating the mortgage interest deduction for mortgages over $500,000 and for second homes .

less than half of survey respondents ( 48% ) reported they favor eliminating all tax deductions in return for lower tax rates , even though only one - third of taxpayers claims these deductions .

many of the largest tax expenditures enjoy the support of the majority of the adult population .

the only large tax expenditure that is not supported by a majority is reduced tax rates on capital gains — 54% of survey respondents think it is totally acceptable ( 17% ) or mostly acceptable ( 37% ) to increase the capital gains tax rate as a way to reduce the federal deficit .

the analysis in this report suggests there are impediments to base broadening by eliminating or reducing tax expenditures , because they are viewed as serving an important purpose , are important for distributional reasons , are technically difficult to change , or are broadly used by the public and quite popular .

the savings incentives account for almost 30% of the total revenue loss of all tax expenditures ( $334 billion ) , but it may be difficult to repeal or scale back these provisions in any significant way .

many groups expressing support for tax reform nevertheless believe it is important to avoid changes that will increase the overall tax on savings .

in fact , many would like to move to a system without any taxation of capital income .

moreover , modification of many of the savings incentives faces significant technical or administrative barriers .

most of these tax benefits are associated with unrealized income ( pension benefits , including those associated with defined benefit plans , unrealized gains at death , and inside buildup in insurance plans ) , which can be difficult or impossible to value properly .

raising capital gains tax rates on realized capital gains may not be considered a significant revenue raiser because of current revenue scoring conventions .

furthermore , since the tax benefits of savings incentives are more concentrated among higher income individuals , it would be quite difficult to reduce the top rates while maintaining distributional and revenue neutrality without turning to these provisions .

some other large tax expenditures , notably the exclusion of employer health insurance and the exclusion of medicare , which account for 20% of the total revenue loss of all tax expenditures ( $240.4 billion ) , are also in - kind benefits that are not easily valued .

modifying the health insurance exclusion was considered during the 2010 debate over health reform but was not changed ( an excise tax on high cost plans was adopted ) as it became clear that a fair imputation of income was probably impossible .

medicare faces even more severe valuation problems and is one of the provisions most beneficial to lower - income taxpayers .

a number of smaller tax expenditures , relating to fringe benefits , also face difficult measurement problems .

other tax expenditures that benefit lower - income taxpayers could be difficult to revise .

the most progressively distributed tax provision is the earned income credit , with benefits highly concentrated among lower - income individuals .

since individuals with little or no tax liability receive most of the tax benefits , the earned income credit could not be changed in a way that maintains both revenue neutrality and distributional neutrality .

taxing social security benefits that are currently not taxed would also fall heavily on lower - income individuals .

the floor on the deduction for medical expenditures , which protects individuals with catastrophic costs , is high by historical standards and was recently increased .

lastly , there appears to be bipartisan support to extend the larger tax benefits of the child credit that were enacted by the bush tax cuts .

these specific tax expenditures account for 11% of the total revenue loss of all tax expenditures ( $132.7 billion ) .

another tax expenditure that may be difficult to reduce is the capital gains exclusion for owner - occupied housing ( $27.2 billion or 2.3% of the total ) , which has historically not been subject to tax and could lead to some significant distortions ( eg , discouraging labor mobility ) and inequities .

these tax expenditures account for over 60% of the revenue loss of all tax expenditures .

but even among the remaining provisions , the scope of revision could be limited .

for example , the major itemized deductions ( mortgage interest , state and local taxes , charitable contributions ) , which account for a fifth of the total revenue loss of all tax expenditures ( $232.5 billion ) , are broadly used provisions and it could be difficult to eliminate or significantly curtail them because of public attitudes towards these provisions .

given the barriers to eliminating or reducing most tax expenditures , it may prove difficult to gain more than $100 billion to $150 billion in additional tax revenues through base broadening .

this amount could have a significant effect on reducing the fy2014 budget deficit — reducing the projected $345 billion deficit by 30% to 43% .

this additional tax revenue , however , is equivalent to about 6% to 9% of projected fy2014 individual income tax , and , consequently , would not allow for significant reductions in tax rates ( about a one or two percentage point reduction for each bracket ) .

appendix a .

classification of tax expenditures by category this appendix lists the particular tax expenditures classified into categories .

savings: includes capital gains rates , tax treatment at death and by gift , exclusion on small business stock , deferral for section 1256 contracts , exclusion of investment income on life insurance and annuities , deferral of tax on non - dealer installment sales , deferral of tax on like - kind exchanges , the new markets tax credit , tax treatment of employee stock ownership plans and stock options , exclusion of stock redemptions to pay estate taxes , tax benefits for pensions ( both employer and self employed ) , and individual retirement accounts .

also includes lower rates for dividends when considering extension of expiring tax benefits .

business: includes expensing of research and development costs , all provision in energy , natural resources and agriculture except for tax exempt bonds and the residential energy efficiency credit , provisions relating to rental housing and credits for structures , all provisions in the subcategory "other business and commerce," other than capital gains provisions included in savings and tax exempt bonds , renewal community incentives , and district of columbia tax incentives .

note that the research credit expired at the end of 2011 , but is negligible for individuals .

owner - occupied housing: includes mortgage deduction , property tax deduction , exclusion of capital gains on owner - occupied housing , and residential energy efficiency credits .

consumption: classified into three subcategories , with the exception of the employer exclusion of life and accident insurance .

health: all of the provisions under the health functional category except for charitable contributions and tax exempt bonds , plus cafeteria plans which are largely used to pay for the employee's share of health plans .

education: all of the provisions under the education sub - function , except for tax exempt and tax favored bonds , and charitable contributions .

charity: charitable contributions ( all three categories: general , education , and health ) .

labor supply: includes exclusion for income earned abroad , employer transportation benefits , minister's housing allowance , fringe benefits , employee awards , income earned by beneficiary associations , exclusions for child and dependent care , earned income credit .

government: includes exclusions of various benefits and payments for the armed services and federal civilian employees working abroad , all tax exempt bonds ( private activity and general obligation ) , tax deductions ( except property tax ) , exclusion for transfers under government programs ( social security , medicare , veteran's benefits , workers compensation , benefits for disabled coal miners , cash public assistance ) , deferral of interest on savings bonds , structural: includes disaster relief , child credit , exclusion of damages on account of personal physical injuries , disaster relief , and the additional standard deduction for the blind and the elderly .

appendix b .

data and methods two nationally representative data files are used in the analysis to estimate the progressivity of selected tax expenditures .

2006 public use tax file the first source of data is the 2006 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) public use file .

the public use file is a nationally representative sample of tax returns for the 2006 tax year .

to protect the identity of individual taxpayers while preserving the character of the data , the irs made changes to the data .

consequently , while reliable aggregate information can be obtained , individual taxpayer records in the data may or may not contain information from just one tax return .

the unit of analysis is the tax return for a taxpayer , and irs - provided sample weights are used throughout the analysis .

the analysis sample contains information for 130,438 taxpayers ( representing 122.7 million taxpayers ) .

2007 survey of consumer finances the second source of data is the federal reserve board's 2007 survey of consumer finances ( scf ) .

the scf is a wealth survey , but also includes employment and income information for households in the sample .

the scf is used to estimate the suits index for tax benefits of 401 ( k ) - type pension plans , iras , employer provided health insurance , and medicare benefits .

both 401 ( k ) contributions and account balances as well as ira account balances are reported in the scf .

in estimating the tax benefits of 401 ( k ) and ira earnings , it is assumed that the rate of return on the account balances is 6% .

neither the value of medicare benefits nor the premium for employer provided health insurance is reported in the scf .

for each person in a household reporting medicare coverage , the national expenditure per beneficiary ( part a only ) is used as the value of benefits that are not taxed .

for each person in a household covered by employer provided health insurance , the employer paid premium by firm size and industry is used as the value of the health insurance benefit that is not taxed .

the premium data come from tabulated statistics of the medical expenditure panel survey by the agency for healthcare research and quality .

the suits index the progressivity measure used in the analysis is the suits index , which was originally developed to measure tax progressivity .

the suits index can be calculated using concentration curves , which are shown in figure b - 1 , figure b - 2 , and figure b - 3 .

the horizontal axis of the concentration curve measures the cumulative percent of income from poorest to richest .

for example , the first 15% of cumulative income is the income reported by the poorest 50% of taxpayers in the sample .

the vertical axis measures the cumulative percent of tax benefits of a tax expenditure .

if the concentration is above the diagonal line in the figures , then the tax benefits tend to accrue to lower - income taxpayers .

if the concentration is below the diagonal line , then the tax benefits tend to accrue to high - income taxpayers .

define two areas in the figures .

the first area is the area below a concentration curve ; call this area a .

the second is the area below the diagonal line in the figures ; call this area b .

the suits index is: the suits index varies between −1 ( a completely regressive tax benefit where area a is zero ) to +1 ( a completely progressive tax benefits where area a is twice area b ) .

a suits index of zero is for a proportional tax benefits ( area a = area b ) .

