congress established the federal depository library program ( fdlp ) to provide free public access to federal government information .

the program's origins date to 1813 , when congress authorized the printing and distribution of additional copies of the journals of the house and senate , and other documents the chambers ordered printed .

quantities were to be "sufficient to furnish one copy to each executive , one copy to each branch of every state and territorial legislature , one copy to each university and college in each state , and one copy to the historical society incorporated , or which shall be incorporated , in each state. .

at various times , the program was expanded to include federal executive branch publications .

the current structure of the fdlp program was established in 1962 .

access to government information is provided through a network of depository libraries across the united states .

in the past half - century , information creation , distribution , retention , and preservation has expanded from a tangible , paper - based process to include digital processes managed largely through computerized information technologies .

today , government ( and most other ) information is typically "born digital," or originated as a digital product such as a word processing document or spreadsheet .

the material may then be produced in tangible , printed form , but is with greater frequency distributed by electronic means via website or other electronic dissemination technology , and retained for archival purposes in searchable electronic databases .

in many cases , born digital material that previously appeared only in paper form is available only in digital form .

in other cases , digital information , including websites , blogs , datasets , and audio or video content , is not intended for tangible distribution .

some materials are available in both tangible and digital forms .

the transition to digital information raises a number of issues that may be of interest to congress .

some of the possible concerns focus on access to government information in an environment in which tangible and digital materials are available , and issues related to the security and authentication of digital materials .

other areas of possible concern include the management and digitization of tangible materials , permanent retention and preservation of digital content , and costs associated with these activities .

while issues related to the emergence of digital information have implications for a number of government programs and policies , this report discusses those implications as they affect fdlp .

these concerns may be addressed in their own right , or in the context of user demand for fdlp information , for which there is no uniform metric over time , or comparatively among current fdlp institutions .

acronyms or abbreviations used in this report are summarized in table 1 .

a glossary in the appendix provides definitions for the specialized information management terms used in this report .

a number of efforts related to the program have been initiated by gpo and groups representing a number of libraries that participate in fdlp .

these have included certain regional library activities ; studies of the program by a private organization ; proposals by a consortium of fdlp libraries to advance the consolidation , digitization , and cataloging of tangible collections ; and a study of fdlp coordinated by gpo .

a number of issues regarding fdlp and policy related to the transition to digital government information that might be of interest to congress arise as a consequence of digital creation , distribution , and preservation of government information .

these issues are in some cases interrelated , and may have been addressed in part in the ithaka report and aserl proposals , or may receive further consideration in gpo's studies .

some of the issues may affect fdlp , and extend beyond the program to a variety of contexts related to the management of government information in tangible and digital forms , and include maintenance and availability of the fdlp tangible collection ; retention and preservation of born digital information ; access to fdlp resources ; authenticity and accuracy of digital material ; robustness of the fdlp electronic collection ; and cost of the fdlp and other government information distribution initiatives .

the emergence of digital information has had notable effects on the types of information created , including databases , video , audio and web - only materials , and the manner in which that information is distributed beyond tangible , paper copies .

a clear consequence of those changes is the emergence of general agreement that the statutes governing fdlp , and last visited by congress before the digital era of information creation , collection , and distribution , are insufficient to regulate contemporary processes carried out by government and depository institutions .

a related question is whether existing authorities can support gpo and depository libraries as they address the demands of users of government information and the general public .

a particularly complex question is what solutions might create a more robust fdlp that is better equipped to meet the demands of providing government information to american citizens .

it appears that a number of social , political , and technical concerns must be addressed more systematically before a policy regarding the future of fdlp can be developed .

in moving toward the development of a more contemporary fdlp , congress might consider the following issues: development of methods , materials , and technologies to ensure the long - term preservation of digitized and born digital information ; a more inclusive definition of materials to be included in fdlp collections .

under current law , "government publications" are defined as "informational matter which is published as an individual document at government expense. .

while seemingly broad with regard to tangible materials , the law does not take into account government publishing programs outside gpo authority .

the somewhat vague language could also lead to differences by agency in the type of materials that get into fdlp collections .

in addition , there is no clear link to which digital material should be included in fdlp collections ; the extent to which there is a need to expand the current institutional model of fdlp beyond regional and selective libraries .

information management is a more specialized activity now than when the current version of fdlp was established .

activities that might be of benefit to the program could include curatorial services , tangible preservation or digitization , information integrity assurance ( eg , digital signatures or other authentication schemes ) , and the cataloging of older tangible materials .

these activities could occur within current fdlp institutions or by other libraries or other entities that could provide assistance without managing collections ; and the costs of the program to the federal government and depository institutions , and how long - standing funding models might affect the program in the digital era .

this selected glossary provides definitions for the specialized information management terms used in this report .

sources for the terms include the government printing office ; general services administration , gsa federal agencies digitization guidelines initiative glossary , http: / / www.digitizationguidelines.gov / glossary ; institute of museum and library services and heritage preservation , "collaboration in the digital age glossary," http: / / test.imls.gov / collections / resources / glossary.pdf ; digital preservation coalition , maggie jones and neil beagrie , "introduction: definitions and concepts," preservation management of digital materials: a handbook , http: / / www.dpconline.org / text / intro / definitions.html ; joan m. reitz , odlis - online dictionary for library and information science , http: / / www.abc - clio.com / odlis / searchodlis.aspx ; and american library association , association for library collections & technical services , preservation and reformatting section , definitions of digital preservation , http: / / www.ala.org / ala / alcts / newslinks / digipres / index.cfm .

