in march 2010 , congress passed p.l .

111-148 , the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( ppaca ) and amended it by passing p.l .

111-152 , the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ) .

subsequently , lawsuits were filed in multiple courts challenging various aspects of the new law .

many of these cases made their way through the judicial system and three petitions for certiorari were ultimately granted by the united states supreme court in one of these cases .

the court ultimately decided in favor of the law in june 2012 .

this collection of resources is intended to assist in responding to a broad range of research questions and requests for assistance related to the affordable care act litigation before the supreme court .

on november 14 , 2011 , the supreme court granted three petitions for certiorari to decide issues raised by the affordable care act cases: ( 1 ) national federation of independent business v. sebelius , no .

11-393 ; ( 2 ) florida v department of human services , no .

11-400 ; and ( 3 ) department of health and human services v. florida , no .

11-398 .

please note , the court agreed to hear four separate questions raised by the three petitions .

oral arguments for the cases took place march 26-28 , 2012 .

on june 28 , 2012 , the court issued its decision in the case , national federation of independent business et al .

v. sebelius .

below are links to documents related to these cases before the court .

many of the documents are available on the supreme court's patient protection and affordable care act website at http: / / www.supremecourt.gov / docket / ppaaca.aspx .

for further information from the court , the public information officer can be reached at [phone number scrubbed] .

in addition to the cases referenced above , information is provided on three other cases in which a petition for a writ of certiorari has been filed and that contain notable legal arguments related to the affordable care act cases .

the following are selected links to statutes , laws , and cases that are relevant to the issues before the court .

in researching these cases , those less accustomed with court proceedings may encounter unfamiliar terms .

below are definitions , taken from black's law dictionary , ninth edition , for some common words used in litigation .

listed below are existing crs products on the affordable care act litigation and related policy issues .

additional titles are available on the crs.gov website , http: / / www.crs.gov , by searching or browsing the health care issues before congress .

crs report r40725 , requiring individuals to obtain health insurance: a constitutional analysis , by jennifer staman et al .

crs report r40846 , health care: constitutional rights and legislative powers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42367 , medicaid and federal grant conditions after nfib v. sebelius: constitutional issues and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34708 , religious exemptions for mandatory health care programs: a legal analysis , by cynthia brougher .

crs report r41664 , aca: a brief overview of the law , implementation , and legal challenges , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41331 , individual mandate and related information requirements under aca , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41159 , summary of potential employer penalties under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41210 , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) provisions in aca: summary and timeline , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r42431 , upcoming rules pursuant to the patient protection and affordable care act: fall 2011 unified agenda , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

