federal lands cannot be taxed by state and local governments .

however , state and local governments have argued that federal lands are not only lost to the tax base , but also impose a burden on local taxpayers through demands for services such as law enforcement or search and rescue actions , which are commonly supported by local taxes .

as a result , congress has enacted several federal programs to offset the loss to the local tax base , even if the programs are not designed to offset that loss on a dollar - for - dollar basis .

congress is re - examining these programs for several reasons: continuing concerns expressed by local governments about the adequacy or fairness of the programs , rising payment levels based on current formulas , interest in decreasing the deficit , and expiration of mandatory spending for some of the programs .

most of these programs are under the jurisdiction of the forest service ( fs ) , the bureau of land management ( blm ) , the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and the department of the interior ( doi ) .

the program for fws lands in the national wildlife refuge system ( hereinafter referred to as the system ) was enacted in 1935 and has been amended extensively since that time .

like many federal land payment programs , its original emphasis was on sharing any revenue generated on the federal lands with local or state governments , as shown by its original name: the refuge revenue sharing fund ( though now it is more commonly called the national wildlife refuge fund , or nwrf ) .

some of the federal payment programs restrict local use of the funds to some specific purpose , such as roads or schools .

others allow the funds to be used for any governmental purpose ; nwrf falls in the latter category .

many of these programs , including nwrf , have become increasingly complex over time .

the 1978 amendments to the program provided that nwrf payments to local governments are based on a complex formula ; the authorized funding level varies from one year to the next , based on changes in the data used in the formula .

the resulting authorization level has increased more than 400% between fy1991 and fy2013 .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

in the same period , the amount of land potentially eligible for nwrf payments has gone from 86.3 million acres to 91.0 million acres , an increase of only 5.4% and clearly insufficient to explain the increase in the authorized funding level .

the question is — what explains the large increase in the authorized levels ? .

the answer , explained below , lies in the formula , particularly in payments for lands purchased by or donated to fws .

the total payment a county receives for federal lands in its jurisdiction is further complicated by the interaction of nwrf and the payments in lieu of taxes ( pilt ) program , a broadly applicable federal land payment program for county governments , which uses a different payment formula .

pilt payments are managed by doi .

besides differing formulas , there is another distinction between nwrf and payment programs for fs and blm lands .

the fs and blm payment programs for local governments have usually had sufficient revenues from the multiple uses of their lands to fund most of their payment programs .

in contrast , fws lands have never generated sufficient revenue to fund nwrf fully since the current formula was created in 1977 .

supplements from annual appropriations were authorized , beginning with the 1980 payments .

however , these supplements have fallen below the levels authorized in the formula in all years except 1981 .

since 1982 , nwrf payments have ranged from as much as 93% of the authorized amount in fy1991 to a low of 22% in fy2010 .

partial payment under nwrf has meant that the effect on local revenues has been more pronounced in counties with fws lands than in counties with other federal ownerships .

this loss is one reason for some local governments' resistance to the creation of refuges or waterfowl production areas .

this report describes the key features of nwrf: the lands under fws jurisdiction , the eligibility of most of those lands for nwrf payments , the sources of revenue for the fund , the payment formula for calculating an individual county's payments , the pilt payments available for certain fws lands , some exceptions to normal authorized payment calculations , changing authorization levels , and falling annual appropriations .

it concludes with a review of options for changes in the program .

lands and waters under fws jurisdiction fall in six management categories .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

three of these categories , taken together , constitute the national wildlife refuge system ( 150.3 million acres ) .

the best - known and oldest parts of the system are the national wildlife refuges themselves .

another category is waterfowl production areas , which are defined as "refuge system lands comprised of small natural wetlands and grasslands that provide breeding , resting , and nesting habitat for millions of waterfowl , shorebirds , grassland birds , and other wildlife. .

roughly 95% of wpa lands are in iowa , minnesota , montana , north dakota , and south dakota .

coordination areas are defined as "refuge system lands managed by states under cooperative agreements between [fws] and state fish and wildlife agencies" regardless of actual ownership of the land .

these three categories , together forming the system , constitute 49% of the lands under fws jurisdiction .

in addition to the three categories making up the system , there are three more categories of lands under fws ownership or administration ( 157.0 million acres ) .

administrative sites are "[fws] - owned maintenance facilities , offices , and off - site visitor centers that are not located on refuge system lands. .

national fish hatcheries are facilities "where fish are raised .

hatchery objectives are to replenish depleted stocks , to mitigate federal water projects , to assist with the management of fishery resources on federal and indian lands , and to enhance recreational activities. .

national monuments , including "marine national monuments are areas designated by presidential proclamation and established under the authority of the antiquities act of 1906.... for the purposes of this report , this category includes only the service - managed or co - managed areas within a national monument that are outside the refuge system .

national monument areas within the refuge system are counted in the 'national wildlife refuges' category total. .

the fws lands and waters that are not part of the refuge system constitute 51% of lands under fws jurisdiction .

with the system lands , they bring fws land ( and water ) jurisdiction to 306.1 million acres .

fws lands can be further categorized based on whether ( a ) they are public domain lands or acquired lands ; ( b ) whether fws has sole or primary jurisdiction over the lands or instead has only secondary jurisdiction ; ( c ) for acquired lands , whether some other federal agency initially acquired the lands and then transferred them to fws , or whether fws acquired the lands directly from a non - federal source as either a gift or a purchase ; and ( d ) whether fws jurisdiction rests on an agreement , easement , or lease , rather than outright ownership of the land .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

only certain lands are eligible for nwrf payments .

criteria for eligibility are as follows: for lands reserved from the public domain , payments to counties only if or when the lands in the refuge generated net revenues in the previous year .

for acquired lands , including lands received as gifts , payments according to a formula involving four payment options ( described below ) .

see table 3 for classes of acquired lands eligible for nwrf .

lands under the sole or primary jurisdiction of fws .

lands ( whether acquired or reserved ) not otherwise excluded from payments .

 ( see " special exceptions to the rules ." ) .

the following fws lands do not receive nwrf payments: lands reserved from the public domain in those fiscal years when they generated no net revenues in the preceding year .

lands over which fws has only secondary jurisdiction .

 ( these are 1.6 million acres or 0.5% of all lands managed by fws ; of these , 0.6 million acres are reserved from the public domain , and 1.0 million acres were acquired by another federal agency. ) .

similarly , wildlife coordination areas ( 257,488 acres ) are not eligible because they are managed by the states ( under cooperative agreements ) and not by fws .

acquired lands in u.s. minor outlying islands ( 54.9 million acres or 18% of area under fws management ) .

these areas are largely submerged lands ; islands found in these areas are uninhabited for the most part .

lands in american samoa ( 8.6 million acres or 3% of area under fws management ) .

these areas are also largely submerged lands .

any other submerged lands outside the jurisdiction of a state or territory ; these lands are largely in national monuments .

any given piece of land may be excluded for more than one reason .

for example , 597,891 acres are excluded because they are public domain lands under only secondary jurisdiction of fws , and therefore are not eligible for nwrf payments ; even were they under primary jurisdiction of fws , the lands would receive no payment unless they generate net revenues .

either condition would result in no payment .

moreover , exclusion may be temporary: fws public domain lands may generate net revenues — and therefore nwrf payments — in some years and not in others .

nwrf payments to counties are mandatory , but only to the extent of receipts .

the sale or lease of goods and services from fws lands ( public domain or acquired ) are the chief sources of revenue .

these include revenues from grazing , mineral development ( though not oil and gas revenues from leases on lands reserved from the public domain ) , sale of forest products , and other activities .

 ( see table 4 . ) .

in fy2012 , these receipts totaled $7.3 million .

the secretary of the interior deducts any direct fws expenses incurred to generate the revenues from the fund ; in fy2012 , these deductions totaled $3.3 million , for a net of $4.0 million available for payment under nwrf in fy2013 .

to the extent that the permanently appropriated net revenues are insufficient to meet the amounts calculated under the payment formulas , the refuge revenue sharing act authorizes discretionary appropriations in annual spending bills to meet any shortfall .

if amounts are still insufficient to meet the authorized level , then each county is paid a pro rata share of the amount authorized in the formula .

from fy1978 to fy2012 net receipts have not been sufficient to meet the payment formula .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

additional discretionary appropriations have more than doubled the available funds , but the totals of receipts and appropriations have provided less than the authorized level in all but one year ( 1981 ) since nwrf reached its modern form in 1978 .

to calculate the total authorized nwrf payment for the areas under fws jurisdiction , several questions must be answered first for each county individually: 1 .

does fws have primary or sole jurisdiction ( versus secondary jurisdiction ) over the land ? .

2 .

is the land reserved from the public domain , or was it acquired by the united states ? .

3 .

for both acquired and public domain land , what were the net receipts from the land ? .

4 .

for acquired lands only , what is the fair market value ( fmv ) of the land ? .

and was the land acquired before september 30 , 1977 ? .

if so , what was the purchase price ? .

with this information , each county's authorized level can be calculated , and the sum of these values provides the total authorized level for the entire program .

figure 3 shows the steps for calculating an individual county's payment .

boxes a and b: primary or secondary jurisdiction .

nwrf provides a payment for fws land that is under the sole or primary jurisdiction of the agency , but formulas differ for acquired lands versus reserved lands .

there is no payment for lands under secondary fws jurisdiction ( box b ) .

box c: reserved or acquired .

this distinction must be made because different formulas apply to the two types of lands .

boxes d , e , and f: reserved lands option .

if the reserved lands have no net receipts , there will be no payment ( box e ) .

if there are net receipts , counties are paid 25% of the net receipts ( box f ) .

this is the only nwrf payment option for such lands .

depending on revenues and costs , these lands might generate payments in some years and not others .

however , as noted previously , these lands are also eligible for pilt payments .

box g: amount authorized .

the result of the calculations , under either box f or h , is the amount authorized .

box h: acquired lands options .

acquired lands generate payments based on the greatest of these four options: box h ( 1 ) : $0.75 / acre .

box h ( 2 ) : 0.75% of current fmv .

regulations describe procedures for determining fmv .

the statute specifies that fmv is to be reappraised at least once every five years .

while this option may be viewed as corresponding to local property taxes , the resulting payment is likely to differ from the amount that a private owner would pay in real property taxes .

for example , property tax rates vary among jurisdictions , and range from 0.40% to 2.57% , according to one analysis .

box h ( 3 ) : 0.75% of the acquisition cost of the land for lands under fws supervision on september 30 , 1977 .

the current calculated refuge payments for lands acquired before september 30 , 1977 , cannot fall below the amount as calculated on september 30 , 1977 .

at that time , the payment was 0.75% of the purchase price , not the fair market value .

box h ( 4 ) : 25% of net receipts .

expenses for producing the revenue or for activities related to revenue are deducted from gross receipts ; expenses of general land or wildlife management are not .

box i: receipts sufficient ? .

once the amount authorized is calculated ( box g ) , this amount is compared with the national total of receipts .

theoretically , if the net receipts are sufficient to meet the formula levels , then each county is paid the full amount ( box j ) .

however , net receipts have never yet been sufficient to meet formula levels .

boxes j , k , and l: appropriate additional funds .

if the net receipts are not sufficient to meet the formula , the authorizing statute allows annual appropriations to make up the difference .

to date , congress has approved additional funds to supplement the net receipts .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

if these supplements , plus receipts , are sufficient to meet the authorized levels , each county is paid the full amount under the formula ( box j ) .

if not , each county receives a pro rata amount ( box l ) .

since the modern program began making payments in 1978 , the additional appropriations , plus the net receipts , have fallen short of the authorized level except in fy1981 , when funding reached 118% of the amount authorized in the formula .

the decline appears to be an effect of the formula creating a growing authorization level , rather than marked reductions in annual appropriations .

 ( see " authorized levels and appropriations ," below for discussion. ) .

besides the general criteria described above , there are also specific criteria that affect individual states or territories , or affect calculation of how many acres are eligible for nwrf payments or later pilt payments .

one of the exceptions occurs in alaska .

the fy201 3 annual report lists a total of 76,241,824 acres of fws public domain land that would qualify for pilt payments .

this total is based on new survey data , which the state disputes .

as a result of the dispute , fws reports a larger figure ( 80,342,130 acres ) for the pilt calculations , based on a historic total previously used .

because of the complexity of the nwrf and pilt formulas , it is not clear how much greater a payment alaska boroughs receive based on the older figures , nor which boroughs receive the greatest benefit .

in hawaii , the acres of system lands reserved from the public domain land , shown in the fy201 3 annual report ( 254,418 acres ) , also differ from those used to calculate pilt .

there is an unresolved dispute between fws and the state about 252,511 acres of submerged lands .

as in other areas , fws does not include these submerged lands as eligible for nwrf and pilt .

there remain 1,907 acres reserved from the public domain in the state that are not submerged ; these acres are reported as eligible for pilt .

while the refuge revenue sharing act lists some territories as eligible for nwrf payments , american samoa is not listed , and therefore it receives no payment .

the 1,613 acres of system lands acquired initially by the u.s. navy in american samoa do not receive pilt payments either , both because they are acquired and because the territory is not defined as a unit of local government for purposes of pilt .

as shown in figure 4 , the percent of the nwrf authorized level that has been paid to county governments has fallen steadily since 1991 .

two factors help explain the decline .

first , and most strongly , authorization levels calculated under the statute's formula have increased markedly .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

second , total appropriations ( net receipts plus annual appropriations ) have declined in the last five years , although the decline shown in figure 4 spans the last 20 years .

as discussed below , the falling percent is primarily the result of the increasing authorization levels based on the formula in the statute .

 ( see figure 1 and figure 2 . ) .

as figure 3 graphically demonstrates , the nwrf statute has only a limited number of potential causes for the increasing authorization levels .

are the net revenues increasing ? .

if so , the increase would affect reserved lands with net revenues , and those acquired lands in counties paid under this option .

but as figure 2 shows , net revenues have been fairly constant , and have declined in recent years .

increases in net revenues cannot explain the increase in the authorization level .

are the acres of eligible fws lands increasing — or , more accurately , are they increasing commensurate with the increase in authorization ? .

lands and waters under fws jurisdiction jumped from 88.8 million acres in 1981 to 307.3 million acres in 2013 .

but the great bulk of this increase is in the marine environment , in waters under the jurisdiction of no state or county government ; these submerged lands can have no effect on nwrf payments .

therefore , increases in eligible fws lands can explain only a part of the increase in authorization levels .

payment under the $0.75 / acre option for acquired lands seems inadequate to explain the rising authorization level as well , because the rate is constant , and as just noted , the increasing number of acres eligible for nwrf payments is not sufficient to account for the authorization increase .

payments tied to purchase price before 1977 also cannot increase .

is the fair market value increasing ? .

only a substantial increase in the fmv of the acquired lands is left to account for the quadrupling of the authorized level .

such an increase is not surprising , given the general rise in real estate values up until the peak of the market in about 2007 .

moreover , because fws lands are re - appraised at about five year intervals , it seems reasonable to hypothesize that falling real estate values of the past few years generally will soon lead to decreases in the authorized levels for nwrf payments , followed by further increases as property values recover .

in sum , increasing fmvs appear to account for a substantial fraction of the increasing authorization , aided to a lesser extent by some increases in the number of acres eligible for payments .

as a result of increasing fmvs , counties with lands having high fmvs receive an increasing fraction of funds appropriated to the nwrf .

there are few proposals in the 113 th congress to amend the nwrf program .

any effort to match the rapidly increasing authorization levels conflicts with increasing pressure to lower federal expenditures .

for example , one recent issue has been whether to eliminate discretionary spending for nwrf .

specifically , for fy2012 through fy2015 , the administration proposed that congress provide no annual appropriation for nwrf , allowing the program to draw funds based only on available receipts .

if the proposal were accepted for fy2015 , the administration estimated that counties would receive approximately 6% of the authorized level .

the administration argued that the savings were justified , and that refuges added few costs to counties and provided economic benefits from increased tourism .

congress rejected the administration's argument for each succeeding fiscal year .

for fy2014 , congress appropriated $13.23 million , down 8.6% from the fy2011 level of $14.47 million ( p.l .

112-74 ) , before the proposed elimination of annual appropriations .

fws estimated that net receipts , combined with the appropriation level approved by congress , are sufficient for counties to receive 24.4% of the authorized level in fy2014 .

besides eliminating annual funding , other options that congress might consider include the following ( in order of increasing payments to county governments ) : 1 .

eliminate nwrf , and make no fws lands eligible for pilt .

2 .

eliminate nwrf , but make all lands now eligible for nwrf also eligible for pilt .

3 .

make all fws lands now eligible for nwrf payments also eligible for pilt payments , without eliminating nwrf .

4 .

change the compensation formula under nwrf to decelerate future growth in authorization levels as land values rise , to bring the formula into accord with historic appropriation levels ( mandatory plus annual ) or with some alternative authorization level .

 ( depending on the specific changes , this option might change its rank in this list. ) .

5 .

fully fund the existing nwrf program .

if the first option were chosen , there would be no federal payment to counties based on the presence of lands under fws jurisdiction .

such legislation might specify a different distribution of net receipts , or allow net receipts to be deposited in the u.s. treasury .

if the second option were chosen , the authorized payments for all eligible nwrf acquired lands with an fmv over $338.67 / acre would be reduced to $2.54 / acre at most .

payments might be further reduced because of another pilt provision limiting payments based on county population levels .

public domain lands would be largely unaffected as they already receive pilt payments .

if the third of these options were chosen , public domain lands in the system would be unaffected because they already receive pilt payments .

those counties receiving their payments under the provision for 0.75% of fmv would likely increase their payments only marginally , because the top payment rate for pilt in fy2013 was $2.54 / acre .

at a 0.75% tax rate , any land with a fmv greater than $338.67 / acre — a common occurrence in eastern states where the bulk of fws acquired lands are found — would result in an nwrf authorized payment of more than $2.54 / acre .

so the added pilt payments would still likely represent only a modest fraction of the authorized nwrf payment level for refuge lands with high fmvs .

the lands outside the system ( administrative sites , national fish hatcheries , and the non - submerged lands in those national monuments outside the system ) , if they are in the public domain but generate no revenue , currently receive no nwrf payment and no pilt payment .

counties with such lands ( about 3,660 acres nationwide in fy2013 ) would receive a pilt payment for the first time under this option .

if the fourth option were chosen , several changes to the nwrf formula could reduce the authorized amount .

because the authorized amount is increasing as more acquired land is compensated under the fmv provision and as fmvs have increased , changes in this provision would be essential to lower the authorized amount .

the reduction could be accomplished by lowering the rate below 0.75% , placing a cap on per - acre compensation , or eliminating this feature altogether and setting all compensation at some fixed rate .

for the fifth option , fully funding nwrf , no change in the authorizing statute would be required .

in fy2014 , full funding would have required the annual appropriation to increase from $13.2 million to $72.6 million , a 549% increase .

future increases would depend on whether fmvs increase and , to a lesser extent , on changes in revenues from fws lands .

a similar end could be accomplished if congress changes the program to mandatory spending .

however , in a climate of continuing efforts to lower federal spending , achieving full funding under either option would face substantial difficulties .

