in disputes between congress and the executive , questions arise about congress's ability to turn to the federal courts to vindicate its powers and prerogatives or for declarations that the executive is in violation of the law or the constitution .

this report seeks to provide an overview of congress's ability to participate in litigation before article iii courts .

the report is limited to a discussion of congress's participation in litigation as either a plaintiff ( eg , the party initiating the suit alleging some sort of harm or violation of law ) or as a third - party intervener ( eg , a party who is seeking to join litigation already initiated by another plaintiff ) .

the report does not address situations where congress or individual members appear as a defendant , or congressional participation in court cases as amicus curiae ( "friend of the court" ) , as those situations do not raise the same legal and constitutional questions at issue when congress or a member is the party plaintiff .

congressional plaintiffs , whether they be individual members , committees , houses of congress ( i.e. , the house or senate ) , or legislative branch entities , must demonstrate that they meet the requirements established by article iii of the constitution in order to participate as party litigants .

specifically , a prospective congressional plaintiff must show that he has standing to sue .

the failure to establish standing is fatal to the litigation and will result in its dismissal without the court addressing the merits of the presented claims .

the supreme court's 1997 decision in raines v. byrd has had a chilling effect on the ability of individual members of congress to demonstrate article iii standing and thereby have their claims adjudicated in federal court .

however , members or committees who are authorized to sue and act on behalf of a whole house have been able to establish standing under certain circumstances , even after the raines decision .

courts have emphasized the distinction between suits brought by individual congressional plaintiffs asserting abstract and diffuse injuries and suits brought by organs of congress alleging concrete institutional harms .

recent case law in this area suggests that suits brought by congress in an institutional capacity have a greater chance of satisfying standing requirements than do cases where individual members attempt to assert political or institutional injuries based on executive action .

generally , the doctrine of standing is a threshold procedural question that does not turn on the merits of a plaintiff's complaint , but rather on whether the particular plaintiff has a legal right to a judicial determination on the issues before the court .

the law with respect to standing is a mix of both constitutional requirements and prudential considerations .

article iii of the constitution specifically limits the exercise of federal judicial power to "cases" and "controversies. .

accordingly , the courts have "consistently declined to exercise any powers other than those which are strictly judicial in nature. .

thus , it has been said that "the law of article iii standing is built on a single basic idea — the idea of separation of powers. .

as applied to congressional plaintiffs , the doctrine of standing has generally been invoked only in cases involving challenges to executive branch actions or acts of congress .

prior to the supreme court's 1997 decision in raines v. byrd , the case law with respect to the standing of members of congress had been largely , though not exclusively , developed by decisions of the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) .

an individual member's ability to bring litigation before an article iii court remains severely limited by the supreme court's decision in raines .

for member plaintiffs to successfully establish standing , they must assert either a personal injury , like the loss of their congressional seat , or an institutional injury that amounts to vote nullification , which requires that no other legislative remedy exists to redress the alleged injury .

considering that legislative remedies are rarely entirely foreclosed , these member plaintiff suits are unlikely to satisfy the standing requirements imposed by raines and its progeny .

it appears that more successful suits could be brought by either congress as a whole , a house of congress , or a committee , so long as the entity is acting with the authorization of one or both houses .

institutional plaintiffs with authorization to sue have established standing in several cases when seeking judicial enforcement of a subpoena .

however , it remains unclear how or if the raines vote nullification standard is supposed to be applied to an institutional plaintiff asserting an institutional injury outside of the subpoena enforcement context .

