on january 4 , 2011 , president obama signed p.l .

111-358 , the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 .

the law responds to concerns about u.s. competitiveness by increasing funding for research in the physical sciences and engineering ; authorizing certain federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education programs and policies ; as well as addressing other related issues .

competes 2010 reauthorized selected provisions of the 2007 america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) .

the purpose of this report is to provide information on the president's fy2013 budget request — and the status of fy2013 congressional appropriations — for the agencies , programs , and activities authorized by competes 2010 .

for a broader treatment of the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 , see crs report r41819 , reauthorization of the america competes act: selected policy provisions , funding , and implementation issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

for information about prior year funding for both competes acts , see crs report r42779 , america competes acts: fy2008-fy2013 funding tables , by [author name scrubbed] .

competes 2010 — like competes 2007 — was designed to "invest in innovation through research and development , to improve the competitiveness of the united states , and for other purposes. .

in total , competes 2010 authorized approximately $45.5 billion in funding between fy2010 and fy2013 for federal research in the physical sciences and engineering , stem education , and other related programs .

certain provisions of the law , including many funding authorizations , expired at the end of fy2013 .

among other things , competes 2010 increased funding authorizations for the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) core laboratories and construction accounts , and the department of energy ( doe ) office of science .

it also authorized new technology transfer and commercialization activities at these agencies .

in addition , competes 2010 authorized inducement prizes at federal agencies , established a loan guarantee program for manufacturers , and established a regional innovation program ( rip ) .

in stem education , competes 2010 sought to provide greater coordination of federal stem education programs , authorized support for academic programs that provide teacher certification concurrent with a bachelor's degree in a stem field , and repealed certain unfunded stem education programs authorized by competes 2007 .

like its predecessor , competes 2007 , the central policy contributions of competes 2010 were the "doubling path" policy for the nsf , nist core laboratories and construction accounts , and the doe office of science , as well as the authorization of stem education activities at various federal agencies .

the president's fy2013 budget requested increased funding for the doubling path accounts ( albeit at levels below those authorized ) but included support for few competes 2010 authorized stem education programs .

in this regard the president's fy2013 budget request was generally consistent with prior year obama administration requests and appropriations activity for both competes acts .

of the new programs with defined funding authorizations in competes 2010 , only the regional innovation program ( rip ) at the department of commerce ( doc ) was specifically included in the administration's fy2013 budget request .

the administration's budget request did not seek funding for the nist green jobs act , federal loan guarantees for innovative technologies in manufacturing , or the stem - training grant program .

competes 2010 also authorized new programs without providing a defined funding amount .

one example of this type of authorization was the green chemistry basic research program at nsf .

the fy2013 budget request included funding for a green chemistry program at nsf .

the following sections discuss in greater detail the president's fy2013 budget request for selected programs and agencies authorized by competes 2010 .

where possible , this report has been updated to reflect fy2012 actual funding .

earlier versions of this report used fy2012 enacted , estimated , or current plan funding levels .

this change provides a more accurate view of the difference between fy2012 funding levels and the president's fy2013 request .

table a - 1 summarizes the fy2013 funding status of selected competes 2010 provisions , including the president's fy2013 requests for these accounts .

funding for competes 2010 programs and agencies is typically included in three appropriations acts: commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) , for nsf , nist , and other department of commerce programs ; energy and water development ( energy - water ) , for doe programs ; and labor , health and human services , education , and related agencies ( labor - hhs - education ) , for ed programs .

as appropriations measures often include a variety of provisions and programs , this section focuses on funding provisions that relate most closely to policies , programs , agencies , and activities specifically authorized by competes 2010 .

table a - 1 summarizes the fy2013 funding status of these selected provisions , including house - passed , senate committee on appropriations recommended , and final ( post - rescission , post - sequestration ) fy2013 appropriations to these accounts .

the competes acts were designed to improve the competitive position of the united states by fostering scientific and technological innovation .

the primary policy devices that the acts employed — to this end — were increases in authorized funding for physical sciences and engineering research ( eg , the doubling path policy ) and stem education program authorizations .

the specific debate about fy2013 funding for competes 2010 provisions occurred within the broader conversation about these policy choices .

this section briefly summarizes this policy context .

few analysts dispute the contention that the path to global competitiveness in the 21 st century runs through the twin pillars of scientific and technological advancement .

the policy question , then , is what should the federal government do ( if anything ) to encourage scientific and technological innovation and ( thereby ) national competitiveness ? .

a broad coalition of business , academic , and government leaders has concluded that at least part of the answer to this question is that the federal government should encourage innovation by increasing support for physical sciences and engineering research and by increasing the number of u.s. students graduating with stem degrees and skills .

supporters of this general consensus assert that a combination of external pressures and internal weaknesses threatens the united states' innovation advantage .

for example , supporters note that changes in the industrial bases and educational attainment rates of rapidly developing countries like china and india mean that these countries are able to compete for a growing percentage of the world's high - value jobs and industry .

further , these advocates assert that signs of potential weakness in areas that have long been u.s. strengths — such as the u.s .

stem workforce and leading - edge research — appear to accompany these global changes .

in particular , competes acts proponents raise concerns about funding for research in the physical sciences and engineering and the u.s. supply of scientists , engineers , and technicians .

although support for the innovation policy approach embodied in the competes acts is widespread , it is not uniform .

opposition has tended to fall into three broad categories: ( 1 ) questions about fundamental assumptions , ( 2 ) preferences for alternative policies or approaches , and ( 3 ) cost .

for example , some analysts dispute fundamental assumptions behind policies designed to increase the supply of stem workers , arguing that there is no evidence of broad shortages of stem workers and that the bigger challenge is on the demand side .

another fundamental assumption that some analysts have called into question is whether increased investment in publically funded research will increase u.s. competiveness given that such research is typically publically available .

other analysts prefer other policy tools — such as regulatory changes and tax policy — arguing that direct federal investment in research in the physical sciences and engineering and in stem education can distort markets .

opponents have also raised concerns about cost , arguing that authorized funding increases are too expensive in light of the federal fiscal condition , deficit , and debt .

fy2013 was the third and final year for most of competes 2010's major funding authorizations .

although the full house , senate committee on appropriations , and the president all initially sought increases over fy2012 levels for many ( not all ) key competes 2010 accounts in fy2013 ; the combined effects of sequestration , as well as rescissions and funding levels in the final fy2013 appropriations act ( p.l .

113-6 ) decreased funding levels for many ( not all ) of these accounts below fy2010 actual levels .

further , although there has always been a gap between competes act authorizations ( total , defined ) and appropriations ( total , defined ) , that gap widened in fy2013 and was larger than in all previous authorized years .

it remains to be seen whether and how the fy2013 funding status of competes accounts will factor in future congressional conversations about reauthorization of competes 2010 and future appropriations for these accounts .

