a number of federal laws prohibit discrimination in employment decisions , including hiring and firing of employees .

generally , these laws also include statutory exceptions for the employment of ministers within religious institutions and organizations .

this protection arises most often in the context of employment legislation , but it has also been recognized in other contexts .

the exceptions in these laws for religious organizations reflect a constitutional protection commonly known as the ministerial exception .

this exception has been used to ensure that enforcement of nondiscrimination legislation does not violate the constitutional rights of religious entities to exercise freely their religious practices and to avoid government interference in internal matters .

in 2012 , the u.s. supreme court recognized the ministerial exception as a protection grounded in the free exercise and establishment clauses of the first amendment in hosanna - tabor evangelical lutheran church and school v. eeoc .

however , the court did not define the scope of the exception , and a number of questions still remain unanswered in how it may be applied in future cases .

this report analyzes the constitutional bases of the ministerial exception and examines selected statutory provisions reflecting its protections under federal employment laws .

the report addresses critical questions involved in the application of the ministerial exception , including which employees qualify as ministers , the extent to which courts may defer to religious entities claiming the exception , and whether the exception may apply to any claim brought against a religious entity .

a number of federal laws prohibit discrimination in employment , each protecting separate classes of individuals .

congress has included explicit statutory recognition of the hiring rights of religious organizations in these laws .

two prominent examples of legislation that include religious exemptions for prohibitions on discrimination are title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

however , other nondiscrimination statutes , like the age discrimination in employment act and the equal pay act , may also affect religious organizations' rights under the first amendment .

these exemptions are sometimes referred to as ministerial exceptions , but they differ from the constitutional ministerial exception as discussed in this report .

before congress enacted statutory exemptions for religious organizations' hiring decisions , the u.s. supreme court recognized that the "freedom to select the clergy" has constitutional protection under the first amendment .

statutory nondiscrimination provisions , for example , title vii's prohibition on discrimination in employment on the basis of sex , would appear to interfere with this constitutional freedom though .

the so - called "ministerial exception" reconciles statutory nondiscrimination provisions with constitutional freedom of religion protections by allowing religious organizations to select clergy without regard to such statutory restrictions .

in 2012 , the court explicitly recognized the ministerial exception as a constitutional protection grounded under both the establishment clause and the free exercise clause: "the establishment clause prevents the government from appointing ministers , and the free exercise clause prevents it from interfering with the freedom of religious groups to select their own [ministers]. .

the statutory exemptions for religious organizations provided by congress differ from the constitutional ministerial exception , though both are rooted in the same principles of non - interference in the internal decisions of church authority and operations .

the constitutional exception protects religious organizations from liability for decisions regarding only ministerial employees , but may be applied to decisions made on any basis .

the statutory exemptions generally exempt religious employers from liability for decisions regarding other employees , but are limited to decisions made on the basis of religion .

to invoke the constitutional ministerial exception , an employer must be a religious organization and the employee must be a minister or ministerial employee .

however , the religious employer does not need a religious basis for its decision .

rather , courts have indicated that the inquiry should focus on the action itself , rather than the motives: "the exception precludes any inquiry whatsoever into the reasons behind a church's ministerial employment decision .

the church need not , for example , proffer any religious justification for its decision , for the free exercise clause 'protects the act of a decision rather than a motivation behind it.' .

under the constitutional exception , courts have upheld the termination of a college chaplain who claimed her termination was a result of gender discrimination ; a hospital chaplain who claimed her termination was a result of discrimination based on a disability ; and a priest who claimed his termination resulted from race discrimination .

various circuit courts determined in each of these examples that the employee qualified as a ministerial employee and that the religious employer's decision was accordingly beyond the review of the court .

congress has extended the recognition of noninterference in employment decisions through statutory exemptions , but has limited the exemptions to avoid undermining the purpose of the legislation .

statutory exemptions apply only to religious employers making decisions based on religion .

one federal court has explained that the statutory exemption is significantly distinct from the constitutional protections to such religious organizations because the "statutory exemption applies to one particular reason for employment decision — that based on religious preference. .

a number of federal circuit courts have noted that the statutory exemption allows religious organizations to make employment decisions based on religious preferences , but does not permit those decisions to be based on other preferences , like race , sex , or national origin .

the statutory exemptions also differ from the constitutional exception because the statutory exceptions exempt employers from liability for decisions regarding any employee , rather than being limited to ministers and ministerial employees .

for example , the religious exemption under title vii has been held to allow a religious organization to terminate the employment of an employee with no religious duties .

in 1987 , the supreme court upheld the title vii exemption when a religious employer discharged a building engineer because the employee failed to qualify for membership in the church that operated the facility for which he worked .

the court explained that the exemption was neutral and its purpose to limit governmental interference in religious matters was permissible .

in light of the split among the circuit courts over the standard for determining the scope of the ministerial exception , it seemed likely in hosanna - tabor that the u.s. supreme court would clarify the analysis of how courts should define minister in future employment discrimination lawsuits involving religious organizations .

often , the court accepts cases for review because a different standard is applied across the various circuits , which , if left unreviewed , means that the application of law is determined by the geography of the court in which the claim is filed rather than by a uniform national standard .

the court did not resolve the split among the circuits , however .

instead , it only announced its recognition of the ministerial exception as a constitutional protection for religious entities and explained that it could be applied to more than just the nominal head of the congregation .

many questions still remain regarding the scope of the ministerial exception: who qualifies as a ministerial employee ? .

which legal claims might the ministerial exception apply to ? .

what options does congress have to affect the outcome of such cases ? .

although the court did not provide the definitive clarification of the ministerial exception that many were expecting , its decision nonetheless indicates its preferred direction of the constitutional analysis for future cases .

the court's decision in hosanna - tabor did not address the scope of the statutory exception of the ada .

rather , it was grounded in the constitutional protections afforded to religious organizations under the first amendment .

in other words , regardless of the explicit statutory protection for religious organizations like hosanna - tabor in the ada , the school still was able to exercise its constitutional right to terminate perich's employment without affording her the legislative protections of the ada .

accordingly , the legislative options for congress in response to the court's decision in hosanna - tabor are extremely limited .

congress may seek to include a preferred standard of review in its religious exceptions to nondiscrimination legislation , but such clarification must comport with the requirements of the constitutional exception .

the most probable method for clarification of the proper standard for the constitutional exception is further litigation , as the court alluded in its decision .

