this report examines several legislative options to help finance water infrastructure that have recently received attention in congress .

the options discussed here are intended to address capital needs for building and upgrading wastewater and drinking water treatment systems and improving water quality in order to meet requirements under federal law .

at issue for congress is whether the federal government should assist water infrastructure projects and , if so , what form or forms of assistance should be provided .

localities are primarily responsible for providing water infrastructure services .

according to the most recent estimates by states and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , funding needs for such facilities total $655 billion over a 20-year period .

some analysts and stakeholders take issue with such estimates .

some say that epa's needs estimates are too low because they do not fully reflect types of projects not currently eligible for federal assistance , such as repair and replacement of aging systems , or needs that currently are not well met by existing programs , such as security - related projects ; on - site treatment systems in small , dispersed communities ; and projects that include mixed elements such as developing and treating new water supply , especially in rural areas .

other estimates much larger than epa's have been made by a number of groups .

for example , the american water works association estimated that investment needs for "buried drinking water infrastructure" total more than $1 trillion over the next 25 years .

however , assessing "need" is complicated by differences in purpose , criteria , and timing , among other issues .

one of the major difficulties is defining what constitutes a "need," a relative concept that is likely to generate a good deal of disagreement .

in the infrastructure context , funding needs estimates try to identify the level of investment that is required to meet a defined level of quality or service , but this depiction of need is essentially an engineering concept .

it differs from economists' conception that the appropriate level of new infrastructure investment , or the optimal stock of public capital ( infrastructure ) for society , is determined by calculating the amount of infrastructure for which social marginal benefits just equal marginal costs .

whether the estimates made by states and epa understate or overstate capital needs , communities face formidable challenges in providing adequate and reliable water infrastructure services .

congress has considered ways to help meet those challenges .

capital investments in water infrastructure are necessary to maintain high - quality service that protects public health and the environment .

capital facilities are a major investment for water and wastewater utilities .

almost all capital projects are debt - financed ( i.e. , they are not financed on a pay - as - you - go basis from ongoing revenues to the utility ) .

the principal financing tool that local governments use is issuance of tax - exempt municipal bonds — at least 70% of u.s. water utilities rely on municipal bonds and other debt to some degree to finance capital investments .

in 2014 , bonds issued for water , sewer , and sanitation projects totaled $34 billion , 10.2% higher than the 2013 volume .

beyond municipal bonds , federal assistance through grants and loans is available for some projects , but is insufficient to meet all needs .

finally , public - private partnerships , or p3s , which are long - term contractual arrangements between a public utility and a private company , provide limited capital financing .

while they are increasingly used in transportation and some other infrastructure sectors , p3s are uncommon in the water sector , especially p3s that involve private - sector debt or equity investment in a project .

most p3s for water infrastructure involve contract operations for operation and maintenance .

this report addresses several financing options intended to address overall needs and decrease or close the funding gap .

some of the options exist and are well established , but they are under discussion for extension or modification .

other innovative policy options have been proposed in connection with water infrastructure , especially to supplement or complement existing financing tools .

some are intended to encourage private participation in financing of drinking water and wastewater projects .

some are intended to provide robust , long - term revenue to support existing financing programs and mechanisms .

this report analyzes six policy options , including their federal budgetary implications , related to financing water infrastructure that were reflected in legislation in the 114 th congress .

increase funding for the state revolving fund ( srf ) programs in the clean water act ( cwa ) and the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) .

some propose increasing federal appropriations for these existing programs , under which federal capitalization grants are provided to states for the purpose of making loans to communities for water infrastructure and other eligible projects .

create a "water infrastructure finance and innovation act" program ( wifia ) .

modeled after the existing transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program , a wifia program is intended to provide federal credit assistance in the form of direct loans and loan guarantees to finance water infrastructure projects .

create a federal water infrastructure trust fund .

establishing such a fund could help to provide a dedicated source of federal funding for water infrastructure .

create a national infrastructure bank .

this federal entity would provide low - interest loans , loan guarantees , and other types of credit assistance to stimulate investments by states , localities , and the private sector in a variety of infrastructure projects .

lift restrictions on private activity bonds for water infrastructure projects .

this proposal would eliminate the limit on the amount of tax - exempt private activity bonds issued by states and localities to provide financing for privately owned water infrastructure facilities .

reinstate authority for the issuance of build america bonds ( babs ) .

babs are taxable bonds for which the u.s. treasury pays a direct subsidy of the interest costs to the issuer ( a state or local government ) , thus helping finance capital projects with lower borrowing costs .

since the 112 th congress , a number of these options have been examined by congressional committees , including the house transportation and infrastructure committee and the senate environment and public works committee .

a pilot program for one of them — wifia — was enacted during the 113 th congress and is discussed below .

nevertheless , interest in other financing options continues , in part due to long - standing concerns with the costs to repair aging and deteriorated u.s. infrastructure generally , and also in response to events in individual regions and cities , such as flint , mi , where problems of elevated lead levels in its drinking water distribution system have recently drawn public attention .

consensus exists among many stakeholders — state and local governments ; equipment manufacturers , construction companies , and engineers ; and environmental advocates — on the need for more investment in water infrastructure .

many in these varied groups support one or more options for doing so .

there is no consensus supporting a preferred option or policy , and many advocate a combination that will expand the financing "toolbox" for projects .

some of the options discussed in this report may be helpful in addressing financing problems , but there is no single method or "silver bullet" that will address needs fully or close the financing gap completely .

for example , some , such as a wifia or a national infrastructure bank , may be helpful to projects in large urban or multijurisdictional areas , while others , such as expanded srf programs , may be more beneficial in smaller communities .

even with enactment of the wifia pilot program in p.l .

113-121 , at least for the near term , most communities will continue to rely on the existing srf programs , tax - exempt governmental bonds , and available tax - exempt private activity bonds to finance their water infrastructure needs .

through its budget requests , the obama administration expressed support for the srf programs and the new wifia program , and it endorsed excluding water infrastructure pabs from the state volume cap and reinstating build america bonds .

