hydraulic fracturing is a technique used to free oil and natural gas trapped underground in low - permeability rock formations by pumping a fracturing fluid under high pressure in order to crack the formations .

the composition of a fracturing fluid varies with the nature of the formation , but typically contains mostly water ; a proppant to keep the fractures open , such as sand ; and a small percentage of chemical additives .

a primary function of these additives is to assist the movement of the proppant into the fractures made in the formation by reducing friction between the fracturing fluid and the pipe used to pump the fluid into the formation .

although some of these chemical additives may be harmless , others may be hazardous to health and the environment .

a report by the minority staff of the house committee on energy and commerce found that between 2005 and 2009 , the 14 leading oil and gas service companies used "780 million gallons of hydraulic fracturing products" in fracturing fluids , with "95 of the products containing 13 different carcinogens. .

in 2011 , president barack obama directed secretary of energy steven chu to form a panel to study the effects of shale gas production on health and the environment .

the shale gas production subcommittee of the secretary of energy advisory board has made several recommendations intended to address these effects .

one recommendation calls for the public disclosure , on a "well - by - well basis," of all of the chemical ingredients — "not just those that appear on material safety data sheets" — added to fracturing fluids , with some protection for trade secrets .

proponents of chemical disclosure laws maintain that public disclosure of the chemicals used in each well would allow for health professionals to better respond to medical emergencies involving human exposure to the chemicals ; assist researchers in conducting health studies on shale gas production ; and permit regulators and others to perform baseline testing of water sources to track potential groundwater contamination if it occurs .

however , some manufacturers of the additives , as well as others in the industry , remain reluctant to disclose information about the chemicals they use .

these parties have expressed concerns that disclosure would reveal proprietary chemical formulas to their competitors , destroying the parties' valuable trade secrets .

this report provides an overview of current and proposed laws and regulations at the state and federal levels that require the disclosure of the chemicals added to the fluid used in hydraulic fracturing .

although a few provisions of federal law require some disclosure of information about the chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing , none of them requires that detailed information about the chemical composition of a fracturing fluid be provided .

in his 2012 state of the union address , president barack obama said he would obligate "all companies that drill for gas on public lands to disclose the chemicals they use," citing health and safety concerns .

in may 2012 , the bureau of land management ( blm ) published a proposed rule that would require disclosure of the content of fracturing fluids used on lands managed by the agency .

in addition , there were legislative efforts in the 112 th congress .

h.r .

1084 and s. 587 , the fracturing responsibility and awareness of chemicals act ( frac act ) , would have created more broadly applicable disclosure requirements for parties engaged in hydraulic fracturing .

at the state level , the interstate oil and gas compact commission , an organization with members that include state regulators and industry representatives , has argued that current regulation of hydraulic fracturing by the states is sufficient .

at least 15 states already have some form of chemical disclosure requirements .

these provisions vary widely , but generally indicate ( 1 ) which parties must disclose information about chemical additives and whether these disclosures must be made to the public or a state agency ; ( 2 ) what information about chemicals added to a fracturing fluid must be disclosed , including how specifically parties must describe the chemical makeup of the fracturing fluid and the additives that are combined with it ; ( 3 ) what protections , if any , will be given to trade secrets ; and ( 4 ) at what time disclosure must be made in relation to when fracturing takes place .

others states are in the process of considering disclosure laws or regulations .

for a glossary of some of the terms used in this report , see appendix a .

for a table summarizing some of the hydraulic fracturing fluid chemical disclosure laws and proposals described in this report , see appendix b .

no federal law currently requires parties to submit detailed information about the chemical composition of a hydraulic fracturing fluid .

under the emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) , owners or operators of facilities where certain hazardous hydraulic fracturing chemicals are present above certain thresholds may have to comply with emergency planning requirements ; emergency release notification obligations ; and hazardous chemical storage reporting requirements .

in addition , environmental advocacy groups have petitioned the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate hydraulic fracturing chemicals under the toxic substances control act and to require the oil and gas extraction industry to report the toxic chemicals it releases under the epa's toxics release inventory .

of the states that produce oil , natural gas , or both , at least 15 require some disclosure of information about the chemicals added to the hydraulic fracturing fluid used to stimulate a particular well .

state requirements , which take the form of laws , regulations , and administrative interpretations , vary widely .

generally , they fall into four overlapping categories: ( 1 ) which parties must disclose information about chemical additives and whether these disclosures must be made to the public or a state agency ; ( 2 ) what information about chemicals added to a fracturing fluid must be disclosed , including how specifically parties must describe the chemical makeup of the fracturing fluid and the additives that are combined with it ; ( 3 ) what protections , if any , will be given to trade secrets ; and ( 4 ) at what time disclosure must be made in relation to when fracturing takes place .

states update their laws on fracturing chemical disclosure frequently , and thus this section is designed to show trends in how states structure these provisions rather than to describe the current status of the law in any particular state .

appendix a provides a glossary of some of the terms used in this section .

appendix b contains a table summarizing the chemical disclosure requirements discussed in this section .

many federal and state legislators and regulatory authorities have adopted or proposed measures that would create new disclosure requirements applicable to the practice of hydraulic fracturing , a natural resource recovery technique that is widely used in the recovery of natural gas from shale formations .

the shale gas production subcommittee of the secretary of energy advisory board has recommended the public disclosure , on a well - by - well basis , of all of the chemical ingredients added to fracturing fluids — even those ingredients that do not meet osha's standards for hazardous chemicals requiring msdss .

the subcommittee recommended that some protection for trade secrets be provided .

at the federal level , a few existing laws require some disclosure of information about the chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing .

however , none of these laws requires disclosure of detailed information about the chemical composition of a hydraulic fracturing fluid .

blm has proposed disclosure requirements that would be applicable for hydraulic fracturing on all lands managed by the agency .

legislation was introduced in the 112 th congress that would have created disclosure requirements for all hydraulic fracturing operations nationally .

chemical disclosure laws at the state level vary widely .

of the 15 laws examined in this report , fewer than half require direct public disclosure of chemical information by mandating that parties post the information on the fracfocus chemical disclosure website .

the level of detail required to be disclosed often depends on how states protect trade secrets , as these protections may allow submitting parties to withhold information from disclosure at their discretion or to submit fewer details about proprietary chemicals , except , perhaps , in emergencies .

even if a disclosure law does not protect information from public disclosure , other state laws , such as an exemption in an open records law , may do so .

a few states require the submission of msds for certain chemicals .

msds may offer a relatively low level of disclosure , as the most specific details that parties currently must include on the data sheets under osha regulations are the chemical or common names of certain hazardous ingredients .

with regard to the timing of disclosure , a few state laws require at least some disclosure of information about fracturing fluid chemical composition before fracturing is performed , but these states typically require less detailed information to be provided before fracturing than afterward .

appendix a. glossary of terms appendix b .

summary of chemical disclosure law .

