on january 4 , 2011 , the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) became law .

the acronym "gpra" in the act's short title refers to the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra 1993 ) , a law that gprama substantially modified .

some of gprama's provisions require agencies to produce plans and reports for a variety of audiences that focus on goal - setting and performance measurement .

other provisions , by contrast , establish an annual process to reexamine the usefulness of certain reporting requirements .

specifically , section 11 of gprama enacts into law a multi - step process in which the president and the office of management and budget ( omb ) may propose to congress that certain plans and reports be eliminated or consolidated .

the gprama process covers the plans and reports that executive branch agencies produce "for congress" in response to statutory requirements or as directed in non - statutory congressional reports .

as a consequence of this scope , the gprama process covers some , but not all , reporting requirements .

notably , as a step in this process , gprama requires an agency to consult with congressional committees to determine whether products are considered to be useful or could be eliminated or consolidated .

this congressional research service ( crs ) report provides an overview of gprama's processes that relate to the reexamination of agency reporting requirements .

the report also will be updated to track some aspects of gprama's implementation .

because gprama's provisions are not the first to focus on agency reporting requirements , the report also contrasts gprama's provisions with related authorities and selected efforts from the past .

the report concludes by highlighting potential issues for congress .

to provide some context , the report begins by discussing potential categories , advantages , and disadvantages of reporting requirements .

section 11 of gprama establishes an annual , statutory process to reexamine certain reporting requirements .

the process may culminate in a presidential proposal to congress to eliminate , consolidate , or modify certain plans and reports .

under the system established by the u.s. constitution , separate institutions share power and utilize checks and balances as they cooperate or compete for influence over public policy .

history demonstrates that congress has relied extensively on receiving information and viewpoints from agencies and their personnel when performing its constitutional responsibilities .

reporting requirements in particular have been a mainstay of congressional involvement in administration of public laws from the 1 st congress to the present .

in 1789 , for example , the statute that established the department of the treasury said it shall be the duty of the secretary of the treasury to digest and prepare plans for the improvement and management of the revenue ... ; to prepare and report estimates of the public revenue , and the public expenditures ; ... to make report , and give information to either branch of the legislature , in person or in writing ( as he may be required ) , respecting all matters referred to him by the senate or house of representatives , or which shall appertain to his office .

in practice , reporting requirements may be used to pursue any of several objectives .

these include transparency , accountability , public participation , efficiency , and effectiveness .

values like these may , on occasion , trade off against one another .

transparency may enhance accountability and effectiveness , for example , but the collection and presentation of information may affect behaviors and impose incremental costs .

furthermore , the same information may have several interested audiences with their own priorities .

congress and non - federal stakeholders frequently rely on access to information about the plans and activities of the federal government when they oversee or work with agencies , or when they participate in the lawmaking process .

agencies themselves , omb , and the president also need access to information to faithfully and effectively execute laws .

in specific circumstances , however , different audiences in congress , the executive branch , and the public may place differing weights on the aforementioned values .

some audiences also may have goals in conflict with one or more of the values .

over time , changes in circumstances and technology may have further implications for the types and formats of information that are feasible and desirable .

for example , many reporting requirements were established before the internet and relatively inexpensive information technology ( it ) came into widespread use .

given this complex institutional , policy , and technological background , gprama's process for the reexamination of agency reporting requirements raises potential issues for congress .

the following two sub - sections highlight several of these potential issues .

looking ahead to annual implementation of gprama's provisions , the president and omb may propose the consolidation , modification , or elimination of specific reporting requirements .

members and committees of congress may consider a specific proposal from several perspectives .

context .

how does a reporting requirement fit in the broader picture of how an agency provides information to its own personnel ? .

how does a plan or report fit in the broader picture of how an agency provides information to , and interacts with , congress , other agencies , the president , non - federal stakeholders , and the broader public ? .

how does the agency manage relevant information ? .

how does a reporting requirement relate to an agency's mission , priorities , management processes , and it systems ? .

consultations .

are consultations with congress occurring under the gprama process for reexamining reporting requirements ? .

are the consultations being conducted with sufficient time and depth for a committee or interested members to have input before changes to a reporting requirement are proposed by the president ? .

for products that are submitted to congress as a whole rather than to a specific committee , are agencies engaging in consultations ? .

what are congress's expectations in that regard ? .

did an agency consult in advance with other , non - federal stakeholders ? .

does an agency have views that are different from those of omb and the president about the benefits or costs of a reporting requirement ? .

will congress have access to these concerns or opinions ? .

what do non - federal stakeholders think about a proposal ? .

credibility .

does a proposal for elimination or consolidation of a plan or report appear to be founded on quality analysis and justification ? .

when an agency , omb , or the president identifies a plan or report as outdated or duplicative , how did they define these terms ? .

did the relevant agency , omb , and the president make a credible proposal that justifies a recommendation adequately and acknowledges any trade - offs or disadvantages ? .

how might any of the perspectives that are discussed below figure into an assessment of a proposal's credibility ? .

usefulness .

how useful is a plan or report to its various audiences — including congress as a whole , congressional recipients , personnel in the federal agency that authors a product , personnel in other government agencies , non - federal stakeholders , and the public ? .

how do they use the plan or report ? .

what impact does a plan or report have on the accountability and incentives of an agency , omb , or the president ? .

would disappearance of a plan or report have implications for policy formulation or policy implementation , including congress's ability to legislate or conduct oversight ? .

would disappearance of a plan or report have implications for power relationships among congress , agencies , the president , non - federal stakeholders , or the public ? .

would consolidation of several products improve or degrade usefulness ? .

costs and side effects .

what are the workload , costs , and side effects that correspond to a reporting requirement ? .

would changes in statute or report language that eliminate or consolidate a product have any effect on an agency's costs or priorities ? .

would an agency's data collection or reporting continue even in the absence of a requirement in statute or directive in report language ? .

would elimination of a reporting requirement entail costs or disruptions for congress or non - federal stakeholders ? .

options .

after reviewing considerations like those outlined above , do the benefits of a reporting requirement to congress and other audiences justify the requirement's costs ? .

are there less costly or more effective options in contrast with the president's proposal ? .

could a reporting requirement be designed or implemented in a better way ? .

would better systems or utilization of technology improve the effectiveness of a reporting requirement or reduce its burden ? .

in the age of "wiki" websites on the internet and the possibility of designing websites to allow bulk - downloading of their contents , what are the implications for agency reporting requirements ? .

do non - federal stakeholders or congressional support agencies have views to offer regarding what should be done for each item on the presidential list of proposed eliminations and consolidations ? .

congress also may evaluate how well the gprama process is working .

if congress perceives a problem or the potential for improvement , congress may consider amending the law to change aspects of how the process operates .

a number of topics might be examined .

coverage .

the gprama process covers plans and reports that agencies produce "for congress" but does not cover all reporting requirements .

as noted earlier , a statute may require that a plan or report be produced by an entity whose status as an "agency" is ambiguous , like omb .

a statute also may require that a plan or report be produced for the benefit of audiences in addition to congress , such as the public through posting on the internet .

gprama also does not explicitly cover an agency's reporting to congress — or for that matter , an agency's reporting to the president — that occurs through the use of discretion by agencies , omb , and the president .

what might be the advantages and disadvantages of taking a broader view of reporting requirements in gprama's process ? .

would broader coverage that explicitly includes the president and entities in the executive office of the president , for example , paint a more useful picture ? .

would expanding the scope to include some reporting inside the executive branch ( eg , from agencies to omb ) offer more potential for identifying efficiencies and ways to generate and share information more effectively ? .

consultations .

gprama's process requires agencies to consult with congressional committees .

unlike other provisions in gprama , however , the consultation requirement does not specify that an agency consult with both the majority and minority of a committee or , furthermore , require an agency to consult with non - federal stakeholders .

in addition , some plans and reports may be submitted to congress as a whole , as opposed to a specific committee .

if agencies are perceived as not adequately consulting with congress or non - federal stakeholders about proposals to eliminate or consolidate plans and reports , would any changes to gprama be desirable ? .

might other mechanisms for consultation be considered ? .

for example , what might be the advantages and disadvantages of amending gprama to require agencies to publish elimination and consolidation proposals in the federal register for public notice and comment ? .

justification of proposals .

gprama does not address how agencies , omb , and the president are to analyze reporting requirements or justify proposals to congress .

for example , the statute is silent about how agencies are to justify their identification of products as being outdated or duplicative .

the requirement for the presidential list of plans and reports similarly does not address how proposals for elimination or consolidation are to be justified .

past experience suggests that a perception of poor justification may diminish the credibility of proposals for congress .

in that light , what might be the advantages and disadvantages of providing more explicit structure in gprama for how agencies , omb , and the president are to document their analyses and justify their proposals ? .

for example , congress might consider establishing criteria for designations of a plan or report being considered "outdated" or "duplicative" or , alternatively , require omb to do so in its guidance .

would any of the topics from the previous sub - section of this report — such as context , consultations with stakeholders , usefulness , and costs ( see " potential issues when considering specific proposals " ) — merit being required as topics for an agency or omb to address in an agency's analysis or a presidential proposal ? .

coordination within congress .

under gprama , large group - repeal - and - modification proposals may become an annual occurrence .

in that light , congress might consider strategies for how it wishes to consider proposals for many modifications and eliminations of reporting requirements .

in the past , members and committees of congress have used several strategies to manage consideration of ad hoc proposals from agencies , omb , and the president .

these proposals typically crossed the jurisdictions of many committees .

in response , a single subcommittee sometimes coordinated the consideration of proposals within a chamber of congress .

the subcommittee then solicited feedback from committees of jurisdiction to develop a draft bill that could be introduced .

looking ahead to annual implementation of gprama's process , might similar approaches be used ? .

in addition , some reporting requirements may correspond to different committees and still be closely interrelated .

might there be opportunities for committees to coordinate their efforts when they have jurisdictions and reporting requirements that are closely related ? .

omb's activities and interactions with agencies .

for the fy2013 round of gprama's process , omb's guidance to agencies addressed the situation where an agency may not find at least 10% of its plans and reports for congress to be outdated or duplicative .

in such cases , omb appeared to say agencies still must achieve the 10% figure .

to achieve that rate , omb said agencies should recommend products for elimination that have comparatively lower net benefits , even if they are not outdated or duplicative and by implication still may be useful to recipients .

for subsequent years , gprama gives authority to omb to determine a minimum annual percentage of plans and reports that agencies are required to identify as outdated or duplicative .

gprama currently contains no requirement for omb to inform congress of such a percentage , if omb chooses one .

if omb's exercise of this authority were of interest , congress might consider options for exercising oversight over omb's use of the provision , including the extent to which omb uses analysis to determine this minimum percentage .

if congress were interested in the views of agencies about the value of certain reporting requirements before potential modification by omb to suit the president's preferences , congress might consider options to better understand how an agency's second list of plans and reports changes after omb's review .

these options might include conducting hearings on the topic , asking gao to look into specific cases , or amending gprama to require an agency to submit its second list to congress concurrently with its submission to omb or , alternatively , later when the president submits his or her budget proposal .

this would allow congress to see what , if any , changes omb made .

institutional roles and responsibilities .

gprama establishes several roles and responsibilities for agencies , omb , and the president .

looking ahead , congress may consider how well this system is working .

if congress perceives a problem or the potential for improvement , congress may consider changes .

to illustrate , gprama requires each covered agency to compile a list of all plans and reports that it produces for congress in accordance with statute or report language .

the law does not require compilation of these data into an overall database that is available to agencies , omb , congress , and the public .

as a consequence , it is conceivable that agencies' efforts to create parallel databases to manage this task may be vulnerable to duplication of effort .

gprama's provisions may also create some duplication of effort when viewed in the context of the house clerk's reports to be made to congress document .

furthermore , efforts to analyze reporting requirements across agencies may be difficult in the absence of a more global view .

if options for a single database were considered , numerous questions might arise .

what agency or agencies might be best positioned to set policy for the database , administer it , and host it on the internet ? .

under current law and practice , individual agencies , the national archives and records administration ( nara ) , and the general services administration participate in federal records management with a statutory division of labor .

what might their respective roles be in a hypothetical , integrated system ? .

january 2013 proposals ( obama administration ) on january 8 , 2013 , the obama administration proposed a group of plans and reports for modification under the process established by gprama .

the proposal was posted on the performance.gov website , located in the website's "faq" section .

in the web page's text , the administration characterized the plans and reports as "potentially outdated , duplicative , or otherwise warranting modification. .

the text also linked to a spreadsheet file available for downloading .

the spreadsheet file identified 376 items as being proposed for modification .

as a group , the proposed items were listed as corresponding to 28 entities: all 15 departments and 13 additional agencies and entities .

each listed item provided the following information: name of entity ; title of plan or report ; type of modification ( identifying one of four categories , including "eliminate," "consolidate," "reduce frequency," and "streamline" ) ; and description of the rationale for modification .

table a - 1 shows tallies of the 376 items , broken out by entity and type of modification .

when looking at the proposals by type , a clear majority of the 376 items were listed as proposals to eliminate reporting requirements ( 269 out of 376 , or 72% of the total ) .

when looking at the proposals by entity , the department of defense ( dod ) was associated with the most proposals , 71 items ( 19% of the total ) .

that total does not include three additional items associated with the army corps of engineers .

another 27 of the 376 items were listed as corresponding to the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

as noted earlier in this report , gprama's definition of "agency" does not explicitly include the eop or the entities located within it .

consequently , the scope of the obama administration's january 2013 proposal could be interpreted as going beyond gprama's specific requirements .

