in february 2012 , the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee's subcommittee on contracting oversight began a wide - ranging investigation of executive agencies' public communications activities .

the subcommittee is seeking to determine whether any of the agency expenditures were wasteful or propagandistic .

the subcommittee has asked 11 federal agencies to provide it with records of their public communications contracts since 2008 .

since 2010 , congressional committees have examined agency public communications at least twice before .

in march 2011 , the senate homeland security and governmental affairs' subcommittee on contracting oversight held a hearing on the general services administration's ( gsa's ) hiring of a private consulting firm .

gsa sought assistance in rebutting criticisms that environmental contamination at one of its facilities had sickened and killed gsa employees .

on august 16 , 2010 , the minority staff of the house oversight and government reform committee released a report faulting seven agencies for engaging in inappropriate public relations and propaganda activities .

among the incidents that drew criticism was a department of health and human services commercial that spoke well of the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

as noted in a related crs report , public communications activities of the department of education , federal communications commission , internal revenue service , and other federal agencies have drawn congressional scrutiny during the past decade .

in part , congress's interest in agency communications flows from its general duty to oversee the agencies it has created and ensure the appropriate use of the funds it appropriates .

but there is a broader context: control .

congressional apprehension about agencies promoting policies and taking political sides is long - standing .

this concern is rooted at least partially in the perspective that agencies should be apolitical and play little if any independent role in policy formulation .

thus , from this perspective , agencies have a duty to inform and educate the public , but they should not attempt to persuade it or to engage in political or policy advocacy or elections .

additionally , agencies have incentives to promote themselves to the public .

the author of a 1939 study of government communications activities noted , "it has long been the habit of officials to place the best possible light upon their accomplishments. .

agencies frequently seek operational autonomy , that is , they try to distance and insulate themselves from legislative direction .

one means for an agency to do this is to develop positive relationships with the public or interest groups through public communications , thereby creating stakeholders who may pressure congress .

collectively , then , the statutory restrictions on publicity experts , publicity and propaganda , and lobbying with appropriated funds are tools for congressional control .

when enforced , these statutes can serve to counteract agencies' incentives to promote themselves or political causes with public revenue , and to remind agencies that the misuse of agency resources or funds invites a congressional response .

federal agencies often speak to the public because doing so generally is considered essential to the functioning of representative democracy .

if government is to serve the people , then the people must be kept well - informed of the government's activities so that they may judge its work and alter its policies through elections or other means ( eg , advocacy ) .

thus , many , and perhaps most , federal agencies routinely communicate with the public in the course of their daily work .

agencies do so for many purposes , including informing the public of its rights and entitlements ; telling the public of the agency's activities ; inviting public comment on proposed rules ; warning the public of perils ; and discouraging harmful or dangerous behaviors .

congress also has established agencies whose primary purpose is to make information available to the public ( eg , the u.s. government printing office ( gpo ) ) , and tasked others with carrying out media campaigns ( eg , the office of national drug control policy's national youth anti - drug media campaign ) .

it is unclear how much the executive branch , let alone the federal government as a whole , spends on communications each year .

however , crs has estimated that executive branch agencies spent nearly $945 million on contracts for advertising services in fy2010 , a figure that does not include all agency public communications expenditures .

the department of defense spent $545.4 million on advertisements in fy2010 , much of it for the purpose of drawing recruits .

congress has established three executive branch - wide statutory restrictions on executive agency communications: a 1913 statute ( p.l .

63-32 ; 38 stat .

212 ; 5 u.s.c .

3107 ) declares , "appropriated funds may not be used to pay a publicity expert unless specifically appropriated for that purpose. .

a 1919 statute ( p.l .

66-5 ; 41 stat .

68 ; 18 u.s.c .

1913 ) forbids agencies from spending appropriated funds to encourage the public to contact members of congress .

this "grassroots lobbying" prohibition , as it is often called , forbids agencies from paying for "any personal service , advertisement , telegram , telephone , letter , printed or written matter , or other device , intended or designed to influence in any manner a member of congress. .

annual appropriations acts often carry a prohibition that forbids the use of appropriated funds "for publicity or propaganda purposes within the united states not authorized by the congress. .

these restrictions have appeared in appropriations laws for over a half century .

the rationales advanced for each of these statutes have varied .

the 1913 anti - publicity expert statute may have been motivated by concern over agencies spending funds to extol their achievements .

plainly , the annual appropriations restrictions aim to prevent agencies from propagandizing the public .

the 1919 anti - lobbying statute , meanwhile , aims to protect the separation of powers by preventing executive agencies from pressuring legislators through the public .

all three statutes also were justified as means for stopping agencies from wasting public funds .

historically , congress has found enforcing the restrictions on government communications is inherently challenging for at least three reasons .

first , no single federal agency is responsible for reviewing agencies' communications with the public and enforcing statutory restrictions .

the department of justice is responsible for prosecutions under the aforementioned 1919 anti - lobbying law .

however , the doj "has never prosecuted anyone" for violating this statute .

otherwise , oversight , investigation , and enforcement of appropriate practices regarding government advertising falls to agencies' inspectors general , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and congress , all of whom have numerous other responsibilities .

second , the enforcement of public communications restrictions is inevitably post hoc — it comes after an agency action .

each agency has the authority to communicate with the public ; there is no central federal communications agency that reviews agency communications for legal propriety before they are released to the public .

 ( individual agencies , in contrast , limit their own employees' communications with the public .

agencies' public communications are the responsibility of press offices and public affairs officials. ) .

this "fire alarm" approach to oversight tends to mean in practice that authorities ( congress , gao , inspectors general , etc. ) .

only learn of possible transgressions when alerted by someone else ( eg , the media or a whistle - blower ) .

third , the brevity of the current statutes has left agencies and oversight authorities with the responsibility for interpreting the extent of the statutes' coverage .

annual appropriations restrictions , for example , speak of "publicity or propaganda purposes" but do not define these terms .

the 1913 anti - publicity expert statute does not define who is a "publicity expert. .

the gao , however , has developed a body of opinions that attempt to define the scope of these terms .

thus gao construes "publicity and propaganda" to cover agency communications that are self - aggrandizing , designed to aid a political party , or that fail to disclose that they were produced by the government ( "covert propaganda" ) .

but gao's determinations are not authoritative .

the department of justice ( doj ) has contested gao's conclusions in some instances and directed executive agencies not to heed gao's opinion .

over the past two decades , federal agencies have adopted new electronic communication technologies .

these "new media" technologies include e - mail , websites , weblogs ( or blogs ) , text messaging , and social media , such as facebook and twitter .

federal agencies are increasingly using new media technologies to communicate with the public .

at present , there are more than 1,504 federal government domains ( eg , data.gov ) , and thousands of websites on these domains .

as of june 2011 , the gao found that 23 of 24 of the federal agencies it surveyed had a presence on facebook , twitter , and youtube .

all 15 of the president's cabinet agencies have at least one twitter account .

some agencies are especially heavy users of these new communications technologies .

for example , the national archives and records administration ( nara ) utilizes blogs , facebook pages , twitter accounts , and flickr photography pages , and it has a youtube video channel .

additionally , a survey of 3,000 federal managers found that approximately a quarter of them used facebook for work purposes .

in part , the incorporation of these technologies into agency communications is in keeping with past adoptions of emergent communications technologies in the hopes of improving agency operations .

additionally , the administration of president barack h. obama has strongly encouraged agencies to use the most recent new media communications technologies .

the president issued a memorandum on his first day in office declaring , [e]xecutive departments and agencies should harness new technologies to put information about their operations and decisions online and readily available to the public .

executive departments and agencies should also solicit public feedback to identify information of greatest use to the public .

this "open government initiative" was operationalized by a subsequent memorandum , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) provided agencies guidance on using new media to make government more transparent , participatory , and collaborative .

president obama appointed a deputy chief technology officer to head the "open government initiative" and a federal chief information officer , both of whom advocated expanding agency use of internet technologies .

different agencies have used different new media to communicate with the public for different reasons and purposes .

several recent examples include the following: the u.s. army uses websites ( eg , armystrongstories.com ) and facebook ( facebook.com / goarmy ) to reach potential recruits .

lieutenant general benjamin c. freakley , who led the army accessions command which previously was in charge of troop recruitment , reportedly stated , "we're working hard to increase our social media" because "we fully recognize that young people tivo over commercials or are multitasking on their smartphones when the commercials come on. .

department of energy secretary steven chu has a facebook page ( http: / / www.facebook.com / stevenchu ) where he posts short messages on a variety of subjects , such as energy conservation .

the nara employs the aforementioned social media technologies for multiple purposes .

according to david s. ferriero , the national archivist , "social media tools can help us make it easier for researchers , students , and the general public to learn about and make use of the billions of items in our collection .

and just as important , they give the public direct ways to reach us: asking questions , telling us what's important to them , helping us plan for the future.... digitization and online access to government records can also benefit from the collaborative expertise of the many , including the citizen archivists , researchers , federal agencies , the private sector , and it professionals. .

the department of state uses twitter ( http: / / twitter.com / # ! / statedept ) as a tool of public diplomacy .

along with online video and other new media , twitter enables the agency to speak directly with foreign audiences .

after the april 20 , 2010 , deepwater horizon explosion in the gulf of mexico , a multi - federal agency "unified command" was established .

it utilized a website ( deepwaterhorizonresponse.com ) , twitter , facebook , flickr , and youtube to explain how it was responding to the oil spill , and how affected individuals ( eg , fishermen ) could get assistance .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) hired alex horton , a former soldier who has been openly critical of the va , to write for the va blog ( http: / / www.blogs.va.gov / vantage / ) .

"alex is not here to flack for the agency," his va supervisor has said .

horton serves as an in - house critic of the agency , identifying to the va shortcomings in its services and understanding of veterans' issues .

smithsonian museums , such as the museum of natural history and the national postal museum , have allowed the public to vote via the internet on which items it would like to see displayed in particular exhibits .

the development and use of new media by agencies has several implications for congress in its oversight and enforcement of agency public communications .

 ( 1 ) quantity of agency new media communications .

the ease of producing new media communications makes it easier for agencies to produce more public communications .

the department of state , for example , has more than 15,191 posts ( "tweets" ) from its main twitter account ( http: / / twitter.com / # ! / statedept ) since late 2008 , and this is not its only twitter account .

more communications may provide for more opportunities for an agency to transgress ( inadvertently or otherwise ) the statutory prohibitions against unauthorized publicity and propaganda and lobbying with appropriated funds ( 18 u.s.c .

1913 ) .

 ( 2 ) quality of agency new media communications .

new media technologies can remove the filters between agency employees and the public .

this intimacy and immediacy enables prompt communications between agencies and the public .

it also may lead to agency employees making misstatements of fact or comments that violate statutory restrictions .

daniel mintz , who served as cio of the department of transportation during the second term of president george w. bush , has further cautioned , "any material a federal employee publishes [online] can be taken as establishing or implying the establishment of a formal policy. .

 ( 3 ) locating agency new media communications .

the nature of new media communications could complicate oversight further .

digital communications often are "born digital" — they exist in digital format only , and often may be deleted easily .

digital communications produced today can be difficult to locate subsequently , especially if they are "real - time" communications ( eg , live online "chats" or video ) .

the nara has issued guidance to agencies on the preservation of new media communications .

however , managing and preserving electronic records in general is a complex undertaking , and historically agencies have not given these activities high priority .

 ( 4 ) authenticating and securing agency new m edia communications .

as with paper - based communications , new media communications can be altered or forged .

the government printing office produces digital documents that carry a signature indicating their authenticity .

but federal agencies' new media public communications seldom are subjected to similar security protocols .

someone with desktop publishing software and the requisite skills easily could download an agency's new media , alter its content , and then distribute it via e - mail and document - sharing websites .

in some instances , agencies' new media communications have been commandeered by hackers or other malefactors and used to send out inappropriate content .

 ( 5 ) identifying publicity experts .

new media technologies may make it more difficult to determine who is acting as a "publicity expert" for the purposes of 5 u.s.c .

3107 .

for one , the employees who author new media often are not readily discernable .

for example , government agencies' twitter accounts seldom state which employees are authorized to send agency tweets .

government agency blog posts may not list an author .

additionally , twitter , facebook , and other new media technologies are not difficult to use , which makes it easier for agencies to have more federal employees ( whatever their official agency position ) communicate with the public .

for example , the department of commerce's chief economist has a blog ( http: / / www.esa.doc.gov / blog ) and twitter account ( https: / / twitter.com / # ! / econchiefgov ) .

similarly , congress established the position of chief information officer ( cio ) within federal agencies to coordinate and monitor the acquisition and implementation of information technology programs ( p.l .

104-106 , div .

e , title li , §5125 ( b ) - ( d ) ; 110 stat .

3009-393 ; 40 u.s.c .

11315 ) .

cios are not public affairs personnel , yet some have blogs that promote their agencies' activities .

 ( 6 ) identify ing agency grassroots lobbying .

the use of new media may make it more difficult to discern when an agency has violated 18 u.s.c .

1913 .

as noted previously , grassroots lobbying occurs when an agency consciously encourages the public to pressure congress .

arguably , any time an agency publishes anything on the internet it could have the effect ( intentionally or unintentionally ) of encouraging citizens to contact congress , especially if the communication "goes viral. .

thus , an agency may think it is serving the public's "need to know" by publishing its congressional testimony online on the day of a hearing .

congress , meanwhile , might view this as an attempt to create public pressure .

additionally , in the past , agency grassroots lobbying efforts could be identified partly based upon the format of the communication ( eg , press releases and direct mail ) .

today , new media have expanded the number of formats that agency communications may take , and any new media format might carry content that has the effect of grassroots lobbying .

 ( 7 ) rebroadcasting and the loss of control over communications .

government communications produced as new media may be easily rebroadcast .

for example , a document posted on an agency website may be downloaded by an individual and then reposted on a personal website or blog .

if the initial document contained an error or transgressed the statutory limitations on public communications , it would be difficult for the agency to rectify the situation by removing all online reproductions of it .

the ease with which new media may be rebroadcast also may raise unforeseen legal issues .

thus , should a federal agency "retweet" another federal agency's communication , could the former agency be held culpable if the initial communication violated any of the statutory restrictions on public communications ? .

as noted earlier , congress historically has found it challenging to enforce the current statutory restrictions on agency communications .

agencies' adoption of new media appears to have further complicated oversight .

should congress find that the proliferation of new media communications is problematic , it may find value in considering a range of possible policy options to improve or augment the public communications restrictions , such as the following: 1 .

defining the major terms in the statutes , such as "publicity expert," "publicity," and "propaganda. .

2 .

updating the 1919 anti - lobbying statute ( 18 u.s.c .

1913 ) to explicitly extend coverage to new media communications .

3 .

surveying agencies to see whether agency employees who use new media communications technologies are trained to respect the current statutory public communications restrictions .

the department of veterans affairs , for example , has released a policy directive for va employee use of social media .

it makes no mention of the statutory prohibitions .

4 .

requiring all agency public communications to identify the author and his or her position at the agency .

5 .

requiring the omb to provide agencies with public communications guidelines .

the information quality act ( iqa ; p.l .

106-554 ; 114 stat .

2763a - 153 ; 44 u.s.c .

amendments ) , which was enacted december 21 , 2000 , required the omb to issue guidance to federal agencies designed to ensure the "quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity" of information disseminated to the public .

however , as an amendment to the paperwork reduction act ( 44 u.s.c .

3501 ) , the iqa's coverage has not been construed by omb as covering public relations communications ( 67 federal register 8460 ) .

6 .

requiring agencies to report annually to congress on their public communications activities , expenditures , and the agencies' rationales for these activities .

7 .

including in agencies' annual appropriation acts a requirement that gao assess agencies' public communications for comportment with the public communications restrictions .

this would provide congress with assessments of agency compliance ; it also could serve as a reminder to agencies of the public communications restrictions .

