energy storage technology has great potential to improve electric power grids , to enable growth in renewable electricity generation , and to provide alternatives to oil - derived fuels in the nation's transportation sector .

in the electric power system , the promise of this technology lies in its potential to increase grid efficiency and reliability — optimizing power flows and supporting variable power supplies from wind and solar generation .

in transportation , vehicles powered by batteries or other electric technologies have the potential to displace vehicles burning gasoline and diesel fuel , reducing associated emissions and demand for oil .

in recent years , federal policy makers have become increasingly interested in promoting energy storage technology as a key enabler of broad electric power and transportation sector objectives .

in remarks about the storage act of 2011 ( s. 1845 ) , which would provide investment tax credits for storage systems connected to the electric grid , businesses and homes , senate energy and natural resources committee chairman jeff bingaman remarked , deployment of storage technologies will make our nation's electricity grid more reliable while also enabling more efficient use of existing energy sources as well as new ones , such as wind and solar... .

these technologies have the potential to cut electricity bills , reduce peak power demand and lower greenhouse gas emissions .

likewise , in a statement regarding new energy storage - related rules for wholesale electricity markets , federal energy regulatory commissioner john norris stated , i believe today's final rule is a positive first step by the commission in recognizing the unique characteristics and the value that storage resources offer.... as we move forward , i strongly believe that storage will become ever more critical as we look to integrate increasing amounts of variable energy resources .

referring to advanced batteries for electric transportation applications , secretary of energy steven chu reportedly stated , it's now within grasp , that you can get a battery where the business plans are one - third of the cost of today's batteries , where you can get ranges now that would allow cars instead of 100 miles on a single charge , go 300 or more miles on the same charge… .

it's not a pipe dream 30 years from today or 20 years from today .

it's in the next decade .

statements such as those above highlight not only the technical opportunities for energy storage in the grid and in electric transportation , but also the attention being paid to energy storage technologies at the highest levels in the federal government .

nonetheless , many new energy storage technologies continue to face significant technological and economic challenges to their commercialization and widespread deployment .

the recent bankruptcy of beacon power , one of the leading developers of flywheel energy storage technologies for the grid , is a prominent illustration of commercial barriers to grid storage technology .

public concerns about elevated fire risks from chevrolet volt electric car batteries , although shown to be exaggerated , are another .

by contrast , increasing investments by aes corporation in utility - scale battery storage for power grids show continuing successful efforts to overcome technical challenges and market barriers to bring new storage technologies into the market .

understanding the potential of energy storage in electric applications is complicated by a number of factors .

the first is the wide range of storage technologies either commercially available , in development , or being researched .

because they are technologically diverse , it is difficult to gain a balanced understanding of the fundamental capabilities , costs , and comparative advantages of these different energy storage options .

second , there are multiple applications of energy storage , each with distinct operational requirements .

certain storage technologies may suit certain applications better than others .

finally , there are many aspects of market structure and economic regulation that affect energy storage deployment .

taken together , these factors make the development of an energy storage research and development portfolio challenging .

while there is general consensus that storage technology improvements are needed , there are multiple potential pathways to such improvements that cut across different disciplines .

this report attempts to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding energy storage technologies for both electric power grid and electric vehicle applications .

it is intended to serve as a reference for policymakers interested in understanding the range of technologies and applications associated with energy storage , comparing them , when possible , in a structured way to highlight key characteristics relevant to widespread use .

the report also discusses how aspects of policy and market structure affect competition among both mature and emerging technologies .

in the united states , there are two major motivations for deploying energy storage technologies .

the first is to improve the technical and economic performance of the electric power grid ( "the grid" ) .

this includes enabling more efficient utilization of conventional power plants ( eg , coal - and gas - fired ) supplying the grid through load - leveling and providing fast response grid support functions ( "ancillary services" ) , among other services .

it also includes enabling greater use of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar generation , which have variable output due to changing weather conditions .

electricity storage is a potential source of grid flexibility to ease integration challenges and decrease integration costs for these renewables .

the second motivation for energy storage is to enable greater use of electrified transportation .

the united states is largely self - sufficient for its electricity needs , and has substantial potential to increase production of low - carbon , domestically sourced electricity from renewable and nuclear sources ( or from coal using carbon capture ) .

yet many of these sources cannot directly produce the liquid fuels generally used in conventional vehicles .

electricity storage in batteries or some other technology ( including electricity - derived fuels such as hydrogen ) could provide a pathway to more electrically powered vehicles , and thereby to reducing u.s. dependence on petroleum .

this report provides information and analysis about the current status and future opportunities for energy storage technologies in electric grid and electric vehicle applications .

it attempts to identify technologies which may have a key role in achieving the objectives stated above .

it discusses key technical and market barriers , along with research and development ( r&d ) and policy efforts to reduce those barriers .

the report: describes and discusses briefly how existing storage technologies work , their most likely applications , and their advantages for particular applications .

describes current limitations of each technology and whether those limitations might be addressed through r&d efforts .

describes economic or materials barriers that might impede development or deployment ( eg , requirements for imported precious metals ) .

assesses the costs ( fixed and operational ) , safety , and effectiveness of each technology .

assesses the time horizon for market readiness of each technology .

provides a technical overview and status of r&d activities for new and emerging storage technologies .

superconducting magnetic energy storage ( smes ) devices store energy in the form of a magnetic field .

using superconducting wires allows smes units to achieve very high efficiencies .

superconducting materials are characterized by the temperature required to achieve superconductivity: low - temperature or high - temperature .

low - temperature superconductors , which require expensive liquid helium , have been used in most smes demonstrations .

recent smes research and development have focused on developing high - temperature smes devices , which could use less costly liquid nitrogen and therefore , could have lower overall system costs that the low - temperature smes devices demonstrated to date .

while low - temperature smes devices have been demonstrated , their costs have been greater than those of proposed high - temperature systems .

there have been several smes demonstration projects for quick - response and very short - term capacity applications , primarily for electric grid power quality .

commercial smes units typically have relatively large power capacities ( on the order of several mw ) , but short discharge times on the order of 1 second , because the high cost of superconducting coils and cryocoolers limits amount of energy stored .

one example is a set of 3 mw / 0.8 kwh distributed smes units built in 2000 by the american semiconductor company for wisconsin public service corporation to enhance voltage stability in northern wisconsin .

other utilities have purchased similar units to provide voltage stability and power quality , and to defer the construction of new transmission lines .

since the distributed smes units are trailer - mounted , they can be optimally sited at locations on the grid where they are most needed .

distributed smes systems have also been installed in industrial applications , primarily to eliminate voltage sags in manufacturing power supplies .

the cost of smes is currently very high , however ; significant reductions are needed to show an economic advantage over alternatives including batteries , capacitors , and power electronics alternatives .

smes devices are large superconducting electromagnets that store energy in a magnetic field generated by electric current flowing through superconducting magnetic wire .

the wire is typically coiled in loops to form a solenoid .

because superconducting material has no electrical resistance , very large amounts of current can be sent through these wires , up to a factor or 100-500 greater than equivalently sized copper wire .

this enables very strong magnetic fields ( measured in tens to hundreds of teslas ) , and much stronger energy densities than conventional electromagnets .

the amount of energy that can be stored in the resulting magnetic field quadruples for each doubling of current , but also depends on the coil geometry and the magnetic permeability of the material inside and surrounding the coil .

smes systems typically consist of four main components: the superconducting coil , the cryogenic cooling system , the power conditioning system , and the control unit .

superconducting materials are characterized by the temperature required to achieve superconducting characteristics .

low temperature superconductors ( lts ) , like niobium - titanium ( nbti ) , have been used in most commercial smes applications .

the electromagnetic coils must be cooled to 4.5"k ( - 269"c ) to become superconducting , which is typically done with a cryocooler system that uses liquid helium as the working fluid .

liquid helium , with a boiling point of 4.2"k , is the only element that is not solid at this low temperature .

high temperature semiconductors ( hts ) , such as ( bi,pb ) 2 sr 2 ca 2 cu 3 o x ( bscco ) and yba 2 cu 3 o x ( ybco ) , are superconductive at the boiling point of liquid nitrogen ( 77 "k ) .

the smes coil is typically made out of lts materials , typically nbti .

hts prototypes have been demonstrated using bscco , and there is ongoing work to demonstrate less expensive ybco coils .

lts smes devices require the coil to be cooled to about 4.5"k , whereas hts smes devices require cooling to only about 77"k. for this reason , lts cryocoolers use liquid helium as the working fluid and hts cryocoolers use liquid nitrogen which is far less expensive .

in both systems , the cryocooler must be located outside the area with a strong magnetic field , with a thermally conductive link between the cryocooler and coil .

the power electronics unit converts alternating current ( ac ) electricity from the electric grid to direct current ( dc ) electricity to be stored when charging , reversing this process during discharge .

typical smes performance is characterized by short bursts ( about 1 second ) of power that are capable of responding very rapidly ( less than 0.5 milliseconds ) from fault detection , well within one cycle of power grid frequency .

smes devices are designed to provide tens of thousands of charge / discharge cycles with little or no performance degradation and have long design lifetimes on the order of 20 years operating continuously .

table 16 summarizes key smes operating characteristics .

the roundtrip efficiency of an smes device is based on the instantaneous system efficiency ( including energy conversion losses and standby energy losses ) as well as the energy required to maintain cool temperatures .

instantaneous efficiency has been estimated to range from 96% to 98% , before parasitic and power conversion losses .

cryocooler power loads are typically about 1% of nameplate capacity for lts smes units .

cryocooler loads could decrease by an order of magnitude or more for hts smes units .

smes roundtrip efficiencies are also dependent on how frequently they are charged and discharged .

for example , if smes systems are charged and discharged every hour , roundtrip efficiency is greater than 95% .

if smes systems discharge once per day , roundtrip efficiency drops to 73% .

however , since commercial smes applications provide a capacity resource , and not an energy resource , roundtrip efficiency is far less important than other factors like capital and operating costs .

smes costs are driven primarily by the cost of the superconductive coil and cryocooler , limiting the amount of energy that can be stored economically .

power electronics costs are based on the capacity of the device and range from $195-$325 / kw ( 2009 dollars ) .

the superconductive coil and cryocooler costs scale with the amount of energy to be stored by the smes device , and range from $395,000-$740,000 / kwh .

figure 37 integrates the capacity - based and energy - based costs into device cost estimates for a design range of 1 to 30 seconds of energy storage .

the cost of a commercially produced smes unit ( 10mw / 2.8kwh , 1 second discharge ) is estimated at $215 / kw - $285 / kw , and is within the lower range of projected costs .

since very few smes devices have been built commercially , these costs represent demonstration project costs .

it is likely that future costs could benefit from organizational learning - based cost reductions and by achieving economies of scale .

smes costs increase significantly with increasing energy storage .

a $1,000 / kw smes device is likely to have the stored energy capacity to discharge for 3.5-7.5 seconds , and a $2,000 / kw device has a stored energy range of about 8-16 seconds .

unless energy - based costs for smes devices achieve significant cost improvements , smes will likely only compete in power quality markets .

both the superconductor and cryocooler costs would have to achieve about an order of magnitude of cost reductions to compete with flywheels and batteries in regulation and reserves markets , and they would have to achieve several orders of magnitude cost reductions to compete with compressed air energy storage and pumped storage hydro in diurnal storage applications .

o&m costs are not included in figure 37 .

fixed o&m costs have been estimated at $16-$26 / kw - yr .

variable o&m costs have been estimated at about $11-$14 / kw - yr , of which about $5 / kw - yr is based on the cost of electricity for cooling an lts system .

a large fraction of variable o&m costs are dependent on the electricity costs associated with running cryocoolers .

smes research and development is focused primarily on developing and demonstrating hts coil materials , as well as improving cryocooler design and performance .

several bscco hts storage devices have been built and demonstrated in laboratories .

however , no ybco devices have been demonstrated , although ybco has the potential to significantly reduce hts costs if fabrication challenges can be overcome .

currently , hts systems remain more expensive than lts systems , which remain the commercial standard .

cryocoolers are also an active area of research , much of which has focused on improving designs to reduce initial capital costs , and improving performance to reduce cryocooler power loads , and operating costs .

smes systems do not use fuel or water , do not contain hazardous chemicals , are emissions free , and have a relatively small footprint .

additionally , smes units are frequently designed to be mobile .

one challenge in siting a smes resource is limiting human exposure to strong magnetic fields .

magnetic field exposure can be managed through magnetic shielding ( using passive material shielding , or active shielding with a compensating magnetic coil ) or by siting the smes resource on enough land to limit human exposure .

it is not likely that material constraints will limit smes deployment .

lts superconductors require niobium and titanium .

niobium is rare , but annual niobium production is tens of thousands of tons , which is more than sufficient for potential smes applications .

titanium is a fairly common earth element mined at a rate of millions of tons annually .

the elements required for the hts material ybco are not rare , and will not limit deployment .

smes systems are likely to be limited to power quality applications in utility and industrial markets .

smes costs are primarily driven by the cost of superconducting coils and cryocoolers .

these costs would have to decrease by at least an order of magnitude for smes to compete in frequency regulation and reserve markets , and by several orders of magnitude to compete in diurnal storage markets .

smes research and development are currently focused on developing and demonstrating high temperature superconductor materials for the electromagnetic coil , as well as improving cryocooler design and performance .

hts units have historically used bscco materials , and there is also the potential to demonstrate the use of less costly hts materials like ybco .

currently , hts magnetic energy storage systems are more expensive than low temperature superconducting lts systems , which remain the commercial standard .

there is considerable effort on developing and demonstrating new hts materials across several fields .

smes costs will benefit from future advancements driven by developments in related fields .

however , hts costs will have to decrease substantially for smes to compete in energy - intensive storage markets .

ac - alternating current afc - alkaline fuel cell arpa - e - advanced research projects agency – energy arra - american recovery and reinvestment act bscco - bismuth strontium calcium copper oxide ( type of superconductor ) caes - compressed air energy storage caiso - california independent system operator cec - california energy commission cer - charging electricity ratio csp - concentrating solar power ct - combustion turbine dc - direct current dmfc - direct methanol fuel cell dod - depth of discharge doe - department of energy ec - electrochemical capacitors epri - electric power research institute ercot - electric reliability council of texas ev - electric vehicle fcev - fuel cell electric vehicle ferc - federal energy regulatory commission foa - funding opportunity announcement gw - gigawatts hev - hybrid electric vehicle hhv - higher heating value htf - heat - transfer fluid iso - independent system operator itc - investment tax credit koh - potassium hydroxide kw - kilowatt kwh - kilowatt hour li - ion - lithium - ion lts - low temperature superconductor mcfc - molten carbonate fuel cell mwh - megawatt hour nas - sodium sulfur nerc - north american electric reliability corporation nimh - nickel metal hydride nox - nitrogen oxides nrel - national renewable energy laboratory nyserda - new york state energy research and development authority o&m - operations and maintenance occ - overnight construction cost pafc - phosphoric acid pem - polymer electrolyte membrane pemfc - proton exchange membrane fuel cells phev - plug - in hybrid electric vehicles phs - pumped hydro storage psi - pounds per square inch r&d - research and development rd&d - research , development , and deployment rto - regional transmission organization sli - starting , lighting , and ignition smes - superconducting magnetic energy storage sofc - solid oxide fuel cell t&d - transmission and distribution tes - thermal energy storage tio - technology improvement opportunities tou - time of use twh - terrawatt hour ups - uninterruptible power supply v2g - hehicle - to - grid vg - variable generation vmt - vehicle mile traveled voc - volatile organic compound wwsis - western wind and solar integration study ybco - yttrium barium copper oxide ( type of superconductor ) .

