the republic of the union of myanmar ( burma ) held parliamentary by - elections on april 1 , 2012 .

depending on the conduct of the election , the official election results , and the treatment of the newly elected members of parliament , u.s. policy toward burma may undergo a major shift , possibly including the waiver or removal of some of the current u.s. sanctions .

other nations and the european union ( eu ) are reportedly also considering removing sanctions or restrictions on burma depending on their assessments of the by - elections .

the by - elections originally were to fill 48 vacant seats in burma's various parliaments .

burma's parliamentary system consists of the bicameral union parliament ( pyidaungsu hluttaw ) plus separate local parliaments for each of the nation's seven states and seven regions .

the two chambers of the union parliament are the lower house people's assembly ( pyithu hluttaw ) with 440 seats , and the upper house national assembly ( amyotha hluttaw ) with 224 seats .

the number of seats in the local parliaments vary .

one - quarter of the seats in each chamber of the union parliament and in each of the local parliaments are appointed by the commander - in - chief of burma's military , the tatmadaw .

the april by - elections were to fill 40 vacant seats in people's assembly , 6 seats in the national assembly , 1 seat in ayeyarwady ( irrawaddy ) region , and 1 seat in the bago ( pegu ) region ( see figure 1 ) .

however , on march 23 , 2012 , the union election commission ( uec ) postponed voting for three people's assembly seats in the kachin state for security reasons .

forty - five of the seats are vacant because the elected member accepted a position in the union government .

two seats are vacant because the elected member was removed from office , and the last seat is vacant due to the member's death .

all 48 seats were previously held by members of the pro - military union solidarity and development party ( usdp ) .

in terms of the overall balance of power in the union parliament , the by - elections will have only a marginal impact .

less than 9% of the total seats in the people's assembly and under 3% in the national assembly were contested ( see table 1 ) .

the by - elections are largely considered significant because of the participation of the nld , and its chair aung san suu kyi , who is viewed both domestically and internationally as the leader of burma's democracy movement .

the election campaign unofficially began in march 2012 , after each party registered its slate of candidates with the union election commission ( uec ) .

president thein sein and the union government pledged to make the by - elections free and fair .

however , a number of incidents during the campaign period revealed efforts by government officials to undermine the ability of the nld to carry out its campaign , as well as intimidate or coerce people to support the usdp .

the exclusion of certain political parties and the campaign irregularities also raised doubts about how free and fair the by - elections were .

on march 20 , 2012 , it was reported that the burmese government had notified the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) that it could send election observers to burma as of march 28 , 2012 .

invitations to send election observers soon went out to the european union , the united states , and a number of other nations .

in contrast to election day in november 2010 , voting on april 1 went comparatively smoothly .

of particular note , there was no repeat of the mysterious appearance of "advance votes" that had marred the previous parliamentary elections .

according to the official results released by the uec , the nld won all 37 seats in the people's assembly , 4 seats in the national assembly , and both of the seats in the regional assemblies .

the usdp won 1 seat in the national assembly in sagaing region .

the shan nationalities democratic party ( sndp ) won the seat in the national assembly in the shan state .

as a result of the by - elections , the pro - military parties — the usdp and the national unity party ( nup ) — and the military control 77.5% of the seats in the people's assembly , 82.6% of the seats in the national assembly , and 79.2% of the seats in the combined union parliament .

this is more than enough votes to pass laws or amend the constitution without the support of any opposition party members .

the initial international response to the by - elections was generally positive .

the white house issued a short statement congratulating the people of burma for the elections .

a statement attributable to the spokesperson for secretary - general ban ki - moon also congratulated "the people , government , and political parties of myanmar for the peaceful and largely orderly manner in which sunday's by - elections for vacant parliamentary seats were held. .

the 10 asean leaders , who were meeting in cambodia , called for the removal of all sanctions on their fellow asean member .

a spokesperson for the european commission reportedly hinted that the eu would consider removing some of its sanctions on burma when it meets in late april .

by most accounts , voting on april 1 , 2012 , proceeded largely without a repeat of the irregularities that marred the parliamentary elections held on november 7 , 2010 .

by and large , the polling centers opened and closed on time , with few technical difficulties .

while there were allegations of inaccuracies in voter registration rolls , people were able to vote and the participating political parties , members of the diplomatic community , international election witnesses , and the local and international press were able to observe from inside the polling centers .

after the polls were closed , the ballot counting was generally conducted in the presence of witnesses for the contesting political parties and members of the public .

in some cases , spoiled ballots were shown to demonstrate that they were not valid .

after sorting , the ballots were counted before witnesses and the results for the polling center were recorded .

the april by - election vote differed from the november election in several important ways .

for example , no unexplained boxes of "advanced votes" appeared after the polling centers were closed on april 1 , as happened in november 2010 .

in addition , the ballot counting and recording of the results on april 1 was done before witnesses , in contrast to being done behind closed doors in many polling centers in november 2010 .

the uec announced the official results on april 2 and 3 , 2012 , and the text of the official announcements were printed in the government - run newspaper , the new light of myanmar , on april 3 and 4 , 2012 .

the nld won all 37 seats in the people's assembly , four seats in the national assembly , and both of the seats in the regional assemblies .

aung san suu kyi was among the nld winners ; she will be a member of the people's assembly for the yangon ( rangoon ) region .

the usdp won one seat in the national assembly located in the sagaing region .

the shan nationalities democratic party ( sndp ) won one the national assembly located in the shan state .

while the results may be considered a landslide victory for the nld and a stunning defeat for the usdp , they do not significantly alter the balance of power in the two chambers of the union parliament ( see table 2 ) .

the pro - military parties — the usdp and the nup — combined with the appointed military seats hold an overwhelming majority in both chambers and 79.2% of the seats in the union parliament , enough to pass laws and amend the constitution without support from opposition parties .

the nld has become the largest opposition party in both chambers of the union parliament , overtaking the sndp in the people's assembly and the rakhine nationals progressive party in the national assembly .

after the uec officially announced the dates for the parliamentary by - elections , the obama administration called upon the burmese government to take the measures necessary to ensure that the elections would be held in a free and fair manner .

during his trip to burma three weeks before the by - elections , special representative and policy coordinator for burma derek mitchell reiterated the u.s. position , saying , "what we're interested in is the process .

we're committed to a free , fair , and transparent process that truly represents the will of the people of this country. .

in addition , senior u.s. officials indicated to the burmese government that it should consider allowing international observers to watch the election campaign , the balloting process , and the vote - counting to confirm that the election was conducted according to internationally accepted standards .

the day after the by - elections , the white house issued a brief statement , saying: we congratulate the people of burma on their participation in the electoral process , and aung san suu kyi and the national league for democracy on their strong showing in the polls .

this election is an important step in burma's democratic transformation , and we hope it is an indication that the government of burma intends to continue along the path of greater openness , transparency , and reform .

the obama administration has signaled that it would consider modifying or waiving some of the existing sanctions on burma if it determines that the elections were sufficiently free and fair to warrant such a response .

it has not , however , announced what changes in the sanctions are being considered .

nor has it disclosed the manner in which the possible changes would be made , including whether it intends to approach congress to pass legislation .

among the criteria to be considered in determining if the by - elections were sufficiently free and fair are the conduct of the campaign , the voting process , and the official results .

many observers believe that aung san suu kyi's assessment of the election process will influence the obama administration's decision as well .

some analysts suggest that the u.s. response may be done in a series of steps , with some possible sanction modifications being made only after the winners of the by - elections have been sworn into office and sufficient time has passed to assess how the new members of parliament are being treated by the usdp majority .

the obama administration's response to the by - elections may also be influenced by how other countries and the eu react to the election results .

on january 23 , 2012 , the eu suspended a visa ban against 87 individuals , including president thein sein , the nation's two vice presidents , its cabinet members , and the speakers of the two houses of burma's parliament .

in addition , the eu has indicated that — pending the conduct of burma's by - elections and continuing progress in a number of areas — it could relax other restrictive measures during the next comprehensive review of burma sanctions , most likely to occur in late april .

australia and japan have also signaled their intent to review their sanctions on burma following the by - elections .

the obama administration may decide to weigh its response after consultation with other entities that have imposed sanctions on burma .

while the parliamentary by - elections are drawing much of the attention in burma , important developments have occurred with respect to other major issues of concern for the united states , particularly the continued detention of political prisoners , the tatmadaw's continued attacks on ethnic militias , and the continued human rights violations of civilians in conflict areas .

the perceived status of these issues is likely to influence the obama administration's potential response to the outcome of the parliamentary by - elections .

the april parliamentary by - elections provide burma's union government , its union parliament , and the tatmadaw another opportunity to demonstrate their commitment to political reform and national reconciliation .

they also provide congress with more evidence by which to assess the present situation in burma and to possibly re - examine current u.s. policy .

in addition , congress may be asked by the obama administration to alter or amend one or more of the existing laws governing u.s. sanctions on burma , depending on the outcome of the parliamentary by - elections .

one of the key issues likely to be considered is the criteria by which to assess the by - elections .

events to date suggest that the elections did not achieve the four standards set forth by u.n. special rapporteur tomás quintana — free , fair , transparent , and inclusive .

the exclusion of some political parties , constraints on campaigning activities , and censorship of campaign speeches and materials are examples of actions where expectations for inclusive , free , and fair elections may not have been fully met .

another likely key issue is the establishment of the criteria by which to select and construct a u.s. response .

one criterion used in the past has been the rewarding of positive developments by providing burma with something it desires .

a second criterion suggested is to respond in a manner that is expected to encourage or create incentives for the burmese government to undertake further reforms .

a third criterion is to take actions that bolster the political power or authority of burmese officials identified as being pro - reform , and / or undermine the power or authority of burmese officials views as being barriers to progress in burma .

other criteria for the formation of the u.s. response have been discussed , but it may benefit congress to consider its goals and objections when taking up the issue of a possible response to the april by - elections .

finally , the obama administration may approach congress with specific requests for the alternation or amendment of existing laws imposing sanctions on burma .

in many cases , the president has the authority to temporarily or permanently waive existing sanctions .

however , in some cases , such authority does not exist and reduction or removal of the sanctions will require congressional action .

the obama administration has already begun consultations with congress on the future development of u.s. policy towards burma .

during the period prior to and after the by - elections , congress may decide to conduct hearings and undertake other forms of investigation into the situation in burma in preparation for its response to a request from the obama administration .

