currently , each participating house member solicits entries from high school students for the event and establishes his or her own method of judging the submissions .

there is no entry fee for the competition and previous entrants ( including winners ) may re - enter as long as they are high school students .

the winning artwork must conform to strict guidelines and meet all deadlines .

by mid - february of each year , the art competition guidelines and forms to accompany the submitted art are available to the public on the house of representatives website at https: / / www.house.gov / content / educate / art_competition .

it is the prerogative of the co - chairs , the house office building commission , the aoc curator , or the congressional institute , inc. , to modify the guidelines from year to year .

two sets of guidelines are available: the "2018 rules and regulations for congressional offices" ( shown as figure b - 1 , unavailable electronically ) .

the "2018 rules and regulations for students and teachers" can be found on the house of representatives public website at https: / / www.house.gov / sites / default / files / uploads / documents / 2018rulesfor studentsandteachers.pdf ( s hown as figure b - 2 ) .

the "student information & release form" is available at https: / / www.house.gov / sites / default / files / uploads / documents / 2018studentreleaseform.pdf ( shown as figure b - 3 ) , and a "2018 art submission checklist" is shown as figure b - 4 ( unavailable electronically ) .

since 2009 , the congressional institute , inc. has assisted and advised member offices on how to run the competition .

the institute responds to questions from participants , collects district winner information , prepares the list of winners , organizes the receipt of the artwork , and shares coordination of the reception honoring the district winners .

the institute also photographs the artwork and provides a digital record of each annual competition to the house of representatives for posting on its public website .

it has been the practice for the congressional institute to mail the invitations , print the programs , and provide food for the annual reception .

the reception , transportation , name tags , t - shirts , photography , event website , and program printing have always been privately sponsored .

recent corporate sponsors have included general motors and southwest airlines .

members of congress may also obtain the services of local sponsors to assist with transportation and local awards .

at the culmination of the annual art competition , the winning entries from participating congressional districts are available on the house of representatives website .

the names of the 2018 winners and their artwork are available at https: / / www.conginst.org / art - competition / ? compyear=2018&state=all .

the congressional art competition co - chairs generally invite an artist from their respective congressional districts to address the student winners at the reception .

since it began in 1982 , "over 650,000 high school students nationwide have been involved with the nation - wide competition. .

there are no required procedures for selecting the winning entries for participating congressional districts .

any entry that conforms to the general specifications stated in the "guidelines for students and teachers" is eligible to represent a congressional district .

members of congress may have local art teachers , art gallery owners , civic leaders , local businesses , or member office staff assist with the judging to select their district winner .

members of congress may also enlist the participation of businesses in the congressional district to donate plaques , savings bonds , and other prizes , or to sponsor a reception or event to announce the competition's district winner .

for example , since 2004 , the savannah college of art and design ( scad ) in savannah , ga , has offered scholarship opportunities to the first - place winners of the district competitions as long as funding is available , according to school sources .

the $3,000 scholarship may be renewed annually .

other scholarships are targeted for winning entrants from a specific congressional district .

in recent years , these have included scholarships to the high school summer institute at chicago's columbia college and the art institute of phoenix .

georgia's 13 th congressional district winner may receive a scholarship to the art institute of atlanta , in pennsylvania , the 15 th congressional district winner is eligible for a full - year scholarship to the baum school of art in allentown , and tennessee 3 rd congressional district participants are eligible for a $3,000 scholarship to tennessee wesleyan university in athens , tn .

additional prizes that have been awarded include roundtrip airfare to washington , dc , for the opening of the annual exhibition , gift certificates to local art supply stores , family memberships for a year to an art museum , and cash .

although no congressional or taxpayer funds may be used for prizes or scholarships , corporate sponsorship is allowed .

as in past years , southwest airlines is providing two roundtrip tickets to winning entrants from any city with scheduled southwest service to ronald reagan washington national airport or baltimore - washington's thurgood marshall international airport ( bwi ) .

tickets will be issued to a parent or guardian as epasses and are to be used within the period of two weeks before and two weeks after the washington , dc , congressional art competition ceremony .

southwest airlines does not provide hotel accommodations or hotel discounts .

appendix a .

letters establishing the congressional art competition appendix b .

congressional art competition sample forms appendix c. congressional art competition leadershi .

