the federal health center program awards grants to support health centers: outpatient primary care facilities that provide care to primarily low - income individuals .

the program is administered by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) — specifically by its bureau of primary care — within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the federal health center program is authorized in section 330 of the public health service act ( phsa ) and supports four types of health centers: ( 1 ) community health centers ; ( 2 ) health centers for the homeless ; ( 3 ) health centers for residents of public housing ; and ( 4 ) migrant health centers .

according to hrsa data , over 9,400 unique health center sites ( i.e. , individual health center facility locations ) exist ; the majority are community health centers ( chcs ) .

chcs serve the general low income or otherwise disadvantaged population , whereas the remaining three types of health centers provide care to more targeted low income or otherwise disadvantaged populations ( eg , migrant health workers ) .

regardless of type , health centers are required , by statute , to provide health care to all individuals regardless of their ability to pay and are required to be located in geographic areas that have few health care providers .

these requirements make health centers part of the health safety net — providers that serve the uninsured , the underserved , or those enrolled in medicaid .

data compiled by hrsa demonstrate that health centers serve the intended safety net population as the majority of patients are uninsured or enrolled in medicaid .

this report provides an overview of the federal health center program including its statutory authority , program requirements , and appropriation levels .

the report then describes health centers in general , where they are located , their patient population , and some outcomes associated with health center use .

it also describes the federal programs available to assist health center operations including the federally qualified health center ( fqhc ) designation for medicare and medicaid payments .

the report concludes with a brief discussion of issues for congress such as the potential effects of the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca ) on health centers ( both the program and individual health centers ) , the health center workforce , and financial considerations for health centers in the context of changing federal and state budgets .

finally , the report has two appendices that describe ( 1 ) fqhc payments for medicare and medicaid beneficiaries served at health centers ; and ( 2 ) programs that are similar to health centers but not authorized in section 330 of the phsa .

the federal health center program awards grants to support outpatient primary care facilities that provide care to primarily low income individuals .

the program is authorized in section 330 of the phsa , which also includes definitions of the four types of health centers and program requirements .

this section of the report describes the statutory authority for the federal health center program ( also called the health center program ) , program requirements , types of grants awarded in support of the health center program , the health center program's appropriation , and other funding / revenue that health centers receive .

this section describes health center facilities funded under the health center program appropriation .

it includes a discussion of the four types of health centers funded and compares the services offered and populations served by each center type .

the section also describes where health centers are located and outcomes associated with health center use .

health centers face a number of issues that may be of concern to congress .

these include ( 1 ) the role of health centers in health insurance expansions under the aca , ( 2 ) the adequacy of the health center workforce , and ( 3 ) financial challenges that health centers may face .

these challenges may also be interrelated .

for example , health centers may be affected by the mandatory budget reductions that may be required as part of the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) , and such budget reductions may impact the ability of health centers to provide access to care for the newly insured when the aca is fully implemented .

this section briefly summarizes these issues and discusses how some aca changes may alleviate or exacerbate health center concerns .

health care access has traditionally been an issue of congressional concern .

for example , gao , at congressional request , has examined medicare and medicaid beneficiary access to health care providers .

in addition , one of the purposes of aca title v was to improve access to and the delivery of health care services for all individuals , particularly low income , underserved , uninsured , minority , health disparity , and rural populations .

the health workforce and its role in providing access to traditionally underserved populations has also been an area of congressional interest .

for example , one of the four mechanisms that title v of the aca included to improve health care access was to "increase the supply of a qualified health care workforce. .

the title also reauthorized a number of programs in titles vii and viii of the phsa , both of which focus on the workforce .

congress , through the appropriations process for the health center program and for programs that support health centers , has an interest in the financial circumstances that health centers face .

congress may also be interested in how deficit reduction efforts and other policy changes ( for example , changes in medicare and medicaid payments or eligibility ) may affect the health center program and the financial circumstances of individual health centers .

finally , congress may consider program changes — such as making changes to granting preference or program requirements — as a way of addressing some of the challenges that health centers face .

health centers serve a predominantly low - income medically underserved population with limited or no access to health care .

research has shown that health centers improve health care access and improve health for the underserved populations they target .

in doing so , health centers may reduce the use of more costly emergency department services thereby reducing health care costs .

the federal government supports health centers through the health center program that awards grants to plan , operate , and expand health centers and through programs that provide recruitment and financial incentives including increased reimbursements through the federally qualified health center ( fqhc ) designation .

health center appropriations have increased over the past decade , but it is unclear whether these increases will continue .

a number of issues facing both the health center program and individual health centers may be of concern to congress .

on the program side , congress may be concerned about the program's appropriation level and the impact of federal deficit reduction efforts on the health center program .

for individual health centers , congress may be concerned about provider vacancies and the role that individual health centers may play in providing health access when the aca is fully implemented .

appendix a .

other federal programs that may provide primary care to the underserved the federal government supports facilities that provide primary care to low - income or otherwise medically underserved populations through a number of facilities that are similar to health centers , but are not authorized in phsa section 330 .

for example , the aca authorized funding for school - based health centers and nurse - managed health clinics .

both of these facilities serve underserved populations , but have different requirements than facilities authorized in phsa section 330 .

the federal government also provides support for facilities that provide care to targeted populations such as american indians , alaska natives , and native hawaiians , facilities located in rural areas , facilities that provide mental health services , and facilities that provide free care .

this appendix describes these types of facilities , their authorization , and program requirements .

school - based health centers school - based health centers ( sbhcs ) are facilities located on or near school grounds that provide age - appropriate comprehensive primary health care services to students regardless of their ability to pay .

sbhcs may be located at public , private , charter , or parochial schools and must open , at a minimum , during school hours .

prior to the aca , hrsa funded sbhcs through its section 330 appropriation .

the aca authorized separate sbhc grants in section 339z - 1 of the phsa and appropriated $200 million ( $50 million annually ) from fy2010 to fy2013 to support grants for sbhc construction and renovation .

although the aca authorized grants for sbhc operation , funding has not yet been appropriated for these grants .

despite the lack of an explicit sbhc operating grant program , some section 330 grantees may operate sbhcs .

hrsa estimates that there are 1,152 sbhcs .

nurse - managed health clinics nurse - managed health centers ( nmhcs ) are centers that provide comprehensive primary care and wellness services to underserved populations where nurses provide the majority of health services .

nmhcs are required to serve the entire population in the area in which they are located and must have an advisory committee similar to those required for section 330 health centers .

nhmcs provide wellness services , prenatal care , disease prevention , management of chronic conditions like asthma , hypertension and diabetes , and health education .

some also provide dental and mental health services .

aca authorized grants to support nmhcs in phsa section 330a - 1 .

in fy2010 , hhs awarded $15 million to provide three years of support for 10 nhmcs .

grantees were required to submit a sustainability plan for operation after the federal grant period is complete in 2013 .

no funding has been awarded since fy2010 .

community mental health centers community mental health centers ( cmhc ) are licensed facilities that provide mental health services .

these facilities are required to provide mental health services that are tailored to the needs of children and adults ( including the elderly ) who have a serious mental illness .

these facilities are also required to provide services to individuals that have been discharged from inpatient treatment at a mental health facility .

among the required services , cmhcs must provide emergency services ; day treatment or other partial hospitalization services ; psychosocial rehabilitation services ; and screening for admission into state mental health facilities .

the aca required that cmhcs provide less than 40% of its services to medicare beneficiaries .

chmcs received funding from substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) block grants .

these include samhsa substance abuse prevention and treatment block grants and community mental health services block grants .

they are also eligible for hhs grants awarded through the social service block grant .

cmhcs also receive reimbursements from medicare and medicaid for covered services provided to beneficiaries enrolled in these programs .

native hawaiian health care the federal government supports the native hawaiian health care system ( nhhcs ) , which is composed of five grantees and the papa ola lokahi , a consortium of health care organizations that provide primary care , health promotion , and disease prevention services to native hawaiians .

this population often faces cultural , financial , and geographic barriers to accessing health care services .

the nhhcs was originally authorized under the native hawaiian health care act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-579 ) , which was reauthorized through fy2019 in the aca .

the nhhcs is not a grant program under section 330 of the public health service act , but the system receives funding through the health center appropriation .

in fy2011 , nhhcs provided medical and enabling services , such as transportation and translation services , to more than 8,400 people .

tribal health centers indian tribes ( its ) , tribal organization ( tos ) , and urban indian organizations ( uios ) may receive funds from the indian health service ( ihs ) to operate health centers for american indians or alaska natives .

although tribal health centers may be similar to health centers funded under section 330 grants they are not subject to section 330 requirements .

for example , they are not required to provide services to all individuals in their service area .

they are also not required to seek payments or reimbursements on behalf of the clients they see because ihs provides services to all eligible american indians and alaska natives free of charge .

tribal health centers — those operated by an it , a to , or a uio — may be designated as federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) and receive the medicare and medicaid fqhc payment rate ( see appendix b ) .

its , tos , and uios may also apply for and receive funds under section 330 of the phsa ; however , should an entity receive section 330 funds it would be subject to all section 330 requirements ( i.e. , would be require to provide services to non - american indians and alaska natives ) .

tribal health centers that receive section 330 grants are also required to ensure that funds received from ihs are only used to provide services to ihs - eligible individuals .

rural health clinics rural health clinics ( rhcs ) are outpatient primary care facilities located in rural and medically underserved areas .

these facilities receive higher medicare and medicaid payments — similar to the fqhc payment rate — for services provided to beneficiaries enrolled in the medicare and medicaid programs .

rhcs are similar to health centers except that they ( 1 ) do not receive federal grants , ( 2 ) may be operated by for - profit entities , ( 3 ) are not required to provide services to individuals regardless of ability to pay , and ( 4 ) are not required to offer a sliding scale fee schedule .

free clinics free clinics are outpatient facilities that provide medical , dental , and behavioral health services to underserved populations that are primarily uninsured .

free clinics are tax - exempt organizations that provide health care to individuals regardless of their ability to pay and are not permitted to charge for services .

in general , free clinic funding comes from donations ( both monetary and in - kind ) , religious groups , foundations and corporations .

there are more than 1,200 free clinics that provide services to a population that is similar to that served by health centers .

free clinics do not receive funding from hrsa , but may participate in the free clinics medical malpractice program administered by hrsa that provides liability coverage to health care providers at free clinics .

federally qualified health center ( fqhc ) look - alikes fqhc look - alikes are facilities that meet the criteria to receive a health center grant , but do not receive a grant because section 330 funding is not available .

the fqhc look - alike program was authorized in 1990 to support the demand for new health centers .

hrsa and cms can designate certain facilities as "fqhc look - alikes," making these facilities eligible for certain federal programs ( eg , the nhsc and the 340b drug discount program ) available to health centers and for the fqhc payment rate .

to be designated as an fqhc look - alike , a facility submits an application to hrsa , the agency reviews the application and then recommends to cms which facilities should be designated as fqhc look - alikes .

as of november 2013 , hrsa reported that there were 316 fqhc look - alikes .

appendix b. medicare and medicaid payments and beneficiary cost sharing for health center services all health centers can be designated as federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) upon enrolling as a provider in the medicare and medicaid programs .

the fqhc designation makes section 330 grantees ( among others , see text box ) eligible for medicare and medicaid reimbursements rates that are generally higher than the reimbursement rates for comparable services provided in a physician's office .

the fqhc designation was created to ensure that medicare and medicaid reimbursements cover the costs of providing services so that section 330 grant funds are not used to subsidize these costs .

this appendix describes medicare and medicaid payments to fqhcs and aca - required changes to medicare fqhc payments .

medicare payments to health centers health centers are paid an all - inclusive payment rate for most services provided to medicare beneficiaries .

it is intended to reflect the cost of all services provided to a beneficiary during a "covered visit" regardless of the specific services provided ( see text box ) .

the all - inclusive payment rate is calculated by dividing the total estimated allowable costs ( with certain limits that take into account the reasonable costs for providing a service , productivity , and payment limits ) by the number of total number of visits for services ( see text box for definition of visits ) .

the rate includes services provided by physicians and other providers and the supplies used to provide these services .

the all - inclusive rate does not apply for certain preventive services including pneumococcal and influenza vaccines and their administration ; instead these services are billed separately and reimbursed at 100% of the reasonable cost of providing the service .

the all - inclusive payment rate also does not include certain diagnostic tests such as x - rays and laboratory tests , which are billed separately .

fqhcs are reimbursed based on estimated costs ; this payment is then adjusted at the end of the year to account for the actual costs of providing services .

these reconciled amounts are subject to payment limits , which are updated each year by a measure of price inflation .

the all - inclusive payment rate is also updated annually and is adjusted to take into account urban and rural differences in the costs of providing care .

medicare beneficiaries are subject to different deductible and cost sharing requirements for services provided at fqhcs .

specifically , the medicare part b deductible does not apply for fqhc services .

beneficiaries — with some exceptions — must pay the 20% copayment for medicare services .

aca payment changes recent studies have indicated that medicare reimbursements may not be sufficient to cover the costs of providing services ; therefore , the aca requires changes to how fqhcs are paid for services provided to medicare beneficiaries .

specifically , the aca required that medicare develop a prospective payment system ( pps ) for fqhcs that would eliminate the all - inclusive payment rate and may better align medicare payments with the cost of providing services .

to implement the new pps system , cms issued a proposed rule that proposes to establish a national encounter - based rate for all fqhcs .

this encounter rate would be calculated using medicare cost report and claims data to assure that the rate reflects the cost of providing services .

the rate would also be adjusted for several factors including geographic differences costs , more intensive services that may be provided during the annual wellness visit , and more time or services that may be provided during a medicare beneficiary's first visit to an fqhc .

the new rule would also eliminate payments for multiple visits on one day , which cms determined are rare among medicare beneficiaries who receive services at fqhcs .

the aca also required that medicare preventive services and the initial exam for new medicare beneficiaries be provided without copayments .

this differs from the general medicare beneficiary copayment of 20% of the fee charged by the health center .

mental health service payment changes the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa , p.l .

110-275 ) also changed medicare reimbursement for mental health services at fqhcs .

previously , medicare reimbursements were limited at 62.5% of the reasonable costs for outpatient mental health services ; however , this limit will be phased out by january 1 , 2014 .

medicaid payments medicaid uses a pps to reimburse fqhcs for services provided to medicaid beneficiaries .

the pps establishes a predetermined per - visit payment rate for each fqhc based on costs of services .

the pps was established based on cost report data in fy1999 and fy2000 and is updated annually for medical inflation .

the state , in turn , receives the appropriate federal matching amount .

states are also required to adjust pps payment rates based on any changes in the scope of services provided at the fqhc .

states are not required to use the pps to reimburse fqhcs , but they may not reimburse an fqhc less than it would have received under the pps .

in 2011 , approximately 20 states and puerto rico used the pps , 12 states used an alternative payment methodology ( apm ) to reimburse fqhcs under medicaid , and the remaining states used a combination of both methods .

states are also required to supplement fqhcs that subcontract ( directly or indirectly ) with medicaid managed care entities ( mces ) .

these supplemental payments are supposed to make up the difference , if any , between the payment received by the fqhc from the mce and the medicaid payment that the fqhc would be entitled to under the pps or the apm .

the aca did not include changes in medicaid fqhc reimbursement policy .

