on august 5 , 2004 , the united states entered into the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) with costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , and the dominican republic ( hereafter the cafta - dr countries ) .

congress engaged in a full year of debate before narrowly passing the implementing bill .

on july 28 , 2005 , after assurances from bush administration officials on many issues , the house approved it by a two - vote margin ( 217 to 215 ) , followed by passage in the senate ( 55-45 ) , clearing the measure for presidential signature on august 2 , 2005 ( p.l .

109-53 ) .

implementing the agreement proved equally challenging and occurred on a rolling basis after each country made legal , regulatory , and rule changes to comply with the accord's obligations .

cafta - dr entered into force with el salvador , honduras , nicaragua , and guatemala by july 1 , 2006 , the dominican republic on march 1 , 2007 , and costa rica on january 1 , 2009 .

this report follows up on congressional interest by providing an analysis of the trends in trade and investment since cafta - dr entered into force six years ago .

changes in rules governing issues such as intellectual property rights , government procurement , services , labor and others are not easily measured and will require a longer - time frame to evaluate .

the report concentrates on trends in all countries , with close attention paid to the cafta - dr partner economies .

the marginal effects on the u.s. economy are expected to be small by comparison because the cafta - dr countries are economically about the size of the denver metropolitan area , and they already had duty - free access to the u.s. market under various unilateral preference programs .

historically , the united states has entered into free trade agreements ( ftas ) and unilateral trade preference programs with developing countries in the pursuit of both economic and foreign policy goals .

in 1983 , the u.s. congress passed the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi — formally the caribbean basin economic recovery act — p.l .

98-67 ) to support political and economic stability in the caribbean at a particularly vulnerable time ( see figure 1 , map of central america and the caribbean ) .

the cbi included limited unilateral trade preferences , which required periodic congressional reauthorization .

cafta - dr builds on this precedent , but makes preferential access comprehensive , reciprocal , and permanent while also enhancing rules and other disciplines on trade .

it is intended to strengthen economic relations as a way to stimulate growth , to foster stability , and , in the words of congress , "to lay the foundation for further cooperation. .

the economic rationale rests on preferential access for agricultural and manufactured goods produced in the region .

by removing regional barriers to trade , cafta - dr encouraged the development of specialized co - production in assembly manufacturing between the united states and cafta - dr countries based on comparative advantage and economies of scale .

this strategy has increased the productivity ( a major benefit of trade ) of firms in all countries .

firm competitiveness rests on value - added supply chain relationships , particularly in the area of apparel manufacturing , later extended to automobile parts , medical equipment , integrated circuits , and other products .

tariff preferences under cafta - dr ( and cbi previously ) have helped firms remain marginally competitive with asian and other low - cost global producers .

by moving from limited unilateral trade preferences to comprehensive bilateral free trade under cafta - dr , u.s. exporters also stood to benefit from reduced trade barriers , both for final goods and the increasingly large intermediate goods trade characteristic of the supply chain model .

market access , therefore , was central to the fta negotiations .

equally important for the united states were enhanced rules covering multiple disciplines including trade in services , intellectual property rights , sanitary and phytosanitary regulations , investment , government procurement , labor , and environment , among others .

from the central american and dominican perspectives , permanently reducing barriers to the u.s. market was the core objective , assuring investors that exports would have permanent duty - free access to the large u.s. market , while ensuring lower - cost imports ( including capital and intermediate goods ) for consumers and producers alike .

increased trade can raise a country's long - term growth rate through multiple channels including increased market size , production specialization , scale economies , transfer of technology and managerial / worker expertise , more efficient resource use , and increased investment .

with these factors in mind , the agreement takes on an added importance given the dominant role of the u.s. economy for the cafta - dr countries .

market access in a reciprocal trade agreement works both ways , however , so countries also face certain challenges .

in the united states , cafta - dr raised concerns over negative effects on import - competing firms .

this is often part of the cost inherent in a free trade agreement , though it is expected to be small relative to the u.s. economy as a whole .

for cafta - dr countries , u.s. agricultural exports , including staples such as corn and rice , increasingly compete with local production of basic grains .

a transition period was built in with an extended tariff phase - out schedule and safeguards as a partial response to this concern .

as a matter of development policy , however , cafta - dr countries also envision diversifying agricultural sectors into higher value nontraditional exports , and integrating rural economies more deeply with other sectors .

cafta - dr's success will in part be judged by how well this transition is made , and so far , results have not been uniform among the six countries .

market access is at the center of free trade agreements and refers to provisions that govern barriers to trade such as tariffs and quotas .

rules of origin determine which goods are eligible for tariff preferences based on their regional content , and are particularly relevant for textile and apparel trade .

cafta - dr requires that each country accord national and most favored nation treatment ( non - discrimination ) to all parties .

the fta also replaces and consolidates in a permanent bilateral agreement trade preferences formerly extended unilaterally under the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , the caribbean basin economic recovery act ( cbera ) , and the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( cbtpa ) .

cafta - dr calls for the progressive elimination of nearly all customs duties .

each country negotiated a list of its most sensitive products for which duty - free treatment is delayed , including separate provisions for certain apparel and agricultural products .

for non - textile manufactured goods , duties on 80% of u.s. exports were eliminated immediately , with the rest phased out over a period of up to 10 years .

for agricultural goods , duties on over 50% of u.s. exports were eliminated immediately , with the rest phased out over a period of up to 20 years .

in some cases , duty - free treatment is "back loaded," meaning it will not begin for seven years or more after the agreement takes effect .

for the cafta - dr countries , 100% of non - textile and non - agricultural goods began to enter the united states duty free upon implementation .

safeguards are retained for certain agriculture and textile goods over the period of duty phaseout , but antidumping and countervailing duties were not addressed in the cafta - dr , leaving all u.s. and other country trade remedy laws fully enforceable under the world trade organization ( wto ) .

following is a discussion of the major trends in merchandise trade from 2000 to 2011 .

for comparative purposes , this encompasses a period of time before and after the agreement entered into force .

it is a starting point for raising questions over the possible effects of cafta - dr .

ftas are often considered as much about investment as trade , and foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is one measure of a country's foreign attractiveness .

an fta can encourage fdi through two channels .

first , permanent preferential access to the u.s. market reassures potential investors that access to the largest market is more stable .

second , enhanced investment rules protect investors .

investment is a critical component of a country's economic growth and development , and where domestic savings rates are low , or opportunities are readily apparent , fdi is one way to meet demand for capital .

there are potentially many economic benefits to fdi , although their realization depends on where and how fdi is invested , and the policies governing its use .

in general , however , there appears to be broad recognition that the benefits of fdi outweigh the costs in most cases for developing countries .

trends in fdi vary among the six cafta - dr countries and total net foreign direct investment is shown in figure 7 , with the united states the largest investor in the region .

trends suggest that a formal investment agreement alone is not sufficient to guarantee uniform results .

three trends stand out: first , fdi increased in all cafta - dr countries immediately prior to and after the fta entered into force , but magnitudes differed widely ; second , investment is also influenced by macroeconomic conditions , as reflected in the decline following the 2007-08 global financial crisis ; and , third , costa rica and the dominican republic outdistanced the rest of the countries in attracting new fdi .

they have the highest labor rates ( see table a - 10 in the appendix ) and level of manufactured exports , indicating that investment is not necessarily drawn to low - cost producers , but rather to countries that have relatively higher levels of stability , education , and productivity .

both theoretical and empirical literature on trade presents differing viewpoints on the benefits of liberalizing commercial exchange in small developing countries .

trade can promote growth through increased productivity , and firm - level studies corroborate the strong link between firm productivity and exporting , but they often argue that the benefit from trade comes from "facilitating the growth of high - productivity plants , not by increasing productivity growth at those plants. .

that is , productivity may increase trade more than the other way around , although both directions of influence are likely .

many economists also argue that trade liberalization can increase a country's long - term growth rate through other channels including increased market size , production specialization , scale economies , transfer of technology and managerial / worker expertise , more efficient resource use , and increased investment .

case studies , however , offer contradictory evidence , pointing up examples where growth has or has not followed trade opening .

such seemingly irreconcilable outcomes raise fundamental questions over how and why the benefits of trade seem to be more robust in some cases , but not in others .

cafta - dr countries comprise an economically heterogeneous group and seem to mirror the disparate responses to trade liberalization found in the economic literature .

country - and product - specific trade and fdi trends vary significantly .

noticeable differences exist with respect to a number of variables that may affect a country's ability to manage openness under an fta .

for the export model of development to succeed , productivity improvements are necessary , which in addition to private sector initiatives implies an important public sector role in creating a solid business environment .

failure to do so may be equivalent to restricting many of the cafta - dr countries to a diminished development model of trade in which they are locked into low - level manufacturing and low - value agricultural production , competing with the poorest countries of the world .

in such a scenario , improving economic well - being will be a slow process .

managing openness implies encouraging macroeconomic stability , investment , and complementary policies to enhance economic growth directly , which can improve chances for reaping the benefits of trade liberalization .

stated otherwise , developing countries may respond less to trade liberalization because they are less invested in policies that , in and of themselves , promote growth more directly than trade .

a non - exhaustive list includes support for private sector investment , infrastructure , education , and good governance , including an efficient and predictable regulatory framework .

as discussed below , the fiscal commitment to accomplish these goals has been lacking , with the possible exception of costa rica .

to the extent that these , and perhaps other non - trade policy areas , function to improve economic growth and efficiency , they can directly and indirectly support a country's ability to take fuller advantage of trade liberalization .

differences in growth of exports and fdi seem to correlate closely with similar trends in these variables .

although it is still early to pass judgment on the success or failure of cafta - dr , the accord has provided enhanced incentives to deepen a trade partnership built on a model of trade preferences that stretches back nearly three decades .

the crowning features of cafta - dr include transitioning to a reciprocal agreement , making tariff preferences permanent , creating more flexible rules of origin , liberalizing trade rules in new areas and commerce , and promoting institutional capacities in many areas to support the new trade and investment arrangement .

the data suggest that cafta - dr has supported a long - term trend in the region toward trade and investment liberalization , encouraging diversification into higher value - added , and in some cases , technology - enhanced goods .

u.s. exports have grown , with gains in agriculture and more modest growth in manufactured goods .

part of this growth appears to be related to cafta - dr and will likely continue as the trade agreement is fully implemented over time .

there are two major challenges to cafta - dr operating better .

first , the longer - term need for deeper structural transformation in the cafta - dr region may be hindering the development potential of the fta .

as suggested by the trends identified in this report , the level of transformative change varies dramatically among the six countries , and to a large extent appears to reflect national business climates and the degree to which national strategies and complementary policies are instituted to support productivity enhancements necessary to be competitive in a global market , a difficult and long - term proposition .

deteriorating security and governance capabilities in some countries further complicate the trade and investment environment .

over time , however , expectations of cafta - dr's success rely on policy changes that will improve chances for all countries to benefit more from this deepening and still evolving trade arrangement .

second , there are a number of issues that are being addressed in the short term , and which congress may wish to continue monitoring .

at the top of the list is enhancing trade facilitation , which refers to improving the rules and capacity of firms and countries to apply them to take full advantage of a trade agreement .

officials in cafta - dr countries , and firms operating there , have identified numerous important obstacles to the full and effective implementation of the trade agreement: rules of origin , which can be highly complex for textile trade , are frequently the object of firm complaints .

many specific rules seek to protect u.s. producers from third country competition .

for example , multiple cases have been identified in which u.s. producers are no longer capable or willing to supply the yarn or fabric covered by the rule , resulting in cafta - dr products having to use inputs that are subject to high tariffs or to forgo production entirely .

in other cases , rules covering u.s. inputs do not match up clearly , causing delays at the u.s. border .

customs determinations for these and other matters have caused delays at the u.s. and cafta - dr country borders .

in order to meet production deadlines , u.s. importers have at times decided to pay tariffs rather than wait for determinations that would have likely been made in their favor .

also , in some cases , u.s. customs procedures and rules have not been well understood by cafta - dr exporters .

in other cases , cafta - dr country customs modernization has been an issue .

assistance has been provided under usaid contracts to ensure u.s. exports are not delayed unnecessarily , but in some cases , further resources and dedication are needed to ensure a continuous smooth flow of u.s. goods .

the short supply list is also intended to protect u.s. producers , but the "first come" rule for use of tariff rate quotas has been criticized as inequitable and complicating production planning .

to the extent that these rules unnecessarily inhibit competitive trade , the agreement falls short of meeting its goals .

other challenges include interpretation and application of highly technical rules in areas such as intellectual property rights , sanitary and phytosanitary regulations , and telecommunications .

the complexities of the cafta - dr make for many operational challenges , with new ones emerging periodically .

over time , the trade data will likely reflect the extent to which the cafta - dr countries and the united states make use of the trade agreement , in part enhanced by addressing these and possibly other issues .

it is still early to pass judgment on this fta , but indicators to date suggest that both long - and short - term policy decisions may go a long way to improving the conditions that will allow cafta - dr to provide economic benefits for all participants .

