carbon capture and sequestration ( or storage ) — known as ccs — is a physical process that involves capturing manmade carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) at its source and storing it before its release to the atmosphere .

ccs could reduce the amount of co 2 emitted to the atmosphere from the continued use of fossil fuels at power plants and other large , industrial facilities .

an integrated ccs system would include three main steps: ( 1 ) capturing co 2 at its source and separating it from other gases ; ( 2 ) purifying , compressing , and transporting the captured co 2 to the sequestration site ; and ( 3 ) injecting the co 2 into subsurface geological reservoirs .

following its injection into a subsurface reservoir , the co 2 would need to be monitored for leakage and to verify that it remains in the target geological reservoir .

once injection operations cease , a responsible party would need to take title to the injected co 2 and ensure that it stays underground in perpetuity .

the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) has pursued research and development of aspects of the three main steps leading to an integrated ccs system since 1997 .

congress has appropriated nearly $7 billion in total since fy2008 for ccs research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) at doe's office of fossil energy: nearly $3.5 billion in total annual appropriations ( including fy2015 ) and $3.4 billion from the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ; enacted february 17 , 2009 , hereinafter referred to as the recovery act ) .

the large and rapid influx of funding for industrial - scale ccs projects from the recovery act was intended to accelerate development and demonstration of ccs in the united states .

the recovery act funding also was likely intended to help doe achieve its rd&d goals as outlined in the department's 2010 rd&d ccs roadmap .

 ( in part , the roadmap was intended to lay out a path for rapid technological development of ccs so that the united states could continue to use fossil fuels despite potential carbon restrictions. ) .

however , the future deployment of ccs may take a different course if the major components of the doe program follow a path similar to doe's futuregen project .

futuregen had experienced delays and multiple changes of scope and design since its inception in 2003 , and on february 3 , 2015 , doe announced that it was suspending the project .

 ( for more details , see sections below on " futuregen — a special case ? .

and " lessons from futuregen: a similar path for other demonstration projects ? " ) .

this report aims to provide a snapshot of the doe ccs program , including its current funding levels , together with some discussion of the program's achievements and prospects for success in meeting its stated goals .

other crs reports provide substantial detail on the technological and policy aspects of ccs .

u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed rules and guidelines for reducing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new and existing coal - fired power plants have been a focal point of discussion in congress about ccs .

how the demise of futuregen will affect that debate is yet to be seen .

legislation regarding ccs in the last congress mainly focused on two issues: stopping or slowing implementation of the epa ghg rules and guidelines and providing federal incentives to accelerate the demonstration and development of ccs at commercial scales .

although doe has pursued aspects of ccs rd&d since 1997 , the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) provided a 10-year authorization for the basic framework of ccs research and development at doe .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) amended the energy policy act of 2005 to include , among other provisions , authorization for seven large - scale ccs demonstration projects ( in addition to futuregen ) that would integrate the carbon capture , transportation , and sequestration steps .

 ( large - scale demonstration programs and their potential significance are discussed below. ) .

it can be argued that , since enactment of eisa , the focus and funding within the ccs rd&d program has shifted toward large - scale capture technology development through these and other demonstration projects .

in addition to the annual appropriations provided for ccs rd&d , the recovery act ( p.l .

111-5 ) has been the most significant legislation that promotes and supports federal ccs rd&d program activities since passage of eisa .

as discussed below , $3.4 billion in funding from the recovery act was intended to expand and accelerate the commercial deployment of ccs technologies to allow for commercial - scale demonstration in both new and retrofitted power plants and industrial facilities by 2020 .

the u.s. department of energy states that the mission for the doe office of fossil energy is "to ensure the availability of ultra - clean ( near - zero emissions ) , abundant , low - cost domestic energy from coal to fuel economic prosperity , strengthen energy security , and enhance environmental quality. .

over the past several years , the doe fossil energy research and development program has increasingly shifted activities performed under its coal program toward emphasizing ccs as the main focus .

the coal program represented between 68% and 70% of total fossil energy research and development appropriations from fy2012 to fy2015 , indicating that ccs has come to dominate coal r&d at doe .

this reflects doe's view that "there is a growing consensus that steps must be taken to significantly reduce [greenhouse gas] emissions from energy use throughout the world at a pace consistent to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of co 2 , and that ccs is a promising option for addressing this challenge. .

the fy2016 president's budget request , however , would reduce the total funding for the coal program compared with the previous two fiscal years .

in the fy2016 request , the coal program would represent 66% of the total fossil energy r&d appropriation .

doe acknowledges that the cost of deploying currently available ccs technologies is very high and that to be effective as a technology for mitigating ghg emissions from power plants , the costs for ccs must be reduced .

for example , in 2010 doe stated that the cost of deploying available ccs post - combustion technology on a supercritical pulverized coal - fired power plant would increase the cost of electricity by 80% .

the challenge of reducing the costs of ccs technology is difficult to quantify .

the boundary dam plant in canada is the only commercial - scale coal - fired power plant equipped with ccs , and it has been operating for less than one year .

nor is it easy to predict when lower - cost ccs technology will be available for widespread deployment in the united states .

nevertheless , doe observes that "the united states can no longer afford the luxury of conventional long - lead times for rd&d to bear results. .

thus the coal rd&d program is focused on achieving results that would allow for an advanced ccs technology portfolio to be ready by 2020 for large - scale demonstration .

the following section describes the components of the ccs activities within doe's coal r&d program and their funding history since fy2012 .

this report focuses on this time period because during that time doe obligated recovery act funding for its ccs programs , greatly expanding the ccs r&d portfolio .

this was expected to accelerate the transition of ccs technology to industry for deployment and commercialization .

in addition , one remaining active project in the ccpi program that received funding in round 2 , prior to enactment of the recovery act — the kemper county energy facility — also is discussed .

lastly , the boundary dam project is described briefly , although it is a canadian venture , because of its unique status as the only currently operating commercial - scale coal - fired power plant with ccs in the world .

the bulk of recovery act funds for ccs ( $3.32 billion , or 98% ) was directed to three subprograms organized under the ccs demonstrations programs: the clean coal power initiative ( ccpi ) , industrial carbon capture and storage projects ( iccs ) , and futuregen ( table 1 ) .

under the 2010 ccs roadmap , and with the large infusion of funding from the recovery act , doe's goal is to develop the technologies to allow for commercial - scale demonstration in both new and retrofitted power plants and industrial facilities by 2020 .

the doe 2011 strategic plan sets a more specific target: to bring at least five commercial - scale ccs demonstration projects online by 2016 .

it could be argued that in its allocation of recovery act funding , doe was heeding the recommendations of some experts who identified commercial - scale demonstration projects as the most important component , the lynchpin , for future development and deployment of ccs in the united states .

it could also be argued that much of the future success of ccs is riding on these three programs .

accordingly , the following section provides a snapshot of the ccpi , iccs , and futuregen programs , and a brief discussion of some of their accomplishments and challenges .

doe allocated $112 million in fy2012 , $107 million in fy2013 , $109 million in fy2014 , $100 million in fy2015 , and is requesting $109 million in fy2016 for its carbon sequestration and storage activities .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

in contrast with the carbon capture technology rd&d , which received nearly all of the $3.4 billion from recovery act funding , carbon sequestration / carbon storage activities received approximately $50 million in recovery act funds .

recovery act funds were awarded for 10 projects to conduct site characterization of promising geologic formations for co 2 storage .

testimony from scott klara of the national energy technology laboratory sums up a crucial metric for the success of the federal ccs rd&d program , namely , whether ccs technologies are deployed in the commercial marketplace: the success of the clean coal program will ultimately be judged by the extent to which emerging technologies get deployed in domestic and international marketplaces .

both technical and financial challenges associated with the deployment of new "high risk" coal technologies must be overcome in order to be capable of achieving success in the marketplace .

commercial scale demonstrations help the industry understand and overcome startup issues , address component integration issues , and gain the early learning commercial experience necessary to reduce risk and secure private financing and investment for future plants .

to date , there are no commercial ventures in the united states that capture , transport , and inject large quantities of co 2 ( eg , 1 million tons per year or more ) solely for the purposes of carbon sequestration .

the kemper county energy project likely will be the first to do so , although the majority of the injected co 2 will be for purposes of enhanced oil recovery .

the boundary dam project in canada , which began operations in 2014 , is the first commercial - scale power plant with ccs in operation in the world .

boundary dam also sends most of its captured co 2 to a nearby oilfield for enhanced oil recovery .

the doe ccs rd&d program has embarked on commercial - scale demonstration projects for co 2 capture , injection , and storage .

the success of these demonstration projects will likely bear heavily on the future outlook for widespread deployment of ccs technologies as a strategy for preventing large quantities of co 2 from reaching the atmosphere while plants continue to burn fossil fuels , mainly coal .

the proposed epa standard to limit co 2 emissions from new coal - fired power plants has invited renewed scrutiny of ccs technology and its prospects for commercial deployment .

congress may wish to carefully review the ccs r&d program and particularly the results from the demonstration projects as they progress .

such a review could help congress evaluate whether doe is on track to meet its goal of allowing for an advanced ccs technology portfolio to be ready by 2020 for large - scale demonstration and deployment in the united states .

in addition to the issues and programs discussed above , other factors might affect the demonstration and deployment of ccs in the united states .

the use of hydraulic fracturing techniques to extract unconventional natural gas deposits recently has drawn national attention to the possible negative consequences of deep well injection of large volumes of fluids .

hydraulic fracturing involves the high - pressure injection of fluids into the target formation to fracture the rock and release natural gas or oil .

the injected fluids , together with naturally occurring fluids in the shale , are referred to as produced water .

produced waters are pumped out of the well and disposed of .

often the produced waters are disposed of by re - injecting them at a different site in a different well .

these practices have raised concerns about possible leakage as fluids are pumped into and out of the ground , and about deep - well injection causing earthquakes .

public concerns over hydraulic fracturing and deep - well injection of produced waters may spill over into concerns about deep - well injection of co 2 .

how successfully doe is able to address these types of concerns as the large - scale demonstration projects move forward into their injection phases could affect the future of ccs deployment .

