many media reports in israel , the united states , and elsewhere since late march 2012 — and especially since august — have focused closely on apparent differences between the netanyahu government in israel and the obama administration on potential "red lines" for possible military action .

after seemingly unsuccessful attempts by israeli prime minister binyamin netanyahu to persuade president barack obama to present iran with a time - specific ultimatum ( see " u.s .

concerns and possible responses: possible impact on israeli decisionmaking " below ) , prospects for future israeli military action remain unclear .

the complex array of information and views set forth in this section may help u.s. policymakers address relevant questions on this issue within the context of various regional and global economic , political , and security concerns .

as with other parts of the report , this section has many elements that are the subject of vigorous debate and remain fully or partially outside public knowledge .

crs does not claim that it has confirmed independently any sources cited within this report that attribute specific positions or views to israeli , u.s. , or other officials .

in february 2012 , a u.s. newspaper columnist reported that secretary of defense leon panetta "believes there is a strong likelihood that israel will strike iran in april , may or june. .

less than two weeks later in testimony before the senate armed services committee on february 14 , secretary panetta declined when questioned to take a position on the likelihood of a spring 2012 israeli attack against nuclear facilities in iran .

secretary panetta's comments were only part of the stream of statements from u.s. and israeli officials and media reports that drew attention to a question that has periodically recurred in the national security discourse of both countries ( and more broadly ) : might israel choose to attack iran's nuclear facilities , possibly counter to u.s. advice ? .

for decades , successive regimes in iran have engaged in nuclear - related activities .

the ultimate goal of these activities , however , has remained stubbornly ambiguous .

despite extensive examination of these activities by both government and non - government experts around the world , including on - site investigation by representatives of the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , no definitive proof has been offered to conclude with certainty the validity of iran's claims that its nuclear work is entirely for peaceful purposes as allowed under the nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) to which it is a party ; concerns of some government officials and non - government experts in the united states and elsewhere that iran is seeking a "nuclear capability" below the threshold of nuclear weapons ( which entails the combination of fissile material with a nuclear warhead and an appropriate delivery vehicle ) that nevertheless may allow it to rapidly cross the nuclear threshold at some time in the future ; or allegations that the iranian regime is committed to acquiring nuclear weapons .

ongoing disagreements among analysts as to how far away iran is from achieving a "nuclear capability" or nuclear weapons if it is committed to doing so only exacerbate this ambiguity and uncertainty regarding iran's nuclear - related efforts .

this ambiguity and uncertainty is a major feature of the environment in which international actors decide their policies and actions vis - à - vis iran .

the view a state holds of the ultimate goal of iran's nuclear - related activities informs the approach it takes in dealing with the iranian regime .

for various reasons — including geopolitical , historical , and ideological — the prospect of an iran with nuclear weapons arguably affects the threat perceptions of israel more than those of the united states or other nations .

twice in its history , israel has conducted air strikes aimed at preventing a regional actor from acquiring a nuclear weapons capability — destroying iraq's tammuz - osirak reactor in 1981 and a presumed reactor under construction at al kibar near deir al zur in syria in 2007 .

for some period of time , israeli leaders have conveyed their view that israel may similarly be compelled to act to prevent a potentially nuclear - armed iran .

analysts generally agree that israeli military action against multiple iranian nuclear facilities would be significantly more complex operationally than these previous attacks , both of which targeted single facilities that were closer in range to israel ( see figure 1 below ) .

what lessons the previous strikes — particularly the one on osirak in 1981 — impart for an israeli decision on whether to strike iran is a subject of debate .

for congress , the potential impact — short - and long - term — of an israeli decision regarding iran and its implementation is a critical issue of concern .

since iran's nuclear program became a major international issue a decade ago , israel has deferred to the united states and other actors in coordinating diplomacy and implementing economic and other sanctions aimed at convincing iran to abandon activities that could allow it to develop nuclear weapons .

in recent years , however , reports suggest that israel has pursued covert means — including sabotage , cyberwarfare , and assassination — to intimidate iran and delay the nuclear program , with some reported success .

without confirming or denying involvement , israeli officials also generally have welcomed reports of events that might set back iran's nuclear program .

even before the reports in recent months of possible israeli military action , at various stages of the international effort to persuade iran to relinquish any possible nuclear weapons ambitions some israeli officials have hinted that israel might be compelled to take unilateral action to counter what they see as an iranian nuclear weapons program .

it was in the first three months of 2012 , however , that the issue came into sharper relief for u.s. policymakers , including in congress .

this was in part a result of comments by senior israeli government officials and former officials that intensified the debate within their country as to the wisdom and potential effectiveness of military action against nuclear - related targets in iran , linked to a similar discussion in the united states and worldwide .

this report assesses this issue , focusing primarily on the decision that might be made by the government of israel .

in particular , it examines the range of factors that could influence such an israeli decision .

implementation of an israeli decision to strike iran's nuclear - related facilities could have significant implications for u.s. interests and goals related both to the nuclear issue itself and to broader regional and international concerns , including u.s. relations with israel .

in assessing those implications and considering possible action either before or after a possible israeli strike ( see " conclusion: possible implications for congress " below ) , congress and the obama administration might consider the following questions: israeli debate and decision regarding a potential attack : what is the nature of the public and official debate in israel over the iranian nuclear issue and possible israeli , u.s. , and international approaches to it , including military and non - military options ? .

how might that debate evolve ? .

what are the factors in israeli thinking and who are the main actors involved in the decision ? .

under what conditions is a final political decision regarding military action likely ? .

how does israel assess the operational requirements of a potential strike ? .

effect on iran's nuclear program and regime : ultimately , is an attack more likely to prevent an iran with nuclear weapons or help bring it about ? .

if an attack only delayed a potential nuclear weapons program in iran , would israel feel compelled to take additional military action later ? .

what effect might an attack have on a potential iranian decision to weaponize its nuclear program ? .

would an attack help or hinder the ongoing international effort to use diplomacy , monitoring , sanctions , and possible threats of further military action to persuade iran not to pursue nuclear weapons ? .

to what extent might the large coalition that is now working with the united states to enforce sanctions against iran fracture in the event of a strike ? .

would an attack strengthen or weaken the iranian regime , particularly given that current trends indicate that the regime faces significant economic challenges and political divisions ? .

effect on other u.s .

interests : what retaliation from iran and its regional allies ( including lebanese hezbollah and hamas or other palestinian militants ) is likely against israeli targets ? .

if iran retaliated , would it limit the targeted area to israel , or would it also target u.s. interests and allies in the region and elsewhere ? .

if iran expands its response to u.s. or u.s. - allied targets , what forms might that take ? .

what is the likelihood and potential scope of a crisis in the strait of hormuz and persian gulf regarding global energy prices and potential region - wide conflict ? .

what are other possible regional consequences of an israeli attack ? .

this report has many elements that are the subject of vigorous debate and remain fully or partially outside public knowledge .

crs does not claim that it has confirmed independently any sources cited within this report that attribute specific positions or views to israeli , u.s. , or other officials .

several factors may influence any israeli political decision relating to a possible strike on iranian nuclear facilities .

these include , but are not limited to , the views and interactions of israeli decisionmakers ; the public debate in israel , the stances and anticipated responses of u.s. , regional , and international actors ; estimates of the effects of a possible strike ; and the anticipated iranian response regionally and internationally .

discussion below regarding the israeli decisionmaking process and the factors that may influence it is largely dependent on secondary sources that crs does not claim to confirm independently .

another factor in israel's deliberations is the question of operational capability: can israeli forces conduct a successful strike , however they define "success" ? .

one israeli journalist has written: while a large - scale operation against iran … would stretch the [israel air force's] resources , it is still within its capabilities .

this is exactly what the lion's share of the defense budget has been spent on for over more than a decade .

on fighter jets , airborne tankers , long - range reconnaissance drones and electronic warfare aircraft .

according to another israeli report , "military thinkers acknowledge the objective difficulties but argue that , with the out - of - the - box improvisation and planning the israel air force is renowned for , they can be surmounted. .

not all israeli assessments agree , however .

one israeli analyst has written: would such an attack by israel be likely to succeed even in doing maximum damage to iranian facilities ? .

no , a great deal could go wrong , especially against multiple hardened targets at the planes' maximum range .

planes could get lost or crash or have to turn back .

planes arriving over the targets could miss , or accidentally drop their bombs on civilians , or simply not do much damage .

many targets would remain unscathed .

a senior israeli official was cited in one report as quoting a senior commander who reportedly told the israeli cabinet in september 2011 that "we have no ability to hit the iranian nuclear program in a meaningful way. .

a march 2012 poll indicated that 65% of jewish israelis believe that the israeli military has the "ability to damage iran's nuclear program substantially," while a late february 2012 poll indicated by a 53% - 39% margin that jewish israelis do not believe that an israeli attack conducted without u.s. cooperation would stop "iran's nuclearization for a substantial period of time. .

in open source assessments mainly in non - israeli media , analysts assert that although the israel air force ( iaf ) is formidable , an attempt to destroy iran's nuclear capability would be a challenge due to both the iaf's technical capabilities and the limited numbers of aircraft in its fleet that are equipped to simultaneously operate over long ranges , carry the necessary ordnance , and thwart foreign air defenses .

former central intelligence agency and national security agency director michael hayden said , for example , "that airstrikes capable of seriously setting back iran's nuclear program were 'beyond the capacity' of israel. .

multiple reports have asserted that military analysts believe that reaching all critical iranian nuclear facilities "would require an air campaign of hundreds of sorties and would have to last for weeks. .

however , a u.s. defense analyst has said that any israeli attack would probably be a one - time event: "given the unfriendly airspace israeli strike aircraft would have to traverse to reach iran's facilities as well as israel's geographic distance from iran , the likelihood of israel being able to carry out repeated strikes is low .

israeli strike aircraft would only have one opportunity to strike at iran's nuclear facilities. .

nevertheless , the same defense analyst has said , "one wave can do a lot , depending on the quality of the penetrating munitions and the targeting abilities. .

on february 4 , 2012 , amid widespread reports about israeli contemplation of a strike , iranian supreme leader khamene'i was quoted as saying that iran will "carry out its own threat in response to the threats of war and oil sanctions should the need arise. .

the potential consequences of a strike on iran's nuclear program — for israel , israel's allies , particularly the united states , and others — are widely assessed to factor significantly into israel's decisionmaking about a strike .

israeli open source reporting generally avoids addressing detailed iranian response scenarios and how they might factor into israeli decisionmaking , perhaps partly due to a belief expressed in january 2012 by three israeli commentators ( including two former officials ) who have been cited earlier that "the operative capabilities [for israel] to cope with [iranian] responses are not a subject for public discussion because of the risks of exposure. .

however , as discussed below , israeli leaders such as defense minister barak and public opinion polls make general references to israel's ability to withstand a retaliation .

beyond an iranian response directly against israel , iran could choose other courses as well .

at the december 2011 brookings institution event , secretary panetta raised concerns about the possible unintended consequences of a potential attack for the united states , the middle east , and the global economy: the united states would obviously be blamed and we could possibly be the target of retaliation from iran , striking our ships , striking our military bases… .

[t]here are economic consequences to that attack — severe economic consequences that could impact a very fragile economy in europe and a fragile economy here in the united states… .

and lastly i think that the consequence could be that we would have an escalation that would take place that would not only involve many lives , but i think could consume the middle east in a confrontation and a conflict that we would regret .

although some of iran's threatened responses are specific — such as its as - yet unimplemented december 2011 threat to close the strait of hormuz if sanctions were placed on iran's central bank — most are vague .

the potential iranian responses discussed below are intended to be suggestive , not exhaustive or definitive .

for purposes of clarity , they are discussed in terms of increasing degrees of severity .

it is also possible that iran would pursue multiple responses simultaneously , or not respond at all .

according to one assessment by two u.s. analysts: an israeli decision to risk indeterminate war with the islamic republic … would be momentous , transforming the regional order in ways that cannot be inferred from past wars .

this report discusses many factors that may influence the israeli debate and a possible decision by its leaders regarding military action against iranian nuclear facilities .

an israeli strike on iran could raise significant questions for members of congress , both short - and long - term .

these include , but are not limited to , the following: how might a strike affect options and debate regarding short - term and long - term u.s. relations and security cooperation with , and foreign assistance to , israel and other regional countries ? .

would an israeli strike on iranian nuclear facilities be considered self - defense ? .

why or why not ? .

what would be the legal and policy implications either way ? .

how might a strike affect the implementation of existing sanctions legislation on iran or options and debate over new legislation on the subject ? .

how might congress consult with the obama administration on and provide oversight with respect to various political and military options ? .

