several lawmakers and the obama administration have recently expressed interest in taxing large partnerships and s corporations , also known as pass - throughs , as corporations .

in early 2011 , senate finance committee chairman max baucus suggested the possibility of taxing pass - throughs earning above a certain income as corporations .

that same year , treasury secretary tim geithner said "congress has to revisit this basic question about whether it makes sense for us as a country to allow certain businesses to choose whether they're treated as corporations for tax purposes or not. .

most recently the president proposed creating parity in the tax treatment of large corporate and non - corporate businesses .

house ways and means committee chairman dave camp , however , has expressed his opposition to such a policy change .

two concerns appear to be driving the interest in taxing large pass - throughs as corporations .

first , projected deficit and debt increases have highlighted the possible need for revenue increases .

pass - throughs may be a source of revenue since they currently comprise over half of all business income but generally pay no corporate tax .

instead , the income of these companies , as the name suggests , "passes through" the business directly to the owners where it is taxed according to individual tax rates .

although no official revenue estimates exist , calculations by economist martin sullivan suggest that federal tax revenues may be between $13 billion and $47 billion lower annually than could otherwise be expected because of the shift away from the corporate form towards the pass - through forms .

the shift has led to a reduction in corporate tax revenues , which has not been completely offset by increased individual tax revenue .

second , discussions of tax reform have expressed concern about the equity , efficiency , and complexity of the general business tax environment in existence today , and in some cases the distinction between corporate and non - corporate businesses specifically .

today , two businesses that are otherwise identical other than that one is a corporation and one is a pass - through are taxed differently .

this disparity could be viewed as inequitable since the firms are similarly positioned to pay taxes .

additionally , the lack of tax uniformity across business types is believed to result in too much investment in the non - corporate sector where the after - tax return on investment is higher .

taxing large pass - throughs as corporations , when combined with other reform proposals such as eliminating or reducing corporate tax preferences and loopholes , would broaden the corporate tax base and allow for lower tax rates .

these changes could potentially increase economic efficiency relative to the current policy .

estimates by crs suggest that limiting the ability to avoid corporate taxation could potentially broaden the base enough to allow for a revenue - neutral corporate rate reduction of three percentage points .

this report uses aggregate and industry - level tax data to analyze how many partnerships and s corporations could be subject to the corporate tax .

analysis of the data suggests that between 0.3% and 1.5% of all partnerships and s corporations could be taxed as corporations depending on what constitutes a "large" pass - through .

although this fraction is a relatively small share of pass - throughs , this report also indicates that these largest pass - throughs account for a disproportionate share of receipts and assets .

thus , while only a small number of firms may be affected by such a proposed policy change , the revenue generated could potentially be significant .

there are alternative policy prescriptions that can promote business tax uniformity and increase efficiency .

integrating the corporate and individual tax systems so that all business income is only taxed once is one such alternative .

integration would promote tax uniformity since all businesses would be taxed equally .

integration could also increase efficiency by removing a layer of taxation as well as possibly other distorting features of the corporate tax .

for these reasons integration is generally appealing to economists .

if , for whatever reason , integration is not possible , then reducing the tax discrepancy between large pass - throughs and corporations may be a viable policy alternative .

the various design and administrative issues surrounding tax integration , however , put an analysis of such a proposal beyond the scope of this report .

the impact on businesses is not the only perspective one can take when it comes to changing the tax treatment of pass - throughs .

crs report r42359 , who earns pass - through business income ? .

an analysis of individual tax return data , by [author name scrubbed] examined the issue of pass - through taxation from the perspective of individual taxpayers .

that report concluded that although the corporate tax would be levied on pass - throughs , individuals would bear the full burden of the tax since businesses are legal , not physical entities .

in addition , the analysis in that report suggests that higher - income taxpayers would generally bear most of the burden from increased pass - through taxes because they earn the majority of pass - through income and are limited in their ability to shift the burden to lower - income taxpayers .

the remainder of this report is organized as follows .

first , a brief overview of tax revenue and trends in business organization is presented .

next , pass - throughs are compared with their corporate counterparts .

aggregate and industry - level estimates of the number of partnerships and s corporations that could be taxed as corporations are then presented .

finally , policy options and considerations are reviewed .

part of the interest in taxing large pass - throughs as corporations stems from the decline in corporate tax revenue .

in the post - world war ii era , corporate tax revenue as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) peaked in 1952 at 6.1% and has generally declined since ( see figure 1 ) .

today , the corporate tax generates revenue equal to approximately 1.3% of gdp , although projections ( not shown here ) have the corporate tax revenue rising to 2.4% of gdp in several years as the economy recovers and temporary investment incentives ( bonus depreciation ) expire .

despite this decline , an increase in payroll tax revenue from 1.4% of gdp in 1946 to 6.0% in 2010 has helped to support overall federal tax revenue .

a number of reasons for the decline in corporate tax revenues have been indentified ( see crs report r42113 , reasons for the decline in corporate tax revenues , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

first , the average effective corporate tax rate has decreased over time , mostly as a result of reductions in the statutory rate and changes affecting the tax treatment of investment and capital recovery ( depreciation ) .

second , corporate - sector profitability has fallen over time , which has eroded the corporate tax base .

and third , an increasing fraction of business activity has shifted to partnerships and s corporations , which are not subject to the corporate income tax , further eroding the corporate tax base .

figure 2 shows just how significant the shift in business activity has been .

in 1980 , c corporations generated 78% of net business income in the united states .

by 2008 however , the corporate sector was responsible for only 27% of all business income .

over the same time period , the share of income attributable to partnerships and s corporations grew from 4% to 54% .

these trends are partly due to the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ) , which increased the attractiveness of choosing a pass - through form over the corporate form by lowering the highest individual income tax rate six percentage points below the highest corporate income tax rate .

additional legislative changes in the early 1990s allowed s corporations to have more shareholders , and that same decade regulatory changes enabled llcs to be taxed as partnerships .

these policy changes increased the attractiveness of pass - throughs and , in the case of the s corporation shareholder limit increase , allowed them to be larger .

how do large pass - throughs compare with corporations ? .

this question is slightly more complicated than it appears since there are several different ways to measure firm size .

size could be measured by employment , profits , assets , or a variety of other statistics .

additionally , two different industries may require different measures of size .

for example , one industry may be more capital intensive than another , leading firms in that industry to naturally have more assets , whereas firms in another industry may generally have fewer assets while still employing a large number of workers .

data availability , however , limits the analysis presented here to using just two different measures of firm size — a receipt - based measure and an asset - based measure .

estimates of the number of pass - throughs that could be taxed as corporations can be made by employing the same data used to construct table 1 and table 2 .

because those tables define size in two ways , two different sets of estimates are presented — one based on a receipt measure of size and a second based on an asset measure of size .

industry - specific estimates are also presented .

the industry - level data needed to construct such estimates for partnerships based on an asset measure of size , however , are not available .

only asset - based estimates for s corporations are presented .

congress will face a number of policy choices and considerations should it choose to tax large pass - throughs as corporations .

one choice would concern the size of a pass - through that would trigger the corporate tax .

this involves two steps .

first , a measure of business size would need to be chosen .

two measures were used in this report — an asset - based measure and a receipt - based measure .

alternatives to these two options include a profit - based measure , an employment - based measure , a composite measure ( i.e. , based on assets , receipts , and employment ) , or industry specific measures ( eg , an asset - based measure for certain industries , and a receipt - based measure for other industries ) .

an asset - based measure has some attractive features .

assets are likely to be more stable over the business cycle than revenues , profits , and employment .

therefore , using an asset - based measure would help to reduce uncertainty about how a business will be taxed in any given year .

it may also be harder for pass - throughs to manipulate their assets to avoid being labeled as large .

the most sophisticated pass - throughs may be able to shift revenue or income to subsidiaries located outside the u.s. in an attempt to avoid the corporate tax .

at the same time , certain firms may still be able to strategically shift assets out of the country to avoid the corporate tax .

there is some evidence that firms with extensive intangible assets ( eg , patients , copy rights , trademarks , etc .

 ) , such as those in the pharmaceutical industry , and the computer and electronic equipment industry , may be engaged in this behavior .

an asset - based measure of size , however , may not accurately measure the economic size of businesses in particular industries .

certain firms and industries may be less capital intensive than others and therefore have fewer assets .

for example , the manufacturing and mining industries will naturally have more assets than the health care industry , or the education industry because these two industries are more service - oriented .

particular health care and education firms could still be considered large if measured by receipts , profits , or employment , but may not be classified as such when measured by assets .

an alternative to using a single measure of size would be to use a composite measure of size that is based on assets , employment , and revenue or income .

another option would be to use industry specific measures , such as an asset - based measure for the manufacturing industry , and a receipt or profit - based measure for the health care industry .

in any case , if policymakers decide to use a measure based on receipts , profits , or employment , they may want to consider using an multi - year moving average since these measure may fluctuate substantially from year to year .

the second step in defining "large" pass - throughs is choosing a threshold above which a pass - through would be taxed as a corporation .

the obama administration may be considering a proposal that would define a large pass - through as one earning $50 million or more in receipts .

the administration has also considered using an industry - specific threshold to impose a financial crisis responsibility fee on large financial institutions .

this threshold would be asset based and set at $50 billion , which would be suitable for indentifying large financial institutions .

however , such a threshold may exclude firms in other industries that are considered large by alternative measures .

one way to address this would be to employ industry - specific size thresholds .

in determining the thresholds , congress could direct the irs to develop appropriate industry specific thresholds , or rely on methods similar to those already implemented by the small business administration ( sba ) .

alternatively , congress could specifically legislate the size measures and thresholds to be used to decide which pass - throughs must pay the corporate tax .

congress could also opt to exempt pass - throughs in certain industries .

again , though , economic theory generally calls for uniform tax treatment across industries , although differential tax treatment may be justified when the actions of firms in certain industries bestow benefits to or impose costs on society that are not reflected in market prices .

examples include research and development ( benefit or positive spillover ) and pollution ( cost or negative spillover ) .

still , it would probably be more efficient to levy a uniform income tax and then use more precise policy tools ( eg , credits , deductions , grants , regulation , etc. ) .

to target spillovers at the firm level .

additionally , by including all industries and thus broadening the corporate tax base as much as possible , corporate tax rates could potentially be reduced further , which may be more efficient and equitable than if certain industries were excluded .

unfortunately , economic analysis does not provide any insight into the appropriate threshold used to define large firms .

economic theory would tend to suggest that any business tax system should tax all businesses — large and small — equally .

the analysis in this report , particularly table 3 and table 4 , however , does provide estimates of the number of firms that would be subject to the corporate tax if particular size thresholds were chosen .

these figures provide policymakers with a starting point from which to construct a more formal proposal if they should choose to do so .

this report used aggregate and industry - level individual tax return data to analyze how many partnerships and s corporations could be subject to the corporate tax .

the analysis determined that if a receipt - based measure of size is used , then between 0.3% and 1.5% of s corporations and partnerships could be taxed as corporations depending on the definition of a "large" pass - through — either receipts exceeding $50 million or $10 million .

using an asset - based measure of size produces similar estimates .

it is estimated that between 0.3% and 1.0% of pass - throughs could pay the corporate tax depending on whether a $100 million or $25 million asset threshold is used to define a "large" firm .

although estimates suggest that only a small percentage of pass - throughs could be considered large for corporate tax purposes , the affected firms are responsible for a significant amount of economic activity , indicating that the proposed policy change could potentially raise substantial revenue .

this report focused on the effect of changing the tax treatment of pass - throughs from the perspective of businesses .

crs report r42359 , who earns pass - through business income ? .

an analysis of individual tax return data , by [author name scrubbed] , examined the issue of pass - through taxation from the perspective of individual taxpayers .

that report concluded that although the corporate tax would be levied on pass - throughs , individuals would bear the full burden of the tax since businesses are legal , not physical entities .

in addition , the analysis in the report suggests that higher - income taxpayers would generally bear most of the burden from increased pass - through taxes .

appendix a. industry - level estimates using a receipts - based measure of size appendix b. industry - level estimates using an asset - based measure of siz .

