the education for homeless children and youth program ( ehcy ) is intended to ensure that all homeless children and youth have equal access to the same free and appropriate public education , including public preschool education that is provided to other children and youth .

it is the only federal education program exclusively focused on homeless children and youth .

federal education funding for homeless children and youth is provided by ehcy and through required set - asides for homeless children and youth from elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) title i - a funds received by local educational agencies ( leas ) .

reauthorization of ehcy may be considered by the 113 th congress as part of the reauthorization of esea .

this report provides an overview of the purposes and program structure of ehcy ; the history of the program's funding ; issues that have arisen regarding the implementation of esea title i - a set - asides for homeless students ; data on the number of leas receiving ehcy grants and on the characteristics of homeless students ; and a discussion of proposed changes to ehcy included in bills introduced in the 112 th congress to reauthorize the esea .

the report also includes two appendices: the first provides information on the number and percentage of homeless students by state ; the second discusses legislation adopted in the 110 th - 111 th congresses that impacts ehcy .

children and youth who are homeless are automatically considered eligible for esea title i - a services , whether or not they meet the performance requirements normally required for title i - a eligibility .

in addition , leas are required to set aside a portion of their title i - a funds for homeless students who do not attend schools receiving title i - a funds: a local educational agency shall reserve such funds as are necessary under this part to provide services comparable to those provided to children in schools funded under this part to serve — ( a ) homeless children who do not attend participating schools including providing educationally related support services to children in shelters and other locations where children may live .

however , ed non - regulatory guidance has indicated that the title i - a funding set aside for homeless students not attending title i - a schools may also be used to provide services for homeless students attending title i - a schools .

ed non - regulatory guidance also states that comparable services provided to homeless students may include services that are specifically tailored to the needs of homeless students: an lea has the discretion to use reserved funds to provide a homeless student with services that are not ordinarily provided to other title i students and that are not available from other sources .

for example , where appropriate , a lea at its discretion may provide a student with an item of clothing to meet a school's dress or uniform requirement so that students may effectively take advantage of educational opportunities .

the guidance also indicates that title i - a funds may not be used to provide transportation to the school of origin for homeless students , since this would violate the supplement - not - supplant provisions applicable to title i - a funds ( because ehcy requires that transportation to the school of origin be provided for homeless students , if requested ) .

however , non - regulatory guidance states that "it may be appropriate in certain circumstances for an lea to use title i , part a funds to transport formerly homeless students to or from their school of origin for the remainder of the school year in which they become permanently housed. .

national data on the amount of esea title i - a funding being set aside by leas for homeless students are not available .

some states require leas to report this information .

ed does not require that the amount set aside be reported .

the final section of this report discusses changes to ehcy proposed by legislation introduced in the 112 th congress .

reauthorization of ehcy may be considered by the 113 th congress as part of esea reauthorization .

where relevant , background information on the context for proposed changes is also included .

on october 20 , 2011 , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) ordered reported a bill to reauthorize the esea , titled the elementary and secondary education reauthorization act of 2011 ( s. 3578 , hereinafter referred to as the senate help committee bill ) .

reauthorization of ehcy was included as part of this legislation .

on february 28 th , 2012 , the house committee on education and the workforce ( education and workforce ) ordered reported two bills to reauthorize portions of the esea .

one of these bills h.r .

3990 , the encouraging innovation and effective teachers act ( hereinafter referred to as the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) ) , would have reauthorized the ehcy program .

the other bill h.r .

3989 , the student success act ( hereinafter referred to as the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3989 ) ) , included amendments to esea title i - a that would have impacted ehcy .

in addition , h.r .

32 , the homeless children and youth act of 2011 , was ordered reported by the subcommittee on insurance , housing , and community opportunity of the house committee on financial services on february 6 , 2012 .

this bill is discussed under the definition heading in this section of the report .

the ehcy issues discussed in this section include: funding ; transportation of homeless students to their school of origin ; esea title i - a set asides ; separate schools for homeless students ; clarifying the "best interest" school selection process ; enhancing the ability of lea homeless liaisons and state coordinators to meet the needs of homeless students ; improving identification and services for preschool students and unaccompanied youth ; increasing access to education and related services for homeless students ; the definition of homeless children and youth in ehcy and other federal programs ; and additional issues .

there has been some concern that funding for the ehcy program may not be sufficient to meet the educational needs of the increasing number of homeless children and youth .

although the number of homeless students reported enrolled by leas increased 11% between sy2008-2009 through sy2010-2011 , ehcy regular appropriations have been stagnant in recent years ( see table 1 ) .

nevertheless , in the current context of limited federal resources , funding increases in the near future for many federal programs , including ehcy , may be unlikely .

the senate help committee bill would have authorized "such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012 and each of the 6 succeeding fiscal years. .

the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have authorized "$65,173,000 for fiscal year 2013 ... " and stated that this amount "shall be increased for each of fiscal years 2014 through 2018 by a percentage equal to the percentage of inflation according to the consumer price index , for the calendar year ending prior to the beginning of that fiscal year. .

as discussed earlier in this report , transportation is cited as the most serious barrier to the enrollment of homeless students .

many school districts have limited funds , and transportation is an expensive service to provide .

current law prohibits the use of esea title i - a funds to provide ehcy transportation , except under limited circumstances ( see earlier discussion ) .

national level estimates of the costs of transporting homeless students are not available .

therefore , data from a survey of eight districts in washington state are included to provide an illustration of the potential costs of transporting homeless students .

these data indicate that: the majority of homeless student trips ( 79 percent ) cost the school districts from just under $3 per one - way trip to over $40 per one - way trip , as opposed to an average of just $.67 for the general student population .

transportation of homeless students by school bus accounted for the largest percentage of student rides provided overall ( 38 percent ) , with costs ranging from $4.24 to $53.79 per one - way trip .

in addition to the costs involved in transportation , there are often disputes among leas regarding how costs of transportation are to be allocated if a student is temporarily housed in one district , but is transported to the school of origin in another district .

these disputes can potentially delay the enrollment of homeless students in their school of origin .

some have suggested that this situation could be improved if the following issues were addressed as part of esea reauthorization: more specific requirements were included on the rules for cost sharing by leas ; a separate funding stream was provided for transportation ; and leas were permitted to use their esea title i - a set aside for transportation costs .

the senate help committee bill included new language that would have required states and leas to ensure that transportation to the school of origin was provided for as long as the student had the right to attend that school .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3989 ) included new language that would have permitted esea title i - a funds to be used to provide transportation for homeless students to their school of origin .

leas are responsible for developing their own procedures for determining the amount of esea title i - a funds that are set aside for homeless students ; as a consequence , the amount of title i - a funding set aside for this purpose varies considerably across leas .

homeless advocates argue that the lack of clarity regarding title i - a set - asides has led to inadequate set - asides .

although no national data on set - asides are available , a survey of local homeless liaisons by the national association for the education of homeless children and youth ( naehcy ) in january of 2010 included a question asking liaisons whether their district ( lea ) set aside title i - a funds for homeless students , and if so , how much was set aside .

out of the 2,234 liaisons who answered the question , 67% indicated that their district did set aside title i - a funds ; 23% indicated that their district did not set aside funds ; and 11% did not know .

the senate help committee bill included new provisions under esea title i - a that would have require d title i - a set - asides to be based on a needs assessment that reflected the number of homeless children and youth identified in the previous year and included the collaboration and input from other agencies .

it also would have expanded the allowable uses of these funds to include , among other things , funding for local liaisons and the provision of transportation to the school of origin .

the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3989 ) included new provisions under esea title i - a stating that title i - a ehcy set - asides may be based on: a needs assessment that reflected the number of homeless children and youth identified in the previous year ; and included collaboration and input from other agencies .

it also would have expanded the allowable uses of these funds to include , among other things , the provision of transportation to the school of origin .

the most recent reauthorization of the esea ( p.l .

107-110 ) amended ehcy to explicitly prohibit states that receive program funding from segregating homeless students from non - homeless students , except for short periods of time for health and safety emergencies or to provide temporary , special , supplementary services .

an exception was made for four counties that operated separate schools for homeless students in fy2000 ( san joaquin , orange , and san diego counties in california , and maricopa county in arizona ) , as long as ( 1 ) those separate schools offer services that are comparable to local schools ; and ( 2 ) homeless children are not required to attend them .

four schools operate under this exception .

some argue that segregation is harmful to homeless students and no exceptions should be permitted .

they believe that homeless students are better served , and perform better academically , if they attend the same schools as other students .

others argue that homeless students benefit from the wider array of services that are provided in separate schools , and that the greater sense of community and belonging provided by these schools is critical for homeless students .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have continued the overall prohibition on the segregation on homeless students ; they would have also retained the limited exception for those schools in exempt counties that were in operation in fy2000 , as under present law .

the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) also included language that would have increased the reporting frequency ( to once a year ) for the secretary's required report on separate schools .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have required that the lea presume that keeping a homeless student in the school of origin would be in the student's best interest unless the parent or guardian disagrees .

in addition , both bills would have required that the "best interest" determination by an lea consider student - centered factors "including factors related to the impact of mobility on achievement , education , health , and safety of homeless children and youth ... " both bills included new language stating that if an lea determined it to be in the best interest of the homeless student to attend a different school , it must provide the parent , guardian , or unaccompanied youth with its decision in writing and must include information on appeal rights in a form that is understandable to parents and guardians of homeless children and youth .

the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) also included new language stating that "the term 'school of origin' should include the designated receiving school at the next grade level for all feeder schools. .

this would have permitted , for example , homeless students graduating from elementary school to be eligible to attend the same middle school serving their elementary school as non - homeless students .

the senate help committee bill stated that if parents and guardians have exhausted all available dispute procedures , they could appeal to the sea .

it also would have required that until there is a final resolution of the dispute , the lea must enroll the student and provide transportation to the school of origin .

in addition , it would have expanded the issues subject to dispute by explicitly adding: eligibility , services in a public school or public preschool , or any other issues relating to services .

the ehcy program requires that each lea , whether it receives an ehcy subgrant or not , designate a homeless liaison for the lea .

many state coordinators and homeless liaisons are responsible for the coordination of several programs , and some argue that they have insufficient time to perform their duties under the ehcy .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have included new language requiring that training be provided for local liaisons and other school personnel providing services under ehcy .

in addition , the senate help committee bill stated that the office of coordinator for ehcy must have "sufficient knowledge , authority , and time to carry out the duties described in this title," and that local liaisons must have "sufficient training and time" to carry out their duties .

the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) stated that the office of coordinator for ehcy must be able to "sufficiently carry out the duties described in this subtitle. .

it would have also required each state coordinator to annually post data on the number of homeless children and youth identified in the state .

homeless preschoolers are particularly difficult to identify , in part because they are not yet old enough to be covered by state compulsory attendance laws .

for this reason , although preschool students are guaranteed equal access to public preschool and pre - k programs under ehcy , they do not have the same guarantee of being able to attend public school as k - 12 homeless students do .

although homeless preschoolers are eligible to attend public preschool programs , placement of homeless preschoolers in public programs is limited by the fact that there is not a sufficient supply of these programs , and programs that do exist often do not have sufficient vacancies to fill the need .

in addition , preschoolers , unlike k - 12 children and youth , are only guaranteed transportation if it is provided to non - homeless preschoolers at the school .

this creates a significant barrier to school attendance for homeless preschoolers , because many homeless families are often unable to provide the needed transportation for their preschoolers .

the senate help committee bill included an increased emphasis on school readiness for homeless preschoolers .

new provisions would have required each state plan to ensure that preschools that are funded , administered , or overseen by an sea or lea prioritize the enrollment of homeless preschoolers , and coordinate the review of educational and related needs of homeless children and their families with the local liaison in the relevant service area .

however , these preschools would not be required to immediately enroll homeless preschoolers if they are at full capacity .

the term 'unaccompanied youth' includes a youth not in the physical custody of a parent or guardian .

these youth are covered by the same protections that are provided to other homeless youth under ehcy .

however , outreach to these youth is difficult because they usually do not stay in shelters , and in some cases they are fearful of being identified , even though they may wish to complete their education .

unaccompanied homeless youth have often run away from a difficult home situation , or been forced to leave by a parent or guardian .

these students often struggle to find a place to sleep and meet their basic needs .

in addition , many of these youth worry that attending school would be unsafe because the school might involve child welfare agencies or law enforcement .

according to advocates , providing programs that make schools safe and welcoming to subgroups of unaccompanied youth who are overrepresented can help .

because of their situation , these youth benefit from receiving more flexibility in their school schedule than other students , and from diversified learning opportunities such as vocational education .

promising approaches to serving these students include providing a mentor ; coordinating with other agencies to help meet the basic needs of these youth ; as well as policies that facilitate the awarding of partial credit or recovery of previous credits .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) included new language that would have required that homeless liaisons ensure that unaccompanied youth are enrolled and have the same opportunities to meet state academic standards as other students .

in addition , both bills would have required that unaccompanied youth be told about their rights to apply for financial aid as an independent student .

both bills also included language that would have protected leas from liability for enrolling an unaccompanied youth without the consent of a parent or guardian .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have required that homeless students be able to participate in all the educational programs for which they meet the eligibility requirements .

both bills included language that stated that homeless children are to be immediately enrolled even if they have missed application or enrollment deadlines .

in addition , the senate help committee bill would have required states to ensure that homeless students receive credits for previous coursework and that they not be hindered from enrolling due to overdue fines or fees .

it also would have required that previous school records be released , even if a student owed fines or fees , or had not met the previous school's withdrawal requirements .

both bills would have required leas to coordinate services for homeless children and youth with disabilities with the individuals with disabilities act and section 504 of the rehabilitation act .

on february 7 , 2012 , h.r .

32 , the homeless children and youth act of 2011 , was reported out by the subcommittee on insurance , housing , and community opportunity of the house committee on financial services .

this bill would have amended hud's definition of homelessness to include children and families that have been verified as homeless through the following federal programs: the ehcy program , the idea part c program , early head start program , and the runaway and homeless youth program .

this change would have made these newly identified individuals and their families eligible for hud housing assistance services , without requiring that they meet the detailed criteria or be subject to the funding cap included in the hearth act ( p.l .

111-22 ) .

however , it would not have guaranteed that they would receive services .

receipt of services would have been based on local providers' needs assessments .

an amendment ( identified as franken title i - amendment 3 ) introduced by senator franken and subsequently adopted as part of the final senate help committee bill , would have included the provision of services for foster children and youth .

among other things , the franken amendment would have changed the definition of homeless in the ehcy by striking children who are "awaiting foster care placement" from the definition of homeless .

this would have meant that children "awaiting foster care placement," as defined by each state , would no longer have been eligible for services under ehcy .

the amendment would also have created a new program under esea title i - a to ensure that foster children and youth would have improved access to education and related services .

only the proposed changes to the ehcy definition of homeless are discussed in the text of this report .

however , a brief summary of the entire amendment is available in the separate text box below .

both the help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have incorporated changes to ehcy to increase cooperation across agencies and within ed to better serve homeless children .

they both would have established privacy requirements to protect information on homeless children and youth's living situation from being released to anyone not authorized to have such information .

both the senate help committee bill and the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have increased the amount of time that states have to submit required information for an ehcy grant to ed to 120 days .

the senate help committee bill would have reduced the state set - aside to the greater of 20% of the state allocation or $85,000 .

it also would have expanded the time available for ed ( from to 60 days to 90 days after enactment ) to issue and publish school enrollment guidelines for states in the federal register .

it also stated that the secretary's required report on homeless children and youth must be published at least every two years ( no timeline is specified in current law. ) .

in addition , the senate help committee bill included provisions that would have allowed the secretary to reserve ehcy funds for emergency assistance to homeless children , youth and their families , if appropriations for the program exceeded $70 million .

the house education and workforce committee bill ( h.r .

3990 ) would have removed the clause in current law requiring that an lea provide an assurance in its application that it would maintain its fiscal effort at a percentage specified in law .

appendix a .

number and percentage of enrolled homeless students by state for selected years appendix b .

legislation adopted in the 110 th - 111 th congresses that affects the education for homeless children and youth program several bills were passed in the 110 th - 111 th congresses that will potentially increase the programs and / or services available to homeless students .

this appendix summarizes the portions of these bills with relevance for homeless students .

the homeless emergency and rapid transition to housing act ( hearth act ) was passed as part of the helping families save their home act ( p.l .

111-22 ) .

this legislation amended and reauthorized the housing and urban development ( hud ) homeless programs under the mckinney - vento act , among other things .

the hearth act expanded the definition of homeless used by hud and several other agencies .

however , the definition of homeless used by ed in administering the ehcy program remains more expansive than the definition included in the hearth act .

the amended definition of homeless included in the hearth act does allow children and youth that meet ehcy eligibility criteria ( or eligibility under certain other federal programs ) to be considered eligible under the hearth act in limited circumstances .

it requires that youth and families who are defined as homeless under another federal program meet each of the following criteria: they have experienced a long - term period without living independently in permanent housing .

in its final regulation , hud defined "long - term period" to mean at least 60 days .

they have experienced instability as evidenced by frequent moves during this long - term period , defined by hud to mean at least two moves during the 60 days prior to applying for assistance .

the youth or families with children can be expected to continue in unstable housing due to factors such as chronic disabilities , chronic physical health or mental health conditions , substance addiction , histories of domestic violence or childhood abuse , the presence of a child or youth with a disability , or multiple barriers to employment .

under the final regulation , barriers to employment may include the lack of a high school degree , illiteracy , lack of english proficiency , a history of incarceration , or a history of unstable employment .

the hearth act includes additional provisions relevant for ehcy .

the most important are the new requirements that in order to receive funds: continuum of care ( coc ) applicants must show that they have collaborated with leas in identifying homeless families , and in informing families and homeless youth of eligibility for ehcy services .

coc applicants must also show that they have considered the educational needs of homeless students when determining shelter placements , including placing families with children in shelters as close to the school of origin as possible .

cocs must obtain certification from each project applicant that provides housing or services that they have designated a staff person to ensure that children are enrolled in school and are connected to appropriate community services , and that these services are consistent with the provisions of title vii of mckinney - vento , as well as other relevant laws .

the reauthorization of the head start act through the improving head start for school readiness act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-134 ) strengthened requirements regarding homeless preschoolers .

two of the most important changes are the requirement that homeless preschoolers be automatically deemed eligible for head start and early head start ; and a requirement that homeless children be identified and prioritized for enrollment in these programs .

the higher education opportunity act , ( p.l .

110-315 ) included amendments prioritizing the provision of services for homeless students in the trio programs ( several programs that provide support so that at - risk junior high and high school students graduate from high school and attend and complete college ) ; and in the gaining early awareness and readiness for undergraduate programs ( gear - up ) program .

it also permits these programs to offer programs specifically designed for at risk groups , including homeless youth .

the college cost reduction and access act ( p.l .

110-84 ) included provisions that allow youth who are verified as homeless and unaccompanied to be considered independent , thereby allowing them to apply for financial aid without the requirement that they obtain a parent's signature or provide information on family income .

these students often face considerable obstacles to attending college , including the cost of attendance .

this law is intended to ensure that these students will be able to apply for financial aid .

it specifies that verification of independent student status must be made by a lea homeless liaison , the director ( or designee ) of the runaway homeless youth act program , the director ( or designee ) of a housing and urban development homeless shelter program , or a college financial aid administrator .

