in 1980 , chile replaced its pay - as - you - go public pension system , under which benefits for current beneficiaries were paid with taxes from current workers , similar to social security in the united states , with a system of individual accounts that has become a possible model for public pension restructuring around the world .

the preceding pay - as - you - go system had been foundering financially and was unable to pay full scheduled benefits .

in addition , the previous system had been extremely complex , with more than 100 different combinations of contribution rates , retirement ages , and benefit amounts for different groups of employees .

chile's system of private pension accounts has been widely studied as one model for public pension restructuring .

the u.s. congress has considered a number of proposals to include private accounts in the social security system , either by carving contributions to private accounts out of social security's current payroll tax revenue stream or by adding private accounts onto social security's traditional benefit system .

this report provides an overview of chile's pension system , including a description of major reforms approved in 2008 , the chilean government's role , and challenges facing the system .

the chilean pension system consists of three tiers: a poverty prevention tier , an individual account tier , and a voluntary savings tier .

the poverty prevention tier provides a basic benefit to aged persons who did not participate in the public pension system and to retired workers whose monthly pensions financed by individual account assets ( the second tier ) do not reach certain thresholds .

under the second tier , workers contribute 10% of wage or salary income to an individual account and choose a private - sector administradora de fondos de pensiones ( afp ) to manage the account .

upon retirement , the worker may withdraw the individual account's accumulated assets as an immediate or deferred annuity or through programmed withdrawals .

a third , voluntary savings tier encourages workers to supplement pension income with additional savings .

the 2008 reforms were designed , among other goals , to increase participation in the public pension system , reduce high investment management fees and administrative costs , and bolster the poverty prevention tier .

in 2008 , chile under president michelle bachelet introduced several major reforms to the pension system to address concerns , including low participation rates , high pension fund management fees , and inadequate benefits for low - wage and women workers .

lessons from chile's introduction of individual accounts may be helpful to other countries considering a similar transition , although not all of chile's experiences are directly comparable to major organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) countries , such as the united states .

for example , chile's experience with high administrative costs may or may not be relevant to a second country , depending on whether the second country's public or private sector would manage account investments and the extent of financial - sector competition in the second country .

another difference between chile and other countries may be the degree of public acceptance for the first , welfare tier of the system , which creates fiscal pressures similar to those of a pay - as - you - go system .

another political consideration is that chile in the early 1980s , under general pinochet , had considerable latitude to impose top - down reform of the pension system .

transition costs are another issue facing a country considering a move to a chilean - type model .

when chile transitioned to a private account system in 1981 , the earlier pay - as - you - go system was chaotic , insolvent , and unfair .

at the same time , chile's non - pension budget in the early 1980s was in surplus and available for financing transition costs , and high growth rates of economic growth in chile during the 1980s reduced the burden of transition on the economy .

the 2008 reforms to the poverty prevention tier ( the solidarity tier ) are generally acknowledged as the most important component of the 2008 reform package .

chile's public pension system continues to face challenges after the 2008 reforms , however .

although the 2008 reforms will bring many self - employed workers into the public pension system , much of the informal sector remains outside the pension system .

it remains to be seen whether reforms to afps will increase competition and lower costs .

