the federal government owns significant amounts of land and resources .

these assets are exempt from state and local taxation .

congress has established a plethora of payments as compensation for this tax - exempt status .

some payment programs are based on the number of indian children or children of federal employees , some on federal receipts , and some on federal acreage .

in addition , some of the payments are permanently authorized and have mandatory spending authority , while others require periodic reauthorization and / or annual appropriations .

the mandatory spending authority for the secure rural schools and community self - determination act ( srs act ) program expired at the end of fy2011 , and that for the payments in lieu of taxes ( pilt ) program will expire at the end of fy2012 .

as congress debates reauthorization of the srs act , the mandatory spending authority of the pilt program , and other payment programs , it might consider the broader questions of what is fair and consistent compensation to state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands .

the u.s. constitution generally prohibits state and local governments from imposing any tax on the federal government , absent congress's clear consent .

this prohibition is rooted in the supremacy clause , which states that the constitution and federal laws are "the supreme law of the land. .

while the clause does not expressly declare that the federal government is immune from state and local taxation , the u.s. supreme court has long recognized that it implicitly provides for such protection .

as the court explained in one of its earliest decisions , "the power to tax involves the power to destroy," and therefore state taxation of the federal government is inconsistent with the theory of federal supremacy required by the clause .

this immunity is implicated when the tax's legal incidence ( who must pay ) falls on the u.s. government .

while some argue that the federal government cannot and / or should not own land , the federal government does , in fact , own about 640 million acres of land in the united states , about 28% of all land in the country .

if these lands were privately owned , the states and local governments would receive tax payments of various sorts from the lands and the economic activity that is generated from the lands — property taxes , sales taxes , income taxes , and more .

the question is: does the federal government have a responsibility to compensate state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of its lands and resources ? .

this report describes existing state and local taxation , presents basic information on issues of fairness and consistency for possible federal compensation , and summarizes existing federal payment programs .

beginning more than a century ago , congress has created numerous programs to provide funds to state and local governments because of the tax - exempt status of federal lands and resources .

impact aid payments are made to local educational agencies because of the financial burdens resulting from federal activities ( eg , educating children residing on tax - exempt federal lands ) .

many programs were funded with receipts from the sale or lease of federal resources .

others have been based on the acreage of federal lands , on some tax - like arrangement , or some combination of options .

when established , most of the federal payment programs were justified as compensation for the tax - exempt status of federal lands .

however , comparing existing payment programs with state and local taxation is a difficult task , at best .

one difficulty is deciding whether the comparison should assess tax equivalency or cost recovery .

as discussed above , each approach has advantages and limitations .

each has theoretical justifications and advocates , but neither is clearly superior or preferable .

the plethora of federal payment programs were enacted by various congressional committees over the past century .

the differences and distinctions among the programs , as well as the complicated formulae used in some programs , has led to confusion , inconsistency , and probably inequality , among recipients .

as shown in the few comparative studies over the years , some counties have probably been "compensated" at levels greater than private taxation would have yielded , while others doubtless have received less than would have been paid by private landowners .

the perpetuation of these inconsistent and probably inequitable programs is likely the result of two factors .

one is differences in committees of jurisdiction over the various programs .

many of the programs were reported by the house committee on natural resources and senate committee on energy and natural resources , or their predecessors , the committees on interior and insular affairs ( and possibly all the way back to the committees on public lands ) .

however , programs enacted at any particular point are likely a reflection of the leadership and membership of these committees , which has shifted over time .

some significant programs , such as forest service 25% payments to states and impact aid , were reported by other committees — notably the committees on agriculture for the forest service payments , and the committees with jurisdiction over education programs .

the second reason for the perpetuation of the plethora of programs is that many , especially the vast number of revenue - sharing payments , were enacted with mandatory spending authority .

thus , the payments continue to be made , year after year , without any additional action by congress .

such payments are only stopped or modified if congress acts to change the payments .

hence , the inertia of ongoing permanent programs may be a cause for many of the programs being continued .

the other principal difficulty in comparing federal payment programs with state and local taxation is the plethora of state and local taxes — both types and levels .

as described above , state and local governments pay for the variety of goods and services they provide to their citizenry with many types of taxation , including income taxes , sales taxes , property taxes , excise and severance taxes , and more .

different states rely on different taxation approaches — some have no sales taxes , others have no income taxes , and the tax rates used in different states and localities vary widely .

furthermore , local governments typically rely heavily on property taxes , although the importance of property taxation also varies widely .

finally , states and localities differ in their "fiscal blood pressure" — the ability and willingness of their citizens to tax themselves to provide the desired government goods and services .

impact aid , the largest of the federal payment programs , pays local educational agencies for students associated with tax - exempt lands .

it is unclear whether the annual appropriations for impact aid provide payments that approximate the tax payments for education that would have been obtained from such lands if they were taxable .

it is also unclear how the payments compare to the cost of providing education to those students .

these uncertainties reflect both the wide variation in property tax rates — the principal tax source of local education funding — and differences in local educational costs per pupil .

for example , the highest average state property tax rate ( texas ) is more than 6 times higher than the lowest average state property tax rate ( hawaii ) .

many federal programs provide payments to state and local governments from a share of revenues from some federal activity .

revenue - sharing payments are probably most closely akin to severance or yield taxes , but as noted above , both severance / yield tax rates and revenue - sharing proportions vary widely , making it exceedingly difficult to compare .

furthermore , severance and yield taxes are typically state taxes , while most revenue - sharing programs provide funding for county - provided services .

some payment programs are based on acreage or on appraised land value .

these programs are probably most similar to property taxes .

the acreage - based pilt payments are specified amounts per acre , regardless of the value or use of the land , and thus have no real parallel among state and local taxes .

pilt payments are reduced by revenue - sharing payments , which is similar to the effect on property taxes of severance or yield tax payments in many places .

for two of the three tax - like federal payment programs , the rate is a fixed 0.75% of appraised values ; this is relatively low , but within the range of the average property tax rates shown in table 2 , above .

the mandatory spending authority for two relatively large payment programs — the secure rural schools and community self - determination act ( srs ) program and the payments in lieu of taxes ( pilt ) program — expire at the end of fy2011 and fy2012 , respectively .

these two programs have provided payments of about $750 million annually for hundreds of counties throughout the country .

as congress debates the reauthorization of the srs act and the mandatory spending authority of the pilt program , and possibly of other payment programs , it might consider the broader questions of what is fair and consistent compensation to state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands .

appendix a .

details on state and local taxation as described briefly in the text , there are several types of state and local taxes imposed in the various states .

these are discussed in more depth below .

property taxes property taxes are one of the few taxes based on wealth — the value of assets at a given point in time .

other taxes are almost always linked to a flow of income or are triggered by a market transaction within a given time frame , usually one year .

many observers suggest that property taxes are intended to reflect the property owner's benefit received from government services .

a common measure of the benefit received at the local level is the value of property at its highest and best use , not necessarily current use .

for example , the "market value" of property is defined by the state of new jersey as: the highest price in terms of money which a property will bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions requisite to a fair sale , the buyer and seller , each acting prudently , knowledgeably and assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus .

relevant market transactions , such as a recent sale or exchange of the property , are generally preferred for assessing property values .

absent recent transactions , various jurisdictions typically use one of three valuation methods to establish market value: ( 1 ) the replacement cost approach ; ( 2 ) a sales comparison approach ; or ( 3 ) an income approach .

the replacement cost method is uniquely suited for structures , whereas the sales and income methods can be adapted for many different types of property .

typically , local governments separately assess farm land , residential property , and commercial property .

that valuation is then split between the land and the improvements to that land ( eg , structures ) .

in many jurisdictions , different rates ( or assessment ratios ) apply to land and structures and to residential and commercial property .

farmland , in contrast to other types of property , is usually valued at current agricultural use and not its potential "highest and best" use .

as depicted in table 1 , above , the importance and collections of property taxes vary considerably among the states .

although not shown in the table , property taxes are much more important for local governments than for state governments ; property taxes accounted for $397 billion ( 72.3% ) of local tax collections in 2008 , but only $13 billion ( 1.6% ) of state tax collections .

the multiple base definitions , rates , exemptions , administration , assessment practices , and state specific constraints all contribute to wide variation in the collection of property taxes .

as shown in table 2 , these variations in implementation result in significant differences in average property tax rates .

table 2 shows the average property tax rates ranging from 0.4% in hawaii to 2.57% in texas .

sales and use taxes sales and use taxes are collected when a business sells a product to a consumer or another business .

all but four states levy a sales tax and local governments in 35 states levy a separate local sales tax .

 ( one state — alaska — has no state sales tax , but has average local sales taxes of 1.74%. ) .

the average state statutory rate is 5.05% , and for those states with sales taxes , average state and local sales taxes range from 4.35% in hawaii to 9.43% in tennessee , as shown in table 2 .

further complicating discussions of state and local sales taxation is that some items ( eg , prescription drugs ) are exempt from many state sales , for other items ( eg , food ) are exempt or taxed at a lower rate .

general sales taxes are generally more significant for state governments than for local governments , accounting for $241 billion ( 30.8% ) of state tax collections and for $63 billion ( 11.6% ) of local tax collections in 2008 .

mail - order , catalog , and internet sales raise questions and issues over the collection of state and local sales taxation .

in addition , some jurisdictions have use taxes — taxes determined and received by the jurisdiction where the products will be used ( eg , building materials ) , rather than at the point of sale ( prior to transport for use ) .

this differs from a user fee , such as is common for utilities , where the user pays for the good or service ( eg , water , sewage , or solid waste disposal ) actually provided by the state or local government .

income taxes income taxes are collected on income earned in the state .

generally , the state where the taxpayer works , not the taxpayer's home state , is entitled to tax that income .

many states , however , enter into so - called reciprocal agreements whereby the states agree not to levy state income taxes on nonresidents ( commuters ) from a neighboring state .

as of 2011 , 44 states and the district of columbia levied income taxes ; two — new hampshire and tennessee — levy taxes on dividend and interest income , but not wage and salary income .

as shown in table 2 , the highest marginal income tax rate for individual taxpayers varies widely among states that levy income taxes , ranging from 4.54% in arizona to 11.0% in hawaii and oregon .

individual and corporate income taxes accounted for $278 billion ( 35.6% ) and $51 billion ( 6.5% ) , respectively , of state tax collections in fy2008 ; local income tax collections were only $26 billion ( 4.8% ) from individuals and $7 billion ( 1.3% ) from corporations in 2008 .

other taxes as shown in table 1 , other state and local taxes are quite significant , accounting for 23.4% of all state and local tax collections .

the primary other state and local taxes are excise taxes and severance taxes , although a variety of other taxes and fees can be significant .

excise taxes are essentially sales taxes on particular products .

states , and sometimes local governments , commonly impose excise on several products — gasoline , tobacco products , alcoholic beverages , hotel and motel accommodations , restaurant meals , and more .

because excise taxes are sometimes used to deter consumption of particular goods ( notably tobacco and alcohol ) , they are occasionally referred to as "sin taxes" or "sumptuary taxes. .

some excise taxes are used to generate revenues for particular purposes , such as gasoline taxes for maintaining roads and highways .

while some excise taxes ( eg , tobacco and gasoline ) are imposed in most states , the rates vary widely ; for example , in 2010 , cigarette excise tax rates ranged from $0.07 per pack in south carolina to $3.46 per pack in rhode island , while gasoline taxes varied from 8¢ per gallon in alaska to 46.6¢ per gallon in california .

in 2008 , sales of motor fuel , alcoholic beverages , and tobacco products accounted for $58 billion ( 7.4% ) of state tax collections and for $2 billion ( 0.4% ) of local tax collections .

other selective sales taxes accounted for another $60 billion ( 7.6% ) of state tax collections and another $24 billion ( 4.4% ) of local tax collections .

severance taxes are excise taxes based on natural resource extraction .

severance taxes are almost exclusively state taxes and are most commonly collected on minerals , oil and gas ( or petroleum ) , coal , and timber .

the tax can be levied on a per - unit basis or as a percentage of the market value ( ad valorem ) of the extracted resource .

severance taxes are relatively insignificant in most states .

twelve do not levy a severance tax , and collections are less than 1% of total state taxation in another 22 states .

on the other hand , severance taxes can be substantial in resource rich states , especially those with extensive oil or natural gas deposits .

in 2007 , severance taxes accounted for 64% of state tax collections in alaska and 40% in wyoming , and generated more than $2 billion in collections in texas .

because some severance taxes are per - unit and others are ad valorem , and because different resources may be taxed differently even in the same state , it is not possible to summarize the nature and average levels of severance taxes .

charges and fees state and local governments also rely on various charges and fees to fund the goods and services they provide .

in 2008 , charges and fees provided more than 30% of state and local revenues ( excluding intergovernmental transfers from the federal government and from states to local governments ) .

these charges , which commonly cover a portion of the cost , are for a broad array of goods and services , such as hospital services , higher education institutions ( eg , college tuition ) , publicly owned utilities ( eg , electricity , water supply , sewage treatment , solid waste disposal ) , and transportation ( eg , highways , airports , port facilities , parking ) .

appendix b .

details on existing federal payments to state and local governments as summarized above in "existing payment programs," there are many federal programs that provide payments to state and local governments associated with federal lands .

some payments are based on numbers of children associated with tax - exempt lands , many on receipts from selling or using federal lands and resources , others on federal acreage , while a few are tax - like payments , and some combine these approaches .

this appendix provides details on the impact aid program , on the many receipt - based programs , and on two complicated programs that either are due to expire ( at the end of fy2012 ) or have expired ( at the end of fy2011 ) : one is the acreage - based pilt program , and the other is a combination program under the secure rural schools and community self - determination act of 2000 .

impact aid impact aid compensates local educational agencies ( leas ) for the "financial burden" resulting from tax - exempt federal land ownership and the enrollment of certain individuals ( eg , children of parents in the military and children living on indian lands ) .

the impact aid program dates from 1950 , and is administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , under title viii of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

several types of payments to leas are authorized , and each receives a separate annual discretionary appropriation .

for the purposes of this report , the most relevant payments are those made under section 8002 , section 8003 ( b ) , section 8003 ( d ) , and section 8007 .

the majority of impact aid funds are provided to leas through the section 8003 ( b ) payments .

section 8002 section 8002 compensates leas for the federal ownership of certain property .

to qualify for compensation , the federal government must have acquired the property , in general , after 1938 , and the property had an assessed value at the time it was acquired of at least 10% or more of ( 1 ) all real property in the lea at the time the federal property was acquired , or ( 2 ) the greater of all real property as assessed in the first year preceding or succeeding the acquisition of the property , if the property was not assessed at the time it was acquired and state law requires an assessment of property acquired .

payments are generally used by leas for general operating expenses ( eg , teacher salaries , books , supplies , and utilities ) .

section 8003 ( b ) and ( d ) section 8003 compensates leas for enrolling "federally connected" children .

these are children who reside with a parent who is a member of the armed forces living on or off federal property ; reside with a parent who is an accredited foreign military officer living on federal property ; reside on indian lands ; reside in low - rent public housing ; or reside with a parent who is a civilian working or living on federal land .

two payments are made under section 8003: ( 1 ) "basic support payments" for federally connected children ( §8003 ( b ) ) and ( 2 ) payments for certain federally connected children with disabilities ( §8003 ( d ) ) .

section 8003 ( b ) authorizes "basic support payments" for federally connected children .

to be eligible for an 8003 ( b ) payment , an lea must have at least 400 federally connected children , or such children must represent at least 3% of an lea's average daily attendance ( ada ) .

impact aid funds provided under section 8003 ( b ) are not limited to specified uses ( such as improving the educational achievement of disadvantaged students ) .

while funds are generally used for current local education expenditures , they may also be used for capital expenditures .

in addition , the funds provided under section 8003 ( b ) need not be spent just on federally connected children .

finally , because impact aid payments are not aimed at specific educational goals , accountability requirements for the use of funds or for specific outcomes are minimal .

section 8003 ( d ) authorizes additional payments to leas based on the number of certain federally connected children with disabilities who are eligible to receive services under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) .

more specifically , payments are limited to idea - eligible children , whose parents are members of the armed forces ( residing on or off military bases ) or who reside on indian lands .

unlike basic support payments , leas receiving 8003 ( d ) payments must use the funds to meet the needs of the federally connected children with disabilities for whom they received the payments .

in addition , the funds must be used to provide a free appropriate public education to these children in accordance with the provisions of idea .

section 8007 section 8007 provides funds for construction and facilities upgrading to certain leas with high percentages of children living on indian lands or children of military parents .

these funds are used to make formula and competitive grants .

under current law , 40% of the funds appropriated under section 8007 are used to make construction payments by formula to leas receiving section 8003 payments and in which either students living on indian land constitute at least 50% of the lea's total student enrollment or military students living on or off base constitute at least 50% of the lea's total student enrollment .

the funds available for construction payments are divided equally between these two groups of leas ( 20% of the total §8007 appropriation going to each group ) .

the remaining 60% of section 8007 appropriations are used to make school facility emergency and modernization competitive grants .

emergency grants must be used to repair , renovate , or alter a k - 12 public school facility to ensure the health and safety of students and staff .

modernization grants may be used to relieve overcrowding or upgrade facilities to support a "contemporary educational program. .

statutory language requires that emergency grants be given higher priority than modernization grants in the grant competition .

receipt - based payment programs table b - 1 provides a list of existing federal payments to state and local governments from federal receipts derived from the sale or use of federal lands and resources .

certain federal lands and / or resources provide no receipt - based payments to state and local governments — notably , national park system lands and hardrock / locatable minerals .

for most other federal lands and resources , the federal government pays state and / or local governments a portion of receipts .

the payment rates vary widely — from 4% in many cases to as much as 90% for oil and gas leasing in alaska .

some are geographically quite narrow ( eg , 37½% of oil royalties from the south half of the red river indian reservation in oklahoma ) , others quite broad ( eg , 25% of gross revenues from all national forest lands ) .

all of the payments shown in table b - 1 were created with mandatory spending authority , since there was a natural source of funds for the payments .

payments in lieu of taxes the payments in lieu of taxes ( pilt ) program was enacted in 1976 and is administered by the department of the interior .

pilt authorizes payments per acre of "entitlement" ( also called eligible or qualifying ) lands identified in the statute .

the authorized payments are based on a complicated formula that reflects eligible acreage , fixed payments per acre that are offset by specified receipt - sharing payments ( some of the payments shown in table b - 1 , above ) , minimum fixed payments per acre , and a population - based ceiling on total pilt payments to a county .

the lands eligible for pilt payments are the majority of federal lands , but do not include all federal lands .

as presented in 31 u.s.c .

§6901 ( 1 ) , "entitlement" lands include federal land: ( a ) that is in the national park system or the national forest system , including wilderness areas and lands described in §2 of the act of june 22 , 1948 ( 16 u.s.c .

§577d ) , and §1 of the act of june 22 , 1956 ( 16 u.s.c .

§577d - 1 ) [specified acquired national forest lands in minnesota] ; ( b ) that the secretary of the interior administers through the blm [bureau of land management] ; ( c ) that is dedicated to the use of the government for water resource development projects [i.e. , bureau of reclamation and u.s. army corps of engineers lands] ; ( d ) on which are located semi - active or inactive installations ( except industrial installations ) that the secretary of the army keeps for mobilization and for reserve component training ; ( e ) that is a dredge disposal area under the jurisdiction of the secretary of the army [corps of engineers] ; ( f ) that is located in the vicinity of purgatory river canyon and piñon canyon , co , and acquired after december 23 , 1981 , by the u.s. government to expand the fort carson military installation ; ( g ) that is a reserve area ( as defined in §401 ( g ) ( 3 ) of the act of june 15 , 1935 ( 16 u.s.c .

§715s ( g ) ( 3 ) ) ) [i.e. , national wildlife refuge system lands reserved from the public domain ] ; or ( h ) acquired by the secretary of the interior or the secretary of agriculture under §5 of the southern nevada public land management act of 1998 [p.l .

105-263] that is not otherwise described in subparagraphs ( a ) through ( g ) .

lands not eligible for pilt payments include acquired lands in the national wildlife refuge system , active military installations , and lands administered by other agencies ( eg , nasa , department of energy ) .

as originally enacted , pilt payments required annual appropriations .

in 2008 , congress provided mandatory spending authority for the pilt program for five years — fy2008-fy2012 .

unless this provision is reauthorized , the last mandatory pilt payments will be for fy2012 , and payments for fy2013 will require annual appropriations in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act .

secure rural schools and community self - determination act the secure rural schools and community self - determination act of 2000 ( srs ) was reauthorized in 2008 .

these optional payments were based on a complex formula that included each county's share , among all the counties opting for srs payments , of historic payments and of forest service ( usfs ) and o&c land acreage and adjusted for relative per - capita personal income in the county .

the specific steps were: step 1 .

determine the three highest revenue - sharing payments between fy1986 and fy1999 for each eligible county , and calculate the average of the three .

step 2 .

calculate the proportion of these payments in each county ( divide each county's three - highest average [step 1] by the total of three - highest average in all eligible counties , with separate calculations for usfs lands and o&c lands ) .

step 3 .

calculate the proportion of usfs and o&c lands in each eligible county ( divide each county's usfs and o&c acreage by the total usfs and o&c acreage in all eligible counties , with separate calculations for usfs lands and o&c lands ) .

step 4 .

average these two proportions ( add the payment proportion [step 2] and the acreage proportion [step 3] and divide by 2 , with separate calculations for usfs lands and o&c lands ) .

this is the base share for counties with usfs lands and the 50% base share for counties with o&c lands .

step 5 .

calculate each county's income adjustment by dividing the per capita personal income in each county by the median per capita personal income in all eligible counties .

step 6 .

adjust each county's base share [step 4] by its relative income ( divide each county's base share or 50% base share by its income adjustment [step 5] ) .

step 7 .

calculate each county's adjusted share or 50% adjusted share as the county's proportion of its base share adjusted by its relative income [step 6] from the total adjusted shares in all eligible counties ( divide each county's result from step 6 by the total for all eligible counties [usfs and o&c combined] ) .

the reauthorization included a total ( "full funding" ) payment , declining by 10% annually over four years ( fy2008-fy2011 ) , to be allocated among the counties opting for the srs payments under the formula .

 ( counties could choose payments under the historic usfs 25% payments to states or o&c 50% payments to counties , shown above in table b - 1 . ) .

in addition , counties in eight states — california , louisiana , oregon , pennsylvania , south carolina , south dakota , texas , and washington — could receive a transition payment ( higher than the calculated payments ) for the first three years of the reauthorization ( fy2008-fy2010 ) .

the reauthorization also continued the requirement to spend ( "reinvest" ) 15% - 20% of the payments on the federal lands and the authority to use some of the payments for other , specified purposes .

the payments under this program expired at the end of fy2011 ( i.e. , the final payment was for fy2011 ) .

at this time , unless the srs act is reauthorized , usfs payments will revert to 25% of gross receipts and o&c payments to 50% of gross receipts for fy2012 and beyond .

