the administration's proposal to reduce the size of the army as well as restructure units and headquarters has national security implications that congress will need to consider as part of its oversight and authorizations and appropriations role .

in terms of size of the force , congress sets the endstrength for both the active and reserve components of the army .

congress also authorizes and appropriates funds needed for army restructuring , training exercises , equipment , basing , and infrastructure , as well as the various manpower management tools the army could use to drawdown the force .

administration decisions about the structure of the army can have a significant impact on army bases in a member's district or state , which can also have economic ramifications for communities around or near affected bases .

the administration's downsizing and restructuring proposals also can have a significant impact on local and state defense - related industries .

lastly , soldiers and their families who might be affected by the administration's decisions constitute a unique element of members' constituencies .

most experts would agree the administration's decision to reduce the size of the army was an outgrowth of its decision to withdraw u.s. forces from iraq by the end of 2011 and the stated intent of handing over security responsibilities for afghanistan to the afghan government and afghan national army by the end of 2014 .

the united states has routinely drawn down forces upon the completion of a major conflict , eschewing a "large standing army" during peacetime — although it can be argued that in a post - 9 / 11 world , "peacetime" is a somewhat subjective term .

a brief history of past army drawdowns can be found at appendix b .

the foundation for the army's drawdown and restructuring was laid in early 2011 .

a year later in january 2012 , the administration provided additional details on proposed force structure and global posture .

historically , military drawdowns have been rather blunt instruments of national policy .

as noted in the earlier descriptions of the drawdowns at the conclusion of world war ii and vietnam , the focus was primarily on immediate reductions in accessions and separating / discharging others as soon as possible .

the rapid and poorly planned demobilization of army forces in the past had a deleterious impact on morale , terminated many aspiring military careers , and released significant numbers of military personnel with limited transition assistance .

the recent post - cold war drawdown was substantially different .

congress still determined the endstrength levels but provided a number of voluntary and involuntary tools to shape each year group of the force — officer , warrant officer , and enlisted .

voluntary separations were emphasized , and some of the tools had robust financial incentives .

few skills were exempt from consideration , and every soldier was vulnerable for separation at some point during nearly a decade of drawdown .

it was also the first time that resources were focused on transition assistance and stressed the importance of working with military alumni , even after their separation .

title 10 drawdown authorities are discussed in greater detail in appendix a .

on february 24 , 2014 , secretary of defense hagel stated that he would recommend the following to the president: dod will further reduce active - duty army end - strength to a range of 440-450,000 soldiers ; "if sequestration - level cuts are re - imposed in 2016 , the active - duty army would have to draw down to an end strength of 420,000 soldiers ; " and "the army national guard and reserves will also draw down in order to maintain a balanced force .

today , the army national guard numbers about 355,000 soldiers and the reserves about 205,000 soldiers .

by 2017 , under our recommendations , there would be 335,000 soldiers in the army national guard force structure and 195,000 in the reserves .

if sequestration returns in 2016 , the army national guard would continue drawing down further , to 315,000 .

army reserves would draw down to 185,000. .

as previously noted , army leadership has stated a 450,000 soldier active component force is the "smallest acceptable force to implement the defense strategy" and a 420,000 soldier active force provides "insufficient capacity ; cannot implement defense strategy. .

during a february 11 , 2014 , appearance at the council on foreign relations , chief of staff of the army general raymond odierno , reportedly noted: i think about 450,000 is right .

at 420,000 , that last 30,000 makes a huge difference in the capabilities that we have .

you've got to remember there's a sunk cost in the army .

in other words , there's about 20 percent of our army that has to be set just to run the institution in terms of training new soldiers , training officers , running the army .

given dod's proposed range of active endstrengths from 450,000 to 420,000 and the army's contention that a 450,000 active soldier force is needed to execute the nation's defense strategy , further examination and discussion of these force levels might be warranted .

congress could decide to examine in detail with the army the overall process employed by the army to reach its minimal acceptable level of 450,000 of active duty soldiers .

aspects of this examination could include — but should not be limited to — the defense planning scenarios employed by the army ; allocation rules used by the army to apportion forces in response to planning scenarios ; whether marine corps units are included in the army's analysis of ground forces required for various planning scenarios ; and if the army's rotational readiness model , the army force generation ( arforgen ) model , is "driving" the 450,000 active soldier minimum requirement .

such a comprehensive examination and ensuing discussion with congress could promote greater understanding of the army's current position or possibly identify an alternative active component endstrength , which would permit the army to successfully execute the nation's defense strategy .

army leadership is currently on record stating that a minimum of 52 bcts ( 28 active and 24 army national guard ) under the 450,000 active duty plan is the "smallest acceptable force to implement the defense strategy. .

others representing army national guard interests suggest that the 52 bct requirement can be met in a 420,000- strong active component army by increasing the number of army national guard bcts above army - recommended levels .

given these seemingly divergent positions and the reported level of debate , there appears to be no public agreement between the army and national guard on a common force structure to meet defense strategy requirements .

this seeming impasse could provide congress with the opportunity to revisit the active component ( ac ) / reserve component ( rc ) force mix .

advocates for a larger reserve component argue that in many cases , the rc is cheaper than the ac , in part because ac troops receive a more generous pension benefit and make costly change - of - station moves every few years .

pentagon leadership noted because rc units maintain a lesser degree of readiness , relying on them too much could put the nation at risk during a crisis .

what some are suggesting is that the balance between the ac and rc be reexamined and potentially some ac units the army deems mission - essential be moved into the rc in order to achieve a degree of cost efficiency .

this would not be an unprecedented action , as the army as frequently rebalanced the ac / rc mix , but because this impacts the active "full - time" army and the "part - time" national guard and army reserves — both of which have strong constituencies both inside and outside the army — this tends to be a somewhat sensitive and sometimes contentious undertaking .

while it is possible that the ac and rc balance could be reexamined , the army contends active forces are best suited unpredictable contingency operations due to their high state of readiness by virtue of their full - time status .

the army further notes in order to build rc readiness , predictability is needed and anywhere from 80 to 195 pre - and post - mobilization preparation days were needed to prepare rc units for their planned deployments to iraq and afghanistan during the 2003-2012 period .

this training day requirement , as well as the need to train many units to a battalion or brigade level of proficiency , makes it extremely difficult to incorporate many types of rc units into the early phases of an operation as well as participate in certain types of missions such combined arms maneuver .

given these circumstances , the army suggests transferring ac units to the rc as a cost - saving measure could make them unavailable for short - notice or contingency operations and increase overall military risk .

congress has already indicated an interest in examining army force mix in greater detail .

h.r .

3930 , to establish the national commission on the structure of the army , and for other purposes , which was referred to the house armed services committee on january 27 , 2014 , calls for , among other things , the establishment of a national commission to: undertake a comprehensive study of the structure of the army to determine the proper force mixture of the active component and reserve component , and how the structure should be modified to best fulfill current and anticipated mission requirements for the army in a manner consistent with available resources and estimated future resources .

while the association of the u.s. army ( ausa ) — an army advocacy group — reportedly views such as commission as "unnecessary" and stated it "would impede the army's ability to implement spending reductions required by the 2011 budget control act," it can be argued congressional involvement in the army force mix debate could prove to be both beneficial and timely , given the apparent degree of divergence in the defense community on this issue .

several authorities in title 10 result in involuntary separation .

they were used sparingly during the post - cold war drawdown and always preceded by the offer of voluntary incentives .

these involuntary tools include the following: title 10 drawdown authorities — involuntary selective early retirement boards ( serb ) selective early retirement is the involuntary retirement of senior officers who are ( 1 ) serving lieutenant colonels or commanders ( navy ) who have been twice non - selected for promotion to colonel or captain ( navy ) or ( 2 ) are serving colonels or captains ( navy ) who have at least four years in grade and have not been selected for promotion .

if not selected for serb , an officer cannot be considered for another five years .

those selected must be retired not later than the first day of the seventh month after the secretary concerned approves the recommendation for retirement .

while considered involuntary , those selected will receive retired pay and remain eligible for military healthcare and the other benefits associated with military retirement .

reduction - in - force ( rif ) reduction - in - force is the second involuntary program available for downsizing the officer cohorts .

while serb is focused on those with 20 or more years of service , rif is directed at those with more than 6 but less than 20 years of service .

while the post - cold war drawdown emphasized voluntary separations and retirements , rif was available ( but used sparingly ) if the voluntary programs did not generate adequate volunteers .

2012 enlisted qualitative service program ( qsp ) on march 14 , 2012 , the army announced the initiation of the enlisted qualitative service program ( qsp ) directed toward the grades of staff sergeant through command sergeant major .

under these provisions , those soldiers under consideration for this program can opt to separate voluntarily in lieu of being subjected for review by the qsp board .

title 10 drawdown authorities — voluntary the drawdown tools available during the post - cold war drawdown are still available to force planners , with several of them recently reinstated by the fy2012 ndaa .

these programs were used extensively during the post - cold war drawdown of the 1990s .

while these tools are available to all of the services , the following descriptions will focus on army programs for the drawdown .

they include the following: voluntary retirement incentive the voluntary retirement incentive is the one incentive that was not available during the post - cold war drawdown ; it was introduced in the fy2012 ndaa .

this program targets retirement - eligible servicemembers with between 20 and 29 years of service .

the amount of the incentive is determined by the service secretary but may not exceed the member's annual basic pay .

in exchange for the payment , the servicemember agrees to retire .

the program is capped at no more than 675 officers , and the program expires on december 31 , 2018 .

voluntary separation incentive ( vsi ) the voluntary separation incentive ( vsi ) is an incentive that is paid annually for twice the number of years the individual served on active duty .

servicemembers must have served between 6 and 20 years and additional eligibility criteria are established by the service secretary .

the formula for determining the annual annuity is 2.5% times monthly basic pay at the time of separation , times 12 , times the number of years of service .

the original authority for this incentive was the national defense authorization act for 1992 / 1993 , which terminated the program on december 31 , 2001 .

the vsi program was reinstated by the fy2012 ndaa for the period december 31 , 2011 , through december 31 , 2018 .

special separation bonus ( ssb ) the special separation bonus ( ssb ) is a voluntary separation incentive available to any eligible member of the armed forces .

ssb is a lump sum payment equal to 15% times years of service ( yos ) and 12 times monthly basic pay .

to be eligible , members must have served for more than 6 years but for less than 20 .

other requirements may be established by the service secretary .

the original authority for the ssb program also expired on december 31 , 2001 , but was reinstated by the fy2012 ndaa for the period december 31 , 2011 , through december 31 , 2018 .

vsi and ssb were complementary programs that were both offered to eligible populations .

the primary difference was that vsi was an annuity program , while ssb represents a lump sum payment .

those who volunteer for vsi or ssb do not receive retirement benefits such as a lifelong annuity and retiree health care benefits , although they may later qualify for retirement through reserve service .

temporary early retirement authority ( tera ) the temporary early retirement authority ( tera ) provided an opportunity for eligible officers , warrant officers , and enlisted personnel to retire prior to completion of 20 years of service .

those in selected grades and skills could voluntarily retire with as few as 15 years of service .

tera retirees have their retired pay reduced for every year less than 20 .

however , as a retiree , they remain eligible for retired pay ; military healthcare ; commissary and exchange privileges ; and morale , welfare and recreation activities .

the original tera program expired on september 1 , 2002 , but has been reauthorized by the fy2012 ndaa .

the current program began on december 31 , 2011 , and extends through december 31 , 2018 .

voluntary early release / retirement program ( veerp ) this voluntary program targeted the most junior and the most senior ends of the officer spectrum , with the incentive being a reduction in service obligation .

junior officers ( lieutenants and captains ) were permitted to resign prior to fulfilling their active duty obligation ( five years for u.s. military academy graduates , four years for most rotc scholarship graduates , and three years for officer candidate school graduates ) .

senior officers ( lieutenant colonels and colonels ) were permitted to retire at their present rank , waiving one year of the existing retirement eligibility criteria ( normally three years ) .

for example , a colonel could retire as a colonel but with only two years in grade , rather than the usual three years .

this authority was originally included in the fy1991 ndaa .

"early outs" service secretaries have the authority to discharge enlisted servicemembers up to three months prior to the end of their term of enlistment .

the fy2012 ndaa expanded the three - month standard to one year with no loss of benefits for the members taking advantage of this opportunity .

however , members are not entitled to pay and allowances for the period not served .

there is no termination date associated with this authority .

other personnel tools with drawdown implications enlisted retention control points the military expects that individual performance will result in the periodic promotion of enlisted personnel as their military experience increases and as their individual responsibility within the organization grows .

those who do not progress in a timely manner may be separated prior to the end of their term of service .

this policy is implemented through a series of retention control points that dictate how long a servicemember may remain at the current rank / grade before being promoted .

those who fail promotion in a timely manner can be separated prior to their normal term of service .

these retention control points can be adjusted over time and can aid in force shaping by separating those with less potential .

the current and previous army retention control points are shown in table a - 1 .

officer promotion non - selection the military's officer management system is an "up or out" system — officers who fail to promote after being twice considered for the next higher grade may be involuntarily separated .

to support the officer manpower requirements during the decade of oif and oef , many non - selected officers were selectively continued in their current grade .

in addition , the oif / oef period was one of unusually high promotion selection rates ( opportunity ) and reduced time - in - grade ( timing ) before promotion consideration .

with the withdrawal of u.s. forces from iraq and the gradual drawdown of forces in afghanistan , the services are again enforcing the standards for promotion and retention .

the promotion timing and opportunity standards established by dod are shown in table a - 2 .

most recently , the air force involuntarily separated 157 majors who had been twice non - selected for promotion to lieutenant colonel .

these officers received separation pay and other transition benefits and may be eligible to transfer to the air national guard or air force reserve but their active duty careers have ended .

appendix b .

brief history of past army drawdowns post - world war ii during world war ii , the army determined what its reasonable post - war strength should be and developed plans for a peaceful demobilization .

initially , the army established a post - war goal of an active and reserve structure capable of mobilizing 4 million troops within a year of the outbreak of a future war .

later , the army set the strength of the active ground and air forces at 1.5 million ( the army air corps did not become the u.s. air force until july 26 , 1947 , with the enactment of the national security act of 1947 , p.l .

80-235 ) .

the vast majority of servicemembers in the army during world war ii were draftees .

the army's demobilization plans provided for the release of troops on an individual basis based on points .

soldiers received point credits for length of service , combat participation and awards , time spent overseas , and parenthood .

also factoring into the army's plans was the availability of shipping to bring overseas troops to the united states , as well as the capacity to process the discharged soldiers .

however , pressure for faster demobilization from the public , congress , and the troops themselves affected the army's plan for an orderly process .

the army responded by easing eligibility requirements and released half of its 8 million troops by the end of 1945 .

in early 1946 , the army slowed its return of troops from overseas to meet its constabulatory requirements in germany and japan , which elicited another public outcry to speed up demobilization .

public opposition diminished after the army more than halved its remaining strength during the first six months of 1946 .

president truman was determined to balance the national budget , which also affected the army's manpower .

the administration's dollar ceiling for fy1947 led to a new maximum army strength of just over 1 million .

in order to reach this new level , the army stopped draft calls and released all post - war draftees along with any other troops eligible for demobilization .

by june of 1947 , the army consisted of 684,000 ground troops and 306,000 airmen .

although considered large for a peacetime army by american standards , the loss of many capable maintenance specialists resulted in widespread deterioration of equipment .

active army units were understrength , had many barely trained replacements , and were considered "shadows of the efficient organizations they had been at the end of the war. .

this post - war reduction saw the army go from 8 million soldiers and 89 divisions in 1945 to 591,000 men and 10 divisions by 1950 — a 93% reduction in manpower over five years .

half of the army's 10 divisions were deployed overseas , with far eastern command controlling four infantry divisions on occupation duty in japan and the european command controlling one infantry division in germany .

the remaining five divisions ( two airborne , two infantry , and one armored division ) were stationed in the united states and constituted a general reserve to meet emergencies .

all 10 divisions had undergone organizational changes , largely based on wartime experience .

despite this reorganization , 9 out of 10 divisions were well below their authorized strength , with most infantry regiments having only two of their three authorized battalions , for example .

also , most units lacked their organic armored units and lacked their wartime complement of weapons .

whatever weapons and equipment these units had were described as "worn - out leftovers from world war ii. .

the low personnel and equipment readiness levels in 1950 became apparent during the initially weak u.s. military response when the korean war broke out in june of that year .

post - vietnam during the 1960s , dod had shaped and sized the armed forces to fight two and a half wars simultaneously .

the wars were two major theater wars , or mtws — a war in europe and one in asia — and a "half war," a small - scale contingency operation .

the force to fight this two - and - a - half - war construct numbered over 950,000 through the middle of the 1960s , and at the height of the vietnam war in 1968 , the army grew to over 1,570,000 men and women .

the conscripted army of the vietnam war had a disproportionate representation of lower - income and non - college - educated soldiers in its ranks , with many middle and upper class men able to qualify for student deferments by attending college .

this perceived unfairness of the draft and the protracted nature of the vietnam war were credited with helping to bring about the all - volunteer force .

in 1970 , in anticipation of a drawdown in vietnam , the army instituted a reduction in force — known as an rif — with the intent of getting rid of low - performing soldiers that had accumulated during vietnam .

the process was applied unevenly and , although the army eliminated some "deadwood," a significant number of good soldiers were released and many substandard soldiers remained on active duty .

1973 was a pivotal year for the u.s. army as direct involvement in vietnam's ground war ended and the transition to an all - volunteer army began .

many believed the army was a weakened institution , and military and political leaders were blamed by many for the poor conduct and outcome of the war .

because of the unpopular nature of the war , many returning soldiers faced a hostile or indifferent public reception .

noted one historian , "[t]he army that left vietnam and returned to america and its garrisons in germany and korea in the 1970s was at low ebb on morale , discipline , and military effectiveness. .

the withdrawal of u.s. forces from vietnam in 1973 also ushered in an era of decreased defense budgets .

in 1973 , in light of budgetary constraints , secretary of defense james schlesinger formally instituted the total force .

these budget reductions translated into a smaller army , and the army's endstrength declined from its vietnam war high of 1.57 million in fy1968 to 785,000 in fy1974 .

by 1974 , the army fielded 13 active duty divisions .

chief of staff of the army general creighton abrams believed that a 13-division active duty army was insufficient to meet the united states' global requirements .

furthermore , the army's director of manpower and forces noted the army's 13 divisions constituted the smallest force since prior to the korean war and , in reality , the army could field only 12 divisions , and only 4 of those divisions were rated as "combat ready. .

general abrams obtained the secretary of defense's approval to increase the army's active divisions to 16 without an increase in army active duty endstrength , which stood at 765,000 .

this was achieved , in part , by shifting soldiers from army headquarters and instructional units to army divisions , assigning reserve component "round - out" brigades to late - deploying active duty divisions , and moving combat support and combat service support units to the reserve component .

there were a number of perceived problems associated with the total force .

filling the army's three new active duty divisions from capped endstrength severely taxed the army's already thin manpower pool .

the relationship between the active duty and reserve components was considered by many as poor , with active duty commanders typically viewing their reserve component counterparts as "weekend warriors" and doubting the combat readiness of reserve forces .

the heavy reliance on reserve forces for combat support and service support also meant active forces would have a difficult time operating in the early days of a major conflict until reserve forces could be mobilized and trained up to standard .

while some viewed the heavy reliance on reserve forces as problematic , general abrams believed increased reliance on the reserves would be beneficial in obtaining american public support in the event of a major conflict and avoiding the kind of public dissonance associated with vietnam .

issues related to limited army endstrength versus requirements , poor recruit quality , budgetary constraints , and lack of public support in the mid - to - late 1970s led senior army leadership to characterize the army as being a "hollow force. .

post - cold war / desert storm the "hollow force" of the mid - 1970s and early 1980s recovered due in part to the arguments of senior dod leaders , congressional action , and the defense build - up under the reagan administration .

in 1987 , the active army consisted of 780,815 personnel comprising 18 divisions , with 2 of the 18 divisions still forming and not yet at 100% strength .

in late 1989 , the warsaw pact and soviet union began to unravel .

the demise of the soviet union led the united states and its allies to pursue a "peace dividend," whereby defense budgets and manpower would be drastically reduced in order to decrease taxes and divert resources to other uses .

in the end , a 535,000 soldier active duty force — a more than 30% cut — was agreed to , constituting the smallest army since 1939 .

the late 1980s saw a fundamental rethinking of u.s. defense policy and army force structure .

a 1987 army force structure review examining the declining soviet threat recommended a smaller force structure of 15 divisions and 640,000 soldiers .

this force level and structure was referred to as the "base force. .

under this scenario , chief of staff of the army carl vuono argued that decreasing force structure by more than 35,000 soldiers per year would jeopardize readiness .

many believed in order to achieve any meaningful savings , the army would need to be smaller than general vuono's 640,000 soldier army .

iraq's august 1990 invasion of kuwait suspended downsizing debates .

at the conclusion of the "100 hour war" to liberate kuwait , many saw it as a validation of a more technologically focused approach toward warfare , and the policy debates about reducing the size of the army were renewed .

in 1993 , the clinton administration announced it would pursue defense budget reductions of at least $88 billion from fy1994 to fy1997 .

as part of this effort , secretary of defense les aspin initiated a bottom up review intended to modify force structure based on current and projected threats to national security .

the review recommended placing added emphasis on u.s. air power and a reduction of army endstrength to 495,000 soldiers while retaining the ability to fight two mtws simultaneously .

in march 1994 , the bottom up review recommendations were implemented and active army endstrength reductions to 495,000 soldiers began and 2 of 12 divisions were eliminated .

