the federal procurement process ( i.e. , the process whereby agencies obtain goods and services from the private sector ) requires funding .

contractors are generally paid using appropriated funds , and agency personnel — who are generally also paid with appropriated funds — are responsible for entering and administering contracts on the agency's behalf .

the use of appropriated funds to finance contract performance and / or administration means that federal contracts may be affected by actual or potential funding gaps or shortfalls , such as could arise from a failure to raise the debt limit , budget cuts , or sequestration , all of which have been topics of wide - spread congressional and public interest during recent years .

while these occurrences are distinct in their causes and their effects upon federal procurement , as table 1 illustrates , all prompt similar questions about what the government must or may do when confronted by a lack of funds , and how contractors could be affected by potential government actions .

this report provides an overview of the various options that the government has , pursuant to contract law or otherwise , when confronted with actual or potential funding gaps , funding shortfalls , or budget cuts .

it begins by considering the legal principles underlying the government's generally broad rights not to incur new obligations ( eg , by canceling solicitations or declining to exercise options ) .

the report then addresses the contractual and other rights that the government may exercise under existing contracts ( eg , changing certain terms of the contract or altering the performance period ) .

overall , these rights are comparatively well established .

however , as the report concludes , the effects of the exercise of these rights upon contractors and , particularly , upon federal spending on procurement contracts are less clear and generally would depend upon the facts and circumstances of individual cases .

the report does not address changes in contract policy that could also occur in response to funding shortfalls , nor does it address the effects that exercising certain of the rights noted here might have upon agency programs .

in thinking about the government's contractual and other legal rights in this area , it helps to keep in mind the ways in which government contracts are — and are not — like other contracts .

in many ways , federal procurement contracts are like other contracts between private parties , notwithstanding the fact that certain terms of these contracts are required by law .

like other contracting parties , the government generally has a duty to perform largely as specified in the contract , absent modification , excuse , or discharge of its obligations .

also like other contracts , government contracts are construed in light of the parties' intent , and the parties' intent could potentially be found to be contrary to the literal meaning of the contract .

for example , a contract that purports to be a fixed - price contract ( i.e. , a contract whereby the contractor agrees to supply certain goods or services to the government at a predetermined price ) could be found to be a cost - reimbursement contract ( i.e. , a contract that provides for the government to pay the contractor , at a minimum , allowable costs incurred in performing the contract up to a total cost specified in the contract ) because other terms of the contract indicate that this was the parties' intent .

similarly , as with other contracts , certain implied duties , such as the duty of good faith and fair dealing , will be read into federal procurement contracts even when they are not express terms of the contract .

such duties could potentially become important where changes to existing contractual obligations , like those discussed below , are involved because one of the implied duties that contracting parties generally have is mitigating the damages they incur due to the other party's conduct .

in addition , like other contracting parties , the government and / or government contractors could potentially waive certain terms of the contract , or their failure to perform could be excused .

certain standard terms of federal procurement contracts , discussed below , do permit the government to take certain actions that could potentially give rise to liability for breach under the common law of contracts .

for example , the various changes clauses — allowing the government to unilaterally change certain terms of the contract — run contrary to the general rule that modifications to a contract must be bilateral .

however , to the degree that these rights arise from terms of the contract , private parties could , and sometimes do , enter contracts granting themselves such rights .

perhaps the best example of this is the clause allowing the government to terminate the contract for its convenience , which the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) requires to be included in all federal procurement contracts .

termination for convenience clauses are also used in contracts between private parties to give the parties some flexibility as to the quantity of goods or services delivered under the contract , as well as limit the scope of potential liability under the contract .

such clauses are necessary , particularly in private contracts , to avoid the operation of the general rule that a buyer who informs a seller that he does not intend to purchase certain goods or services provided for in a contract has anticipatorily repudiated , or breached , the contract and is liable for damages , potentially including anticipatory profits and consequential damages .

anticipatory profits are profits that the non - breaching contractor would reasonably have realized had the contract been performed .

consequential damages are damages that , while not a direct result of the breach , are a consequence of it .

there are , however , several ways in which government contracts differ from other contracts precisely because the government is the sovereign .

one way is that certain standard contract terms , such as the clause allowing the government to terminate the contract for its convenience , will be read into contracts from which they are lacking .

the grounds upon which this is done , and potentially also the types of clauses that will be read in , have arguably shifted over time .

the most recently articulated grounds for doing so are that ( 1 ) the clause represents a "deeply ingrained strand of public procurement policy," and ( 2 ) federal regulations can "fairly be read" as permitting the clause to be read into the contract because they require agencies to incorporate the clause in their contracts .

however , courts had previously held that termination for convenience clauses , in particular , should be read into government contracts because the government should be given broad latitude to act in the "public interest. .

another way in which government contracts differ from other contracts is that , in certain cases , the government could avoid liability for conduct that would otherwise give rise to liability for breach because it acted in its sovereign capacity when it took the action .

for example , in one recent case , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit found that the government was not liable for damages incurred by a contractor after the government blocked the contractor's access to a construction site on a military base for 41 days following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

according to the court , the government took this action in its capacity as a sovereign , and the action was not "specifically targeted at appropriating the benefits of a government contract. .

the government's rights are broadest where prospective contracts , or prospective obligations ( i.e. , definite commitments to spend appropriated funds ) under existing contracts , are concerned .

the supreme court has held that , "[l]ike private individuals and businesses , the government enjoys the unrestricted power to produce its own supplies , to determine those with whom it will deal , and to fix the terms and conditions upon which it will make needed purchases. .

this generally means that the government may cancel a solicitation , decline to exercise an option under a contract , and not allot additional funding to cost - reimbursement contracts , even if the contractor has expended costs in preparing a bid or offer in response to the solicitation , or otherwise relied upon the expectation that the government would exercise the option , or allot additional funding .

the contractor's ability to recover when the government opts not to incur new obligations is generally limited , although it is broader when the government does not allot additional funds to incrementally funded cost - reimbursement contracts than in other cases .

the anti - deficiency act generally bars agencies from incurring new obligations during funding gaps by prohibiting the obligation of funds in excess or advance of appropriations .

agencies would generally not be similarly barred from incurring new obligations when the debt limit is not increased , or spending is cut , but they may voluntarily limit such obligations in order to reduce spending .

the existence of a contract between two parties ( including the government ) generally serves to constrain their options in so far as they are obligated to perform and / or pay as called for in the contract , absent modifications to the contract or special circumstances .

while this general rule would seem to suggest that the government's options to reduce procurement spending are significantly more circumscribed with existing obligations under contracts than with prospective obligations , the government has broad contractual and inherent rights that give it some flexibility in responding to funding gaps , funding shortfalls , and budget cuts ( eg , by reducing the scope of the contract when there are budget cuts , or delaying performance in anticipation of a potential funding gap ) .

in some cases , these rights reflect the type of contract used .

for example , because indefinite - quantity contracts obligate the government to purchase only a minimum quantity of goods or services from the contractor , while allowing it to purchase more , the government could generally forgo purchases in excess of the minimum without incurring liability to the contractor .

in other cases , the contract expressly or impliedly includes terms allowing the government to ( 1 ) change the scope of the contract , including the quantity of goods or services purchased under it , ( 2 ) delay or accelerate performance of a contract , or ( 3 ) terminate a contract , all without incurring liability for breach .

the contractual and other rights that the government could exercise in modifying procurement spending in light of funding gaps , funding shortfalls , or budget cuts are arguably well - established .

determining what the exercise of these rights might mean for federal contractors and , particularly , federal spending on procurement contracts is , in contrast , less clear for multiple reasons .

first , individual contracts could contain specific terms that are contrary to the standard terms discussed here , and that would generally be found to prevail over the standard terms .

for example , while the suspension of work clause , discussed above , would generally not allow contractors to recover costs resulting from the impact of a government - caused delay upon the vendor's other contracts , some contracts have expressly allowed for such costs .

second , there is incredible variation in the types , terms , and performance of individual contracts , and in how particular government actions might affect the contractors' costs and / or schedule .

two contractors performing apparently identical functions for an agency could potentially be doing so under fundamentally different contracts , and the same agency action ( eg , reductions in scope , issuance of a stop - work order ) could have profoundly different effects upon them depending upon how they planned to perform , where they are in the course of performance , and other aspects of their business operations ( eg , availability and desirability of other work ) .

relatedly , the government often has multiple ways , pursuant to its contracts , to get to the same outcome ( eg , a reduction in the quantity of goods or services to be supplied under the contract ) .

depending upon the circumstances , it could potentially be more beneficial to treat such a reduction as a partial termination for convenience or as a change , and the government has some discretion in determining how to proceed , provided the change is "minor. .

finally , government contracts are subject to interpretation by various courts and boards of contract appeals , which have had differing opinions on various questions , such as whether contingent costs may be recovered as part of an adjustment .

in short , individual contractors could be more or less affected by individual government actions in this area , depending upon the terms of their contract , the course of performance , the nature of the government action , and the tribunal hearing their case , among other things .

the government's spending upon procurement contracts could similarly be more or less affected , depending upon how it exercises its rights .

for example , reductions in scope effectuated pursuant to the changes clause might or might not lead to savings , depending upon the effects that the reductions have upon contractor costs .

if reductions could be targeted to contracts where contractors' costs would decrease due to the reduction , the government could potentially realize savings through reductions .

if , however , the reductions were not so targeted , the government might save nothing , or even incur higher costs on particular work .

