the space industry refers to economic activities related to the manufacture and delivery of components that go into earth's orbit or beyond .

the space industry is a subset of the u.s. aerospace industry and u.s. strength in aerospace has helped to provide u.s. strength in space .

bolstered by a large research and development establishment , the commercial space industry has a manufacturing component and a services component .

the focus of this report is the global commercial space manufacturing sector ( launch vehicles , spacecraft , satellites , and parts and equipment ) .

the space industry also builds space ports , ground stations , and ground equipment .

together , the space and ground infrastructure enables a much larger space services sector that includes satellite telecommunications and broadcasting services and satellite remote sensing , among many other services .

the space industry , broadly defined , is an important part of the u.s. industrial and technology base .

because of its economic importance and its close link to government space programs , the u.s. space manufacturing industry has historically been of great interest to congress .

this report discusses the current structure of the industry , looks at trends that may promote or inhibit space manufacturing , and examines current space manufacturing activities .

it then lays out a number of federal policy issues that may affect the industry's growth .

the u.s. commercial space manufacturing sector is small , but the companies that manufacture commercial satellites also manufacture satellites for the u.s. government .

u.s. commercial satellite manufacturing generated estimated revenues of $3.4 billion ( of $5.6 billion in total u.s. satellite manufacturing revenues ) and employed 26,611 private sector workers in 2010 , while the u.s. commercial launch industry generated revenues of $307 million ( of $1.2 billion in total u.s. launches ) and employed 49,195 private - sector workers .

in 2010 , global revenues from satellite - enabled activities ( i.e. , the commercial products and services that are created using satellites ) totaled $101.3 billion .

major products include direct - to - home television ( $79.1 billion ) , satellite communications ( $17.3 billion ) , satellite radio ( $2.8 billion ) , consumer broadband ( $1.1 billion ) , and earth observation ( $1.0 billion ) .

satellite services also generated worldwide sales of ground equipment that totaled $51.6 billion , including all of the infrastructure and technology needed to communicate with and manage satellites ( $7.5 billion ) , as well as all of the end - user consumer equipment ( satellite radios , satellite phones , satellite tv receivers and dishes , and satellite navigation equipment ) ( $44.1 billion ) .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

the u.s. government is by far the largest consumer of space products and services , accounting for 23% of global spending .

the commercial space sector overlaps the government ( civil and military ) space sector in a number of different ways .

many manufacturers sell to both commercial and government customers , making use of common systems ( for instance , satellites use standard buses ) , common launch vehicles , and interdependent supply chains .

many of the largest commercial aerospace companies play a major role in the space industry , and some are almost entirely dependent on government space programs for their space - related work .

military and civil ( i.e. , non - military government ) space programs provide economies of scale and scope to companies that are federal contractors .

during the post - cold war period , numerous mergers resulted in industry consolidation , with fewer firms spanning multiple sectors .

because of the size of government space programs , some of the largest u.s. space companies , especially those engaged in launch activities , withdrew from the commercial space sector to focus nearly exclusively on government contracts that are not open to foreign competitors .

nevertheless , the international commercial launch industry has continued to develop even as some of the largest u.s. space companies ceased to compete for those launches .

during the last decade , the united states increasingly offered opportunities to smaller private companies to encourage entrepreneurial approaches to space activities as a means of spurring innovation , reducing costs , and promoting commercial engagement in space manufacturing and service provision .

orbital sciences corporation and space exploration technologies corporation ( spacex ) are two newer american companies that have successfully competed for commercial and government contracts .

launch vehicle , spacecraft , and satellite manufacturing is highly competitive internationally , with european , russian , chinese , indian , and japanese companies vying with u.s. firms for contracts to provide launch vehicles , spacecraft , and satellites to commercial customers .

some manufacturers of launch vehicles specialize in the manufacture and launch of those vehicles , while others also make spacecraft , satellites , and civil and defense aviation products , in addition to building and launching rockets .

the supply chain for launch vehicles is moderately globalized , while satellites vary according to customer: military ( low level of globalization ) , civil ( moderate level of globalization ) , commercial ( moderate to high level of globalized components ) .

the major policy issues discussed in this report are limited to those that appear to have large effects on the competitiveness of the u.s. space manufacturing sector: classification of commercial satellites as munitions subject to stringent u.s. export controls laws and regulations ; domestic and international spectrum regulations that may not have kept pace with the emergence of new technologies that appear to require much greater flexibility in terms of spectrum use ; and the dramatically increased use of commercial satellites for department of defense communications needs .

one major caveat regarding the statistical data used in this report needs to be mentioned .

publicly available u.s. government data for the manufacture of launch vehicles , spacecraft , satellites , and electronic components ( especially search , detection , and navigation systems and instruments ) are deficient in many respects .

in some cases , data are suppressed because they would make it possible to identify a specific company ; in others , data are aggregated to a level that makes it virtually impossible to distinguish between manufacturing for space activities , aviation , and telecommunications .

missiles , space launch equipment , and spacecraft cannot be differentiated using government data sources: for example , satellites , which are grouped with terrestrial telecommunications and broadcasting , are invisible in the data .

crs has used government data when available , but draws on reports by futron corporation , the space foundation , and others that provide estimates of the size of the global market and , in some cases , the u.s. market .

futron corporation's data , in particular , are used by government agencies , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and others as a basis for analyzing the space industry .

the space equipment industry comprises three distinct segments .

launch vehicles are used to place satellites and other spacecraft into orbit .

spacecraft and space systems are manned or unmanned vehicles that transport passengers or cargo .

satellites , with functions such as telecommunications and weather sensing , are the most common payloads aboard spacecraft .

most of the major companies manufacturing commercial space equipment compete in more than one of these sectors ( see table 1 ) .

u.s. government data on space - related employment provide only a broad indication of the number of workers employed in the space industry , and , because of industry definition issues and suppression of nondisclosable data , employment in specific manufacturing sectors cannot be accurately gauged .

data suppression makes it difficult to compare data from year to year .

the space foundation provides estimates of employment in the space industry , broadly defined .

the space foundation uses six broad categories that are defined in the north american industry classification system ( naics ) ( see table 2 ) , some of which may contain non - space industry workers ( eg , search , detection , and navigation instruments ) or include service sector ( information technology ) workers or nasa civilian employees engaged in launch or satellite operations .

other naics categories that contain space industry workers are omitted because they do not provide enough information to determine the number of space industry jobs .

another issue is that workers in three of the naics categories involving production of guided missiles and space vehicles are combined so that it is impossible to distinguish between workers who manufacture weapons from those who make launch equipment and / or spacecraft .

nevertheless , the space foundation's choice of data provides insight into the overall group of workers that comprise the space industry labor force , including engineers , scientists , and highly skilled production workers .

annual average earnings in the aerospace sector for production workers and engineers tend to be higher than the average for all industries .

according to the bureau of labor statistics , "above - average earnings reflect , in part , the high levels of skill required by the industry due to the high quality standards of their products .

the earnings may also reflect longer average hours worked each week in the industry .

nonproduction workers , such as engineering managers , engineers , and computer specialists , generally command higher pay because of their advanced education and training. .

bls data ( see table 3 ) also indicate that employees in the space sector were , on average , somewhat better paid than workers in aircraft and aircraft parts manufacturing .

in 2010 , aircraft manufacturing workers averaged $88,737 in annual earnings , while guided missile and space vehicle manufacturing employees had average annual earnings of $106,830 .

the approximately 20,000 workers who manufactured propulsion units and parts or parts for guided missiles and space vehicles had lower average annual earnings than those involved in assembling guided missiles and space vehicles .

employees in the search , detection , and navigation instruments category earned more than aircraft manufacturing workers and more than guided missile propulsion and parts workers and guided missile and space vehicle parts and auxiliary equipment employees .

the higher average annual earnings reflect the skills involved in creating and assembling the sophisticated electronics products that are critical to guided missiles , spacecraft , satellites , and ground infrastructure .

the search , detection , and navigation instruments industry also includes jobs associated with the creation and assembly of consumer navigation equipment for automobiles and cell phones .

with the exception of search , detection , and navigation instruments ( naics 334511 ) , data on space manufacturing employment are not available on a state - by - state basis .

bls data are available for california , but are suppressed for nearly all other states .

california , with the largest number of workers in the aerospace industry ( 109,663 in 2010 ) , had 59,580 employees in the space industry , of which nearly 41,000 ( 69% ) worked in search , detection , and navigation instrument manufacturing .

missile and spacecraft manufacturing ( naics 336414 ) had 106,830 employees in 2010 , of which 15,585 ( 14.6% ) worked in california .

eighteen states employed more than 1,000 workers in the manufacture of search , detection , and navigation instruments , with average annual earnings ranging from $130,414 in colorado to $51,936 in georgia .

federal laws and regulations are of major importance to the space equipment manufacturing industry .

although many of these measures were developed principally with reference to military concerns , they may also affect the u.s. commercial space industry because of the interrelationship between commercial and government use of space described earlier .

the outlook for the united states commercial satellite sector is generally positive , notwithstanding the regulatory challenges mentioned in the last section .

in 2010 , the united states commercial satellite industry launched a total of 34 satellites for commercial and government customers — more than russia ( 26 ) or europe ( 24 ) .

according to futron , the united states also claims four of the five largest space manufacturers , in terms of revenue ( see table 4 ) .

even with the rise of countries such as china , india , and brazil , the united states continues to enjoy a significant , albeit slowly diminishing , advantage in space , at least in part because the united states has a dynamic private sector that produces most of its output .

the drawn - out transition from nasa's space shuttle program to a successor program may delay government procurement of the commercial equipment intended to replace the shuttle .

nonetheless , as military and nasa programs become more reliant on the private sector for transportation into space , u.s. commercial space equipment manufacturers will have access to a market that is largely closed to foreign competitors .

the prospects for the u.s. space equipment manufacturing industry in markets that are open to international competition are less certain .

the rapid expansion of new consumer technologies and services that are space - enabled has led to the emergence of new competitors from many countries .

u.s. manufacturers of launch vehicles , spacecraft , and satellites have a number of distinct advantages over many foreign competitors , including a very large aerospace industrial base capable of supporting commercial and government demand for space technologies and equipment .

additionally , the united states is pursuing policies that support and encourage competition , and numerous entrepreneurial firms are investing and developing launchers and spacecraft that may open new avenues for space exploration and travel .

the united states also has a well - educated workforce and higher education system that is highly competitive internationally .

in its analysis of space competitiveness , futron ranked the relative position of the united states , compared to other countries , and found that the u.s. decline in recent years is mainly attributable to advances achieved by russia , china , japan , and india .

as the u.s. government's role in promoting human spaceflight has transitioned from the space shuttle to a strategy that relies on the private sector to develop products that are competitive and serve the broad u.s. goals and activities that were identified in the national space policy of june 2010 , the u.s. launch industry has become dependent on government payloads and has continued to face stiff competition from russia and europe .

u.s. industry still maintains a wide lead in manufacturing for space .

although there are some vulnerabilities in the space industrial base ( primarily in areas where some critical products are available from only one supplier or from limited foreign sources ) , the sector as a whole generates significant revenues and value - added and tends to be more entrepreneurial than in most other countries engaged in space activities .

a major weakness , however , that has been identified by some members of congress and a number of analysts is the general lack of public support for government funding of civil and military space programs .

the authors of the futron study , for instance , have observed that the u.s. space program may be perceived as not providing sufficient value to the nation .

one consequence could be a further loss of competitiveness as other countries continue to strengthen their own space manufacturing capabilities and programs .

