this report will track and provide an overview of actions taken by the administration and congress to provide fy2013 appropriations for commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) accounts .

it also provides an overview of enacted fy2012 appropriations for agencies and bureaus funded as a part of the annual appropriation for cjs .

the source for the fy2012-enacted amounts is the conference report for the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-55 , h.rept .

112-284 ) .

fy2013-requested amounts were taken from s.rept .

112-158 and the appendix to the budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2013 .

the senate committee - reported amounts were taken from s.rept .

112-158 and the house - passed amounts were taken from h.rept .

112-463 and the version of h.r .

5326 passed by the house .

the amounts provided in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) were taken from the text of the act and rescissions of fy2013 budget authority were calculated by crs .

the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-55 ) included a total of $60.910 billion for the bureaus and agencies funded as a part of the act .

the act included $7.808 billion for the department of commerce , $27.408 billion for the department of justice , $24.838 billion for the science agencies , and $856.6 million for the related agencies .

for fy2013 , the administration requests a total of $62.076 billion for the agencies and bureaus funded as a part of the annual commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill .

the administration's request includes $7.978 billion for the department of commerce , $28.079 billion for the department of justice , $25.090 billion for the science agencies , and $929.2 million for the related agencies .

the fy2013 request for cjs is 1.9% greater than the fy2012 appropriation of $60.910 billion .

on april 19 , 2012 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2013 ( s. 2323 ) .

the bill includes a total of $61.762 billion for the agencies and bureaus that would be funded by the bill .

the senate committee - reported amount is 1.4% greater than the fy2012 appropriation of $60.910 billion , but it is 0.1% below the administration's request .

the bill includes $6.288 billion for the department of commerce , $27.866 billion for the department of justice , $26.679 billion for the science agencies , and $929.2 million for the related agencies .

on may 10 , 2012 , the house passed the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2013 ( h.r .

5326 ) .

the bill would provide $60.879 billion for cjs , which is under 0.1% less than the fy2012 appropriation , 1.5% less than the administration's request , and 1.4% below the senate committee on appropriation's mark .

the bill includes $7.663 billion for the department of commerce , $27.584 billion for the department of justice , $24.786 billion for the science agencies , and $845.9 million for the related agencies .

on march 26 , 2013 , president obama signed into law the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 , hereinafter "consolidated and further continuing appropriations act" ) .

the act provides a total of $60.638 billion for cjs .

this amount includes $7.726 billion for the department of commerce , $27.305 billion for the department of justice , $24.737 billion for the science agencies , and $870.1 million for the related agencies .

section 3001 of the act provided for a series of rescissions of fy2013 budget authority .

discretionary non - security ( as defined at 2 u.s.c .

§900 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ) accounts were subject to a 1.877% rescission , while discretionary security ( as defined at 2 u.s.c .

§900 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ) accounts were subject to a 0.1% rescission .

most accounts in the cjs appropriations act were subject to the 1.877% rescission .

only the foreign claims settlement commission and the international trade commission accounts were subject to the 0.1% rescission .

also , per section 3001 , rescissions were applied proportionately to each discretionary account and each item of budget authority and each program , project , or activity ( ppa ) within each account or item of budget authority ( with ppas being delineated in the act or the explanatory statement published in the march 11 edition of the congressional record ) .

in addition to the rescission specified in section 3001 of the act , omb ordered another rescission pursuant to section 3004 of the act .

section 3004 is intended to eliminate any amount by which the new budget authority provided in the act exceeds the fy2013 discretionary spending limits in section 251 ( c ) ( 2 ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act , as amended by the budget control act of 2011 and the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 .

as enacted , this section provides two separate across - the - board rescissions — one for non - security budget authority and one for security budget authority — of 0% , to be applied at the program , project , and activity level .

the section requires the percentages to be increased if omb estimates that additional rescissions are needed to avoid exceeding the limits .

subsequent to the enactment of p.l .

113-6 , omb calculated that additional rescissions of 0.032% of security budget authority , and 0.2% of non - security budget authority , would be required .

the appropriations provided by the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act for each cjs account do not reflect any reductions that resulted from the sequestration ordered by president obama on march 1 , 2013 , pursuant to the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

the amounts in this report reflect only new appropriations .

therefore , the amounts do not include any rescissions of unobligated or de - obligated balances that may be counted as offsets to newly enacted appropriations , nor do they include any scorekeeping adjustments , such as the balance on the crime victims fund .

table 1 shows the fy2012-enacted appropriations , the administration's fy2013 request , the senate committee - reported amounts , the house - passed amounts , and the amount included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act for the department of commerce , the department of justice , the science agencies , and the related agencies .

table 14 shows enacted appropriations for these agencies , in detail , for fy2009 through fy2013 ( the amounts for fy2013 shown in table 14 do not reflect sequestration ) .

the department of commerce ( commerce department ) originated in 1903 with the establishment of the department of commerce and labor .

the separate commerce department was established on march 4 , 1913 .

the department's responsibilities are numerous and quite varied ; its activities center on five basic missions: ( 1 ) promoting the development of u.s. business and increasing foreign trade ; ( 2 ) improving the nation's technological competitiveness ; ( 3 ) encouraging economic development ; ( 4 ) fostering environmental stewardship and assessment ; and ( 5 ) compiling , analyzing , and disseminating statistical information on the u.s. economy and population .

the following agencies within the commerce department carry out these missions: international trade administration ( ita ) seeks to develop the export potential of u.s. firms and improve the trade performance of u.s. industry ; bureau of industry and security ( bis ) enforces u.s. export laws consistent with national security , foreign policy , and short - supply objectives ; economic development administration ( eda ) provides grants for economic development projects in economically distressed communities and regions ; minority business development agency ( mbda ) seeks to promote private - and public - sector investment in minority businesses ; economic and statistics administration ( esa ) , excluding the census bureau , provides ( 1 ) information on the state of the economy through preparation , development , and interpretation of economic data and ( 2 ) analytical support to department officials in meeting their policy responsibilities ; census bureau , a component of esa , collects , compiles , and publishes a broad range of economic , demographic , and social data ; national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) advises the president on domestic and international communications policy , manages the federal government's use of the radio frequency spectrum , and performs research in telecommunications sciences ; united states patent and trademark office ( uspto ) examines and approves applications for patents for claimed inventions and registration of trademarks ; national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) assists industry in developing technology to improve product quality , modernize manufacturing processes , ensure product reliability , and facilitate rapid commercialization of products on the basis of new scientific discoveries ; and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides scientific , technical , and management expertise to ( 1 ) promote safe and efficient marine and air navigation ; ( 2 ) assess the health of coastal and marine resources ; ( 3 ) monitor and predict the coastal , ocean , and global environments ( including weather forecasting ) ; and ( 4 ) protect and manage the nation's coastal resources .

as president obama indicated in his january 24 , 2012 , state of the union address , the administration is seeking authority to reorganize and consolidate the federal government , an initiative with potentially great significance for the commerce department .

the president's first action if granted this authority would be to consolidate and combine the department's "core business and trade functions," the small business administration , the office of the u.s. trade representative , the export - import bank of the united states , the overseas private investment corporation , and the trade and development agency into a new department .

the census bureau , the bureau of economic analysis , and the department of labor's bureau of labor statistics also would move to the new department , as a statistics division .

noaa would transfer to the department of the interior , and the commerce department would cease to exist as such .

established by an act of 1870 with the attorney general at its head , doj provides counsel for the government in federal cases and protects citizens through law enforcement .

it represents the federal government in all proceedings , civil and criminal , before the supreme court .

in legal matters , generally , the department provides legal advice and opinions , upon request , to the president and executive branch department heads .

the major functions of doj agencies and offices are described below .

united states attorneys prosecute criminal offenses against the united states ; represent the federal government in civil actions ; and initiate proceedings for the collection of fines , penalties , and forfeitures owed to the united states .

united states marshals service provides security for the federal judiciary , protects witnesses , executes warrants and court orders , manages seized assets , detains and transports unsentenced prisoners , and apprehends fugitives .

federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) investigates violations of federal criminal law ; helps protect the united states against terrorism and hostile intelligence efforts ; provides assistance to other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; and shares jurisdiction with drug enforcement administration over federal drug violations .

drug enforcement administration ( dea ) investigates federal drug law violations ; coordinates its efforts with state , local , and other federal law enforcement agencies ; develops and maintains drug intelligence systems ; regulates legitimate controlled substances activities ; and conducts joint intelligence - gathering activities with foreign governments .

bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) enforces federal law related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives .

it was transferred from the department of the treasury to doj by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

federal prison system ( bureau of prisons , bop ) provides for the custody and care of the federal prison population , the maintenance of prison - related facilities , and the boarding of sentenced federal prisoners incarcerated in state and local institutions .

office on violence against women ( ovw ) coordinates legislative and other initiatives relating to violence against women and administers grant programs to help prevent , detect , and stop violence against women , including domestic violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the activities of the bureau of justice assistance , bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and the office of victims of crime .

community oriented policing services ( cops ) advances the practice of community policing by awarding grants to law enforcement agencies to hire and train community policing professionals , acquire and deploy crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test innovative policing strategies .

most crime control has traditionally been a state and local responsibility .

with the passage of the crime control act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-351 ) , however , the federal role in the administration of criminal justice has increased incrementally .

since 1984 , congress has approved five major omnibus crime control bills , designating new federal crimes , penalties , and additional law enforcement assistance programs for state and local governments .

the science agencies fund and otherwise support research and development ( r&d ) and related activities across a wide variety of federal missions , including national competitiveness , climate change , energy and the environment , and fundamental discovery .

for fy2013 , the administration requested a total of $929.2 million for the related agencies .

the administration's request was 8.5% greater than the $856.6 million appropriated for fy2012 .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended a total of $929.2 million for the related agencies , the same as the administration's request .

the house - passed amount for the related agencies was $845.9 million , 1.2% below the fy2012 appropriation and 9.0% less than both the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

congress provides a total of $870.1 million for the related agencies under the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act .

established by the civil rights act of 1957 , the u.s. commission on civil rights ( the commission ) investigates allegations of citizens who may have been denied the right to vote based on color , race , religion , or national origin ; studies and gathers information on legal developments constituting a denial of the equal protection of the laws ; assesses the federal laws and policies in the area of civil rights ; and submits reports on its findings to the president and congress when the commission or the president deems it appropriate .

the administration's fy2013 budget request included $9.4 million for the commission , an amount that was 2.3% greater than the fy2012 appropriation of $9.2 million .

the senate committee on appropriation's recommended funding for the commission was $9.4 million , the same as the administration's request .

the house recommended $9.2 million for the commission , which would have been the same as the fy2012 appropriation and 2.2% less than both the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act includes $9.2 million for the commission .

the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) enforces several laws that ban employment discrimination based on race , color , national origin , sex , age , or disability .

in the past few years , appropriators were particularly concerned about the agency's ability to reduce the pending inventory of charges due to rising caseloads and limited staff .

due to new hires of enforcement staff and developments in technology , the eeoc progressed in reducing the pending inventory of cases in fy2011 .

the president's fy2013 budget request for the eeoc was $373.7 million , which is 3.8% ( $13.7 million ) more than the fy2012 enacted level of $360.0 million .

out of the $373.7 million , up to $29.5 million was requested for payments to state and local entities with which the agency has work - sharing agreements to address workplace discrimination within their jurisdictions ( i.e. , fair employment practices agencies , fepas , and tribal employment rights organizations , teros ) .

this is the same amount the agency paid to these groups for fy2012 .

the senate committee reported amount for the eeoc was $373.7 million , which was 3.8% ( $13.7 million ) more than the fy2012-enacted level of $360.0 million .

the senate recommended amount was the same as the president's budget request for fy2013 .

the senate committee on appropriations would have provided $30.0 million for payments to state and local entities with which the agency has work - sharing agreements to address workplace discrimination within their jurisdictions ( i.e. , fepas and teros ) .

the house - passed bill would have provided $366.6 million for the eeoc , which is 1.8% ( $6.5 million ) more than the fy2012 appropriation , but 1.9% ( $7.1 million ) less than both the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

the house - passed bill would have included $29.5 million for payments to state and local entities , the same amount enacted in fy2012 and requested by the president for fy2013 .

the house bill also included an amendment passed by voice vote prohibiting the use of eeoc funds for enforcing eeoc guidance dealing with potential discrimination resulting from employer criminal background checks .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 provides $370.0 million as enacted , and $362.3 million after rescissions for the eeoc .

this post - rescission amount includes an additional rescission of 0.2% for non - security accounts as reported by omb , pursuant to p.l .

111-6 , section 3004 .

congress requested that the eeoc report within 60 days on steps taken to implement fy2012 goals from eeoc's 2012-2016 strategic plan .

congress continues to remain interested in steps taken to manage private sector cases and the development of new processes for managing federal sector cases .

congress also requested the eeoc report within 90 days on a new age discrimination rule's effect on small business .

finally , congress directs the eeoc report within 120 days on new guidance for criminal background checks .

the pending inventory of private sector cases filed with the eeoc was reduced from 86,338 at the end of fy2010 to 78,136 at the end of fy2011 , a 9.5% decline .

according to the commission , the decline reflects the ability of the eeoc to embrace technological advances and hire key frontline enforcement staff in 2009 and 2010 .

the fy2013 request for 85 new hires , including 46 investigator positions , as well as other mediator , support staff , and attorney positions , will continue to address the agency workload .

within 60 days of enactment , the senate committee on appropriations directed the eeoc to submit a report discussing the "national full service intake model" , which would create intake units at each field office to handle charges .

the eeoc federal sector hearings workload was 15,709 hearings in fy2011 and is estimated to decrease slightly to 15,356 in fy2012 .

the commission continues to implement technology initiatives to support the federal sector program , such as the hotdocs software , a commercial document assembly software package , which would streamline the writing phase of the hearings process .

the senate committee on appropriations requested the eeoc submit an implementation plan for the new federal sector hearings process , including the "fast track" proposal .

the senate committee is concerned this process could threaten discovery and limit hearings before independent administrative judges ( ajs ) .

the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) is an independent , quasi - judicial agency established by congress that advises the president and congress on u.s. foreign economic policies .

in its strategic plan for 2009-2014 , the itc identified the following five strategic operations , which define the functions of the agency: ( 1 ) import injury investigations , ( 2 ) intellectual property - based imports investigations , ( 3 ) industry and economic analysis , ( 4 ) tariff and trade information services , and ( 5 ) trade policy support .

as a matter of policy , its budget request is submitted to congress by the president without revision .

the administration requested $82.8 million for the itc for fy2013 , an amount $2.8 million , or 3.5% , higher than the fy2012-enacted appropriation of $80.0 million .

the amount reported by the senate committee on appropriations was $82.8 million , the same amount as the administration's request .

the house recommended $83.0 million for itc , an amount 3.7% greater than the fy2012-enacted amount and 0.2% greater than the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

p.l .

113-6 provides $82.9 million for the itc .

the legal services corporation ( lsc ) is a private , nonprofit , federally funded corporation that provides grants to local offices that , in turn , provide legal assistance to low - income people in civil ( noncriminal ) cases .

the lsc has been controversial since its incorporation in the early 1970s and has been operating without authorizing legislation since 1980 .

there have been ongoing debates over the adequacy of funding for the agency and the extent to which certain types of activities are appropriate for federally funded legal aid attorneys to undertake .

in annual appropriations bills , congress traditionally has included legislative provisions restricting the activities of lsc - funded grantees , such as prohibiting any lobbying activities or prohibiting representation in certain types of cases .

although the authorization of appropriations for the lsc expired at the end of fy1980 , the lsc has operated for the past 33 years under annual appropriations laws .

for fy2013 , the obama administration requested $402.0 million for the lsc .

this amount is $54.0 million ( 15.5% ) above the fy2012 appropriation of $348.0 million for the lsc .

the administration's fy2013 budget request included $376.8 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $17.0 million for management and grants oversight , $3.0 million for client self - help and information technology , $4.2 million for the office of the inspector general , and $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance .

the obama administration also proposed that lsc restrictions on class action suits and attorneys' fees be eliminated .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $402.0 million for the lsc for fy2013 .

this amount is 15.5% more than the fy2012-enacted amount and the same as the administration's fy2013 budget request .

the senate committee recommendation deleted restrictions concerning the use of non - federal funding for lsc activities except for activities regarding class action law suits , abortion litigation , and litigation on behalf of federal , state , or local prisoners .

the house - passed bill recommended $328.0 million for the lsc for fy2013 .

this amount is 5.7% less than the fy2012-enacted amount and 18.4% less than the amount recommended by the administration's fy2013 budget request and the amount reported by the senate committee on appropriations .

currently , the allocation for lsc grantees in each geographic area is based on poverty statistics from the ''most recent decennial census.' .

the census bureau has since stopped collecting poverty data in the decennial census and instead collects those data in the american community survey ( acs ) .

the house committee recommended that the formula be altered to reflect this shift .

since acs data are released more frequently , the house committee recommendation would allow reallocation of lsc funding every three years .

one house amendment that would have eliminated all funding for the lcs and another house amendment that would have cut the funding for the lsc to $200.0 million for fy2013 were rejected .

p.l .

113-6 includes a total of $357.4 million for the lsc for fy2013 .

congress directs lsc to re - examine its headquarters structure and identify areas of duplication for consolidation or elimination in an effort to provide a more efficient and cost - saving structure , and send more funding to those in the field in need of lsc services .

lsc is required to report these findings to the committees on appropriations within 90 days of enactment .

in addition , a technical change to the allocation formula for basic field grants is included to reflect the shift in how the census bureau collects poverty data .

the technical change allows reallocation of funding every three years .

p.l .

113-6 also provides a two - year phase - in of the changes .

the marine mammal commission ( mmc ) is an independent agency of the executive branch , established under title ii of the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ; p.l .

92-522 ) .

the mmc and its committee of scientific advisors on marine mammals provide oversight and recommend actions on domestic and international topics to advance policies and provisions of the marine mammal protection act .

as funding permits , the marine mammal commission supports research to further the purposes of the mmpa .

the administration's fy2013 request for the mmc was $3.1 million , which would have represented a 1.9% increase compared to fy2012-enacted funding of $3.0 million .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $3.1 million , a 1.9% increase over fy2012-enacted funding and the same as the administration's fy2013 request .

the house recommended $2.8 million for the mmc .

this amount was 6.0% less than the fy2012 appropriation and 7.7% less than both the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act includes $3.0 million for the mmc .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , located in the executive office of the president , is responsible for developing and coordinating u.s. international trade and direct investment policies .

the ustr is the president's chief negotiator for international trade agreements , including commodity and direct investment negotiations .

ustr also conducts u.s. affairs related to the world trade organization .

the administration requested $53.0 million for the ustr for fy2013 , an amount $1.8 million , or 3.5% , greater than the fy2012-enacted amount of $51.3 million .

the amount reported by the senate committee on appropriations for fy2013 was $53.0 million , the same amount as the administration's request .

the house recommended $51.2 million , an amount is 0.1% less than the fy2012-enacted amount , and 3.5% less than both the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

p.l .

113-6 provides $50.2 million for the ustr .

ustr is the lead u.s. negotiator in the ongoing talks for the proposed trans - pacific partnership agreement with 10 other countries .

acting u.s. trade representative demetrios marantis has expressed concerns about having the necessary resources to negotiate new trade agreements and enforce existing ones .

trade enforcement has been of concern for congress and the obama administration for numerous years .

in 2013 , president obama called for the creation of a new trade enforcement unit to enhance u.s. capabilities to aggressively challenge unfair trade practices around the world , particularly in china .

the administration's fy2013 request for ustr included an increase of $1.7 million to help create and direct the new interagency trade enforcement center ( itec ) .

the state justice institute ( sji ) is a nonprofit corporation that makes grants to state courts and funds research , technical assistance , and informational projects aimed at improving the quality of judicial administration in state courts across the united states .

it is governed by an 11-member board of directors appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate .

under the terms of its enabling legislation , sji is authorized to present its budget request directly to congress , apart from the president's budget .

the administration's request for sji was $5.1 million , which was the same as the fy2012 appropriation .

both the senate committee - reported and the house - passed amount for sji was $5.1 million , the same as the administration's request .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act includes $5.0 million for sji .

