the bursting of the u.s. housing bubble in 2006 precipitated the december 2007-june 2009 recession and a financial panic in september 2008 .

falling house prices contributed to rising foreclosure rates and lower consumer spending .

in addition , mortgage defaults and the rise in foreclosures hurt financial institutions that owned the loans on the foreclosed homes , triggering a much broader collapse of the financial system .

as credit flows slowed , so did economic growth .

because the housing market was a locus for many of the economic problems that emerged , some members of congress and other experts propose intervening in the housing market not only as a means of improving the housing market itself but also the financial sector and the broader economy .

supporters of housing market intervention argue that housing market weakness has a strong indirect negative effect on the balance sheets of households and banks , which dampens the recovery of the wider economy .

skeptics , however , worry that further intervention could prolong the housing slump , delay economic recovery , and affect outcomes based on the government's preferences .

since the housing bubble burst , the federal government has created multiple programs to aid homeowners , but their impact has been less than anticipated .

many measures have been proposed either to modify existing programs or to establish new efforts to improve the housing market .

three frequently discussed approaches are ( 1 ) reducing mortgage principal for borrowers who owe more than their homes are worth , ( 2 ) refinancing mortgages for borrowers who find themselves locked into paying high interest rates , and ( 3 ) renting out foreclosed homes .

principal reductions aim to improve the housing market by minimizing defaults and foreclosures , thus reducing collateral damage to the economy .

however , principal reduction shifts the losses of borrowers to banks and other lenders .

at the same time , principal reduction might improve the wider economy if it stimulates consumer spending , allowing borrowers to divert income from debt repayment to spending on other goods and services .

members of the 112 th congress have introduced multiple bills that would reduce mortgage principal on certain loans .

these include h.r .

1587 , the home foreclosure reduction act of 2011 ( representative john conyers et al .

 ) ; h.r .

3841 , the principal reduction act of 2012 ( representative maxine waters et al .

 ) ; h.r .

4058 , the bankruptcy equity act of 2012 ( representative earl blumenauer et al .

 ) ; and s. 2093 , the preserving american homeownership act of 2012 ( senator robert menendez ) .

principal reduction is also a component of a settlement reached between several mortgage servicers and 49 state attorneys general and the federal government .

the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , the regulator and conservator of fannie mae and freddie mac , decided against allowing the enterprises to reduce principal for mortgages that they guarantee .

all of these initiatives are discussed more fully in " principal reduction " below .

a second approach , large - scale refinancing , helps borrowers who are current on their mortgage to refinance into a new mortgage with a lower interest rate .

because refinancing generally helps borrowers who are current , it is unlikely to have a major effect on the housing market , but it may prevent some foreclosures that could occur in the absence of a refinance .

some argue that refinancing would stimulate consumer spending .

for example , a mortgage refinance could lower a borrower's monthly payment , freeing up more income that can be used to pay down debt or for non - housing - related spending .

some of the additional spending of borrowers may be offset by reduced income for investors .

in a refinance , the previous owner of the mortgage is repaid on the loan earlier than expected and now faces reinvesting in a lower interest rate environment .

although some investors ( including banks ) may lose investment income from refinancing , other banks and mortgage originators benefit from the increased business associated with refinancing .

similarly , mass refinancing might cause fannie mae and freddie mac , two housing government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , to lose investment income but gain from the reduced likelihood of default .

it is unclear which effect would be larger .

in his 2012 state of the union address , president obama proposed streamlining the existing program to refinance fannie mae and freddie mac loans and establishing a new mass refinancing plan for non - fannie mae and non - freddie mac loans .

congressional proposals for large - scale refinancing in the 112 th congress include h.r .

363 , the housing opportunity and mortgage equity act of 2011 ( representative dennis cardoza et al .

 ) ; s. 170 , the helping responsible homeowners act ( senator barbara boxer et al .

 ) ; and s. 3085 , the responsible homeowner refinancing act ( senator robert menendez et al. ) .

these proposals are discussed more fully in " large - scale refinancing " below .

a third proposal , renting out foreclosed homes currently held by banks , gses , and other financial institutions , has the potential to stabilize housing prices by reducing the supply of homes on the "for sale" market .

current policy encourages lenders to sell foreclosed property quickly rather than rent out vacant homes .

a successful rental program depends on house prices increasing in the future such that the rented properties can eventually be sold in a healthier market .

in addition , renting foreclosed homes keeps the properties in use and reduces the collateral damage to communities .

unlike principal reductions and mass refinancing , renting foreclosed homes does not reduce existing homeowners' payments or increase their disposable income .

any impact on consumer spending is likely to be indirect through favorable effects on household net worth due to stabilizing house prices and preserving neighboring homeowners' equity .

the program would only prevent foreclosure if , in lieu of foreclosure , it allowed delinquent homeowners to rent out their own homes .

fhfa has started a pilot project to convert gse foreclosed homes into rentals .

congressional proposals in the 112 th congress to allow for renting foreclosed properties include h.r .

1548 , the right to rent act of 2011 ( representative raúl grijalva et al .

 ) ; h.r .

2636 , the neighborhood preservation act of 2011 ( representative gary miller et al .

 ) ; and s. 2080 , the keeping families in their home act of 2012 ( senator dean heller ) .

these initiatives are discussed more fully in " renting foreclosed homes " below .

table 1 summarizes the potential impact of these policies on three categories of households: delinquent borrowers , borrowers who are paying on time , and renters .

table 2 summarizes the likely impacts on house prices , financial institutions' balance sheets , and the broader economy .

the remainder of this report will further analyze principal reduction , refinance , and rental proposals .

first , however , the next section provides one estimate of the size of the housing market problem .

in her september 2011 congressional testimony , laurie goodman , a senior managing director at amherst securities group , estimated that 8.3 million to 10.4 million homeowners , approximately 15% - 19% of all homeowners with a mortgage , are at risk of losing their homes in the next six years .

goodman's estimates are shown in table 3 .

of the approximately 80 million homes in the united states , nearly 55 million have a mortgage .

goodman divides the mortgages into five categories and assigns an estimated default rate for each category to calculate the number of homes in jeopardy of transitioning to default ( i.e. , being more than 60 days delinquent on the mortgage ) .

the five categories , in order of highest to lowest default rate , are ( 1 ) loans that are currently non - performing because the borrowers are no longer making their monthly payments ; ( 2 ) loans that were non - performing but have become re - performing because the borrowers have resumed payment ; ( 3 ) loans that have always been performing but have severe negative equity , meaning the borrower owes more on their mortgage than the home is worth ; ( 4 ) loans that are always performing and the borrowers have moderate negative equity ; and ( 5 ) loans that are always performing and the borrowers have positive equity .

goodman includes a "lower bound" and a "reasonable" estimated default rate for each of the loan categories based on current trends in the foreclosure rate and the pace of economic recovery .

goodman's analysis suggests two broad types of policy approaches for improving the housing market .

first , policies could attempt to keep people in their homes by lowering the default rates .

principal reduction and large - scale refinancing are two frequently discussed proposals attempting to accomplish this goal .

principal reduction generally involves lowering the amount of the mortgage that is owed for borrowers who are delinquent , have negative equity , or are both delinquent and have negative equity .

large - scale refinance proposals generally target borrowers who are current on their loans but cannot refinance because of their negative equity .

both proposals attempt to lower monthly payments for borrowers as well as reduce default rates by stimulating the economy through reducing or redistributing the debt burden of the mortgage .

the second approach implied by goodman's analysis is to ease the transition of foreclosed homes into the market .

rather than flooding the market with foreclosed homes and potentially further lowering house prices , some have proposed converting the foreclosed homes into rental properties .

different proposals call for financial institutions either to rent the properties directly themselves or to sell properties in bulk to investors who would rent the vacant homes .

the remainder of this report analyzes each of these three major policy proposals .

as a result of falling house prices , an estimated 11 million - 15 million homeowners owe more on their mortgage than their home is worth .

borrowers in this situation are said to be "underwater" on their homes or in "negative equity. .

negative equity may impair a borrower's labor mobility , making it more difficult to sell the house and move for a new job , or limit the ability to use the house as collateral to take out a loan for a small business .

borrowers with negative equity are also more likely to default and enter foreclosure than borrowers with positive equity , partly because borrowers with negative equity are often unable to sell their home for enough to cover the amount owed if they are unable to make their monthly payments .

foreclosures can drive down home prices , forcing some borrowers further underwater and continuing the cycle of foreclosure .

figure 1 shows the rise and fall of a measure of home prices since 1987 .

to address these concerns , some members of congress have proposed reducing the mortgage principal for underwater borrowers .

the amount that a borrower is underwater is often measured by the loan - to - value ( ltv ) ratio .

the ltv ratio is the ratio of the amount that a borrower owes on the mortgage to the value of the house .

an ltv of 100% means that a borrower owes the same amount as the value of the house .

an ltv greater than 100% means that the borrower has negative equity , owing more than the house is worth .

the more the ltv is above 100% , the more underwater the borrower is .

figure 2 shows the distribution of borrowers by the equity they have in their homes .

homeowners with a mortgage can generally be divided into three groups: ( 1 ) those with a loan that is government - insured through the federal housing administration ( fha ) , u.s. department of veterans affairs , or other government agency ; ( 2 ) those with a mortgage owned or guaranteed by fannie mae or freddie mac ( the gses ) ; and ( 3 ) those with a privately owned mortgage .

most of the proposals discussed in this report focus on gse loans and privately owned ( non - gse ) mortgages .

a borrower with a privately owned mortgage could see principal reduced independent of any government assistance program if the mortgage holder ( i.e. , bank , credit union , or other investor ) believed it is in its best interest .

non - gse borrowers could also see their principal reduced through the federal government's home affordable modification program's ( hamp's ) principal reduction alternative ( pra ) .

borrowers with a gse mortgage , on the other hand , are ineligible for principal reductions because of policies set by fannie mae's and freddie mac's regulator , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) .

several bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress to reduce mortgage principal on some mortgages , including h.r .

1587 , the home foreclosure reduction act of 2011 ( representative john conyers et al .

 ) ; h.r .

3841 , the principal reduction act of 2012 ( representative maxine waters et al .

 ) ; h.r .

4058 , the bankruptcy equity act of 2012 ( representative earl blumenauer et al .

 ) ; and s. 2093 , the preserving american homeownership act of 2012 ( senator robert menendez ) .

principal reduction is also a component of the settlement reached between several mortgage servicers and 49 state attorneys general and the federal government .

the specifics of these proposals are discussed in "legislative proposals for principal reduction" below .

the next section discusses some of the factors that influence whether a financial institution would offer a borrower a principal reduction .

with mortgage rates at historic lows , some have proposed establishing a large - scale refinancing program that would help borrowers who are current on their mortgage refinance into a new mortgage with a lower interest rate .

unlike a principal reduction , the principal balance of the loan does not change with a mortgage refinancing .

a borrower prepays the existing loan with a new loan , presumably with more favorable terms .

refinancing allows borrowers to potentially lower their monthly payments .

to refinance , a borrower typically must be current on his or her mortgage loan .

because refinancing helps borrowers who are current , it is unlikely to have a major effect on the housing market but may prevent some foreclosures that would occur in the absence of a refinance by lowering payments .

however , refinancing has the potential to have a larger effect on the economy by stimulating consumer spending and improving household balance sheets .

a mortgage refinance lowers a borrower's monthly payment , freeing up more income for non - housing related spending .

some of the additional spending of borrowers may come at the cost of the financial sector .

in a refinance , the previous owner of the mortgage is repaid earlier than expected and now faces reinvesting in a lower interest rate environment .

though some investors ( including banks ) may lose from refinancing , other banks and mortgage originators benefit from the increased business associated with refinancing .

similarly , mass refinancing might cause fannie mae and freddie mac to lose investment income but gain from the reduced likelihood of default , though it is unclear which effect is larger .

current refinancing policy discussions center on two approaches: ( 1 ) develop a new program to refinance non - gse loans into government - insured loans ; and ( 2 ) expand the existing home affordable refinance program ( harp ) to help more homeowners refinance their gse loans .

in his state of the union address and a subsequent fact sheet , president obama endorsed both approaches .

he proposed allowing borrowers who are current on their non - gse loans to refinance through a program run by the fha .

the program would be funded through a tax on large financial institutions .

president obama also proposed streamlining harp to allow even more borrowers with gse guaranteed loans to refinance .

the recent mortgage settlement between five banks and 49 state attorneys general and the federal government is estimated to provide at least $3 billion to refinance underwater borrowers .

several congressional proposals , such as s. 170 , the helping responsible homeowners act ( senator barbara boxer et al .

 ) ; h.r .

363 , the housing opportunity and mortgage equity act of 2011 ( representative dennis cardoza et al .

 ) ; and s. 3085 , the responsible homeowner refinancing act of 2012 ( senator robert menendez et al .

 ) , would require fannie mae and freddie mac to expand refinancing of gse loans .

the specifics of these proposals are discussed in " presidential and legislative proposals for refinancing " below .

federal reserve chairman ben bernanke and other policy experts state that the housing market is experiencing serious imbalances .

overbuilding leading up to the bursting of the housing bubble , the subsequent increase in foreclosures , and the fall in household formation have led to an excess supply of homes in the market .

economic theory predicts that prices will continue to fall until the market clears .

falling house prices can contribute to a negative spiral in which falling prices lead to more foreclosures and prices falling even further .

the foreclosed homes that financial institutions assume control over are called real estate - owned ( reo ) properties .

as of december 2011 , single - family reos valued at $11.6 billion , an estimated 79,000 units , are held by fdic - insured institutions .

in addition , fannie mae and freddie mac held 179,063 reo properties at the end of 2011 , and fha held 31,046 properties as of january 31 , 2012 .

according to some estimates , a third of reo inventory is from private - label securities .

because of the uncertainty surrounding the foreclosure process in the wake of investigations into the robo - signing allegations , many large banks slowed down the rate at which they initiated foreclosure proceedings .

with the recent mortgage settlement involving five of the banks that engaged in robo - signing , some expect the rate of foreclosures to increase as the backlog of foreclosures reaches the market .

figure 9 shows the shadow inventory , the approximately 1.5 million borrowers who are seriously delinquent and in danger of having their home become part of the reo inventory .

in a january 2012 speech , william dudley , the president and chief executive officer of the federal reserve bank of new york , estimated that the flow of properties into reo could be as high as 1.8 million per year in 2012 and 2013 , up from 1.1 million in 2011 and 600,000 in 2010 .

to address the imbalances in the housing market , some propose temporarily allowing financial institutions to rent the foreclosed homes or to sell the homes to investors who agree to rent the vacant units .

historically banks and the gses have been encouraged by their regulators to sell their reo property quickly and have not performed extensive property management services , though they are allowed to rent reos for some limited periods .

some proposals focus on renting properties as a way to help foreclosed homeowners through lease back or right - to - rent .

others do not address the foreclosed homeowners but focus on rentals as a way to stabilize neighborhoods and home prices .

given the imbalances in the owner - occupied housing market , supporters of a rental program believe expanding the amount of time that reos can be rented is justified .

critics worry that if house prices do not increase while the homes are being temporarily rented , then the policy may serve to delay recovery by flooding a weak market with additional homes a few years in the future .

critics would rather allow the market to bottom out now rather than risk prolonging the housing slump .

in a housing white paper prepared for congress , the federal reserve outlined three obstacles to implementing an reo - to - rental program as well as possible policy solutions .

first , as mentioned previously , regulators have discouraged financial institutions from holding reo properties .

institutions are currently allowed to temporarily rent reo if doing so maximizes the potential return of the asset .

on april 5 , 2012 , the federal reserve issued guidance to financial institutions that it regulates to "clarify supervisory expectations regarding rental of residential reo properties by such organizations while such circumstances continue. .

the guidance explains to regulated reo holders how they may rent the properties within "the existing statutory and regulatory holding - period limits. .

second , if the reo program involves sales to investors , then investors would need to purchase a large number of properties in close geographic proximity to each other to be profitable on a large scale .

many of the components of property management , such as processing payments , advertising for renters , and developing relationships with local contractors , benefit from economies of scale — the more houses a landlord has in a given area the more profitable it is .

but if an investor must assemble a critical mass of properties one property at a time , then the investor must bear carrying costs , such as maintenance and taxes , without receiving any revenues .

to facilitate bulk transactions , the federal reserve notes that reo holders could auction their existing inventory in a given area to an investor as well as the future stream of reos in an area .

however , the federal reserve paper states that bulk sales can yield lower recoveries than individual sales in some cases because each property cannot be allocated to the highest individual bidder when sold in bulk .

but it may take longer to sell properties individually , during which the properties deteriorate .

others predict that bulk investors will pay a premium for the opportunity to buy a large quantity at once rather than pay the expense of individually collecting properties .

third , to amass a sufficient number of properties , investors may need to obtain financing .

however , financing for purchases of bulk pools of reo properties is not something that lenders traditionally offer .

for example , freddie mac only allows investors to finance up to 4 homes and fannie mae sets the limit at 10 homes .

without more accessible credit , there may be a limited number of investors able to participate .

in addition , not all communities are suited for a reo - to - rental program .

the program may be most effective by targeting communities in which the number of reo properties is high , but the current demand among investors for one - at - a - time purchases is weak .

figure 10 shows the communities with the most gse and fha reo properties .

a reo - to - rental program would prevent foreclosed homes from flooding the "for - sale" market and instead temporarily shift them to the "rental" market .

foreclosed homes negatively impact house prices in several ways .

first , foreclosed homes and other forms of distressed sales ( such as a short sale ) typically sell at a discount compared with non - distressed sales , potentially lowering the appraisal value for neighboring homes .

second , foreclosures increase the supply of homes that are on the market , which typically drives down home prices .

lower home prices may benefit those who are looking to purchase homes , but they hurt those who currently own their homes .

a goldman sachs research paper estimated that if 475,000 vacant reos were converted to rentals , then house prices would rise by an additional 0.5% in the first year of the program and by 1% in the second year .

if the program increases house prices in the for - sale market , then prices are expected to fall in the rental market .

the federal reserve white paper on housing notes that the current movement in relative prices — prices that are falling or flat in the for - sale market but rising in the rental market — provides evidence that it may be appropriate to transition reo properties to rentals in some areas .

figure 11 shows the trend in prices for rent compared with sales .

the major reo - to - rental policy proposals , discussed in " legislative proposals for renting reo " below , have two variations: ( 1 ) allow banks , gses , and other institutions to rent properties directly themselves or ( 2 ) sell the properties in bulk to investors who will rent them .

in both options , reo is rented , but how and when the assets are eventually sold will impact the balance sheet of the institutions .

if the reo properties are immediately sold in bulk to investors , then the institutions can have a relatively good idea of what price the properties can be sold given current trends , though some factors on the margin may influence the final price , such as whether auction methods are used or if financing is provided to facilitate the sale .

however , if the institutions rent the properties for several years prior to eventually selling , then the direction of future house prices will significantly impact the price for which the properties are eventually sold .

supporters of policies that encourage institutions to rent for several years before selling are likely expecting future house prices to increase so that eventual sales occur in a more stable market .

however , future asset prices are inherently unpredictable .

if future house prices fall , then institutions would lose by postponing the sale of reo properties .

unlike principal reductions and mass refinancing , renting foreclosed homes does not reduce existing homeowners' payments or increase their disposal income .

any impact on consumer spending is likely to be indirect through stabilizing house prices and preserving nearby homeowners' equity and net worth .

in august 2011 , fhfa , in consultation with the treasury department and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , submitted a request for information on ideas for asset disposition .

after receiving more than 4,000 responses , fhfa announced the first property sales under its real estate - owned ( reo ) initiative on february 27 , 2012 .

under the reo initiative , fannie mae and freddie mac reo properties in the hardest - hit metropolitan areas are to be sold to qualified investors who agree to rent the properties for a specified number of years .

table 5 summarizes the fannie mae reo in the first transaction .

most of the properties in the first transaction ( 91.2% ) are single - family homes or condominiums .

however , most of the single - family homes and condominiums are already rented with fewer than 10% vacant .

because of their desire to see vacant homes rented out , some commentators expressed disappointment that a larger percentage of the homes were not vacant .

others argue that by starting with properties with existing tenants , fhfa can attract more investors for the first sale ; by having existing renters , investors are ensured of a future stream of income and may therefore face less uncertainty in attempting to price this new asset class .

it is unclear if fhfa will allow fannie mae ( and possibly freddie mac in potential future sales ) to retain an ownership stake in the properties or if they will be true sales .

it is also unclear if the gses will provide financing to investors and how the properties will be sold , whether to a single investor , multiple investors by metropolitan area , or some other method .

multiple proposals have been introduced in the 112 th congress to establish reo rental programs .

some proposals focus on renting foreclosed properties to any renter , while others focus on allowing delinquent homeowners to stay in their home but pay rent .

h.r .

2636 , the neighborhood preservation act of 2011 ( representative gary miller et al .

 ) , and s. 2080 , the keeping families in their home act of 2012 ( senator dean heller ) , temporarily authorize depository institutions , depository institution holding companies , fannie mae , and freddie mac to lease foreclosed property held by those institutions for up to five years .

section 2 of h.r .

2636 makes clear that one of the goals of the proposed reo program is to increase the options available to financial institutions to maximize the value of their assets .

by temporarily renting a home before selling it , the institution could eventually sell the property into a more stable market and receive a higher return .

h.r .

1548 , the right to rent act of 2011 ( representative raúl grijalva et al .

 ) , gives eligible borrowers who are delinquent on their mortgage and subject to foreclosure proceedings the option to rent their home at a fair market rent for up to five years .

to be eligible , a delinquent borrower must have a mortgage originated by july 1 , 2007 , on a single - family property that has been used as the borrower's principal residence for at least two years prior to the foreclosure filing .

in addition , the borrower's home must have had a purchase price less than the median purchase price for residences in the metropolitan statistical area ( or state if not in an msa ) at the time of the purchase for the borrower to be eligible .

the fair market rent will be determined by the court and adjusted annually in line with the consumer price index .

