title v of the social security act ( ssa ) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children .

these include the maternal and child health ( mch ) services block grant ; the maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting program ; and other funding related to abstinence education , postpartum depression , and personal responsibility education programs .

this report focuses on the mch services block grant , which receives the largest single appropriation under title v. the mch services block grant is administered by the maternal and child health bureau ( mchb ) of the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

title v was enacted by congress in 1935 as part of the social security act ( ssa , p.l .

74-271 ) to promote and support the health of mothers and children .

two grant programs were established under the original title v of the ssa , to enable states ( 1 ) to improve maternal and child health services , especially those in low - income and rural areas , and ( 2 ) to extend and improve services for crippled children .

the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( cobra , p.l .

99-272 ) replaced the term "crippled" with the term "children with special health care needs. .

children with special health care needs ( cshcn ) are defined by hrsa as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical , developmental , behavioral , or emotional condition and who also require health and related services of a type or amount beyond that required by children generally. .

over time , additional programs targeting children with special health care needs and low - income women and children were added to the public health service act ( phsa ) and the ssa , including certain services for children with disabilities who receive supplemental security income ( ssi , formerly §1615 [c] of the ssa ) ; lead - based paint poisoning prevention programs ( formerly §316 of the phsa ) ; genetic disease programs ( formerly §1101 of the phsa ) ; sudden infant death syndrome programs ( formerly §1121 of the phsa ) ; hemophilia treatment centers ( formerly §1131 of the phsa ) ; and adolescent pregnancy grants ( p.l .

95-626 ) .

title v was converted to the mch services block grant in 1981 by the omnibus budget reconciliation act ( obra ) .

obra 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant .

the consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health needs .

it required that each state receive , at a minimum , the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under obra 1981 .

additional changes were made to the block grant under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1989 ; these changes increased the authorization of appropriations , called for greater accountability , and created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for the states , including the addition of a statewide needs assessment requirement .

the mch services block grant currently has three components: block grants to states , a set - aside for special projects of regional and national significance ( sprans ) , and another set - aside for the community - integrated services systems ( ciss ) program .

the mch services block grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for fy2016 .

the majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , guam , the virgin islands , the northern mariana islands , american samoa , the federated states of micronesia , the marshall islands , and palau ( referred to collectively as "states" in this report ) through the block grant to states .

however , some of these funds are reserved for ciss grants , and others are devoted to research via the sprans grants .

title v of the social security act established seven broad goals for the mch services block grant .

maternal and child health services , research , training , demonstrations , and other activities funded by the block grant must be linked to one or more of these goals .

the seven goals are as follows: ensure access to quality health care for mothers and children , especially those with low income or limited availability of care ; reduce infant mortality ; provide and ensure access to comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care to women ( especially low - income and at - risk pregnant women ) ; increase the number of children receiving health assessments and follow - up diagnostic and treatment services ; provide and ensure access to preventive and health care services for certain blind and disabled children , as well as rehabilitative services ; implement family - centered , community - based systems of coordinated care for children with special health care needs ; provide toll - free hotlines and assistance in applying for services to pregnant women with infants and children who are eligible for medicaid .

the primary use of funds under the mch services block grant , including formula grants to states , discretionary grants for special projects of regional and national significance ( sprans ) , and discretionary grants for community integrated services systems ( ciss ) , is to fill gaps in core public health services for low - income mothers and children .

projects funded by sprans include mch workforce development , genetic services , and diagnostic and treatment services for hemophilia .

ciss grants fund projects that support integrated maternal and child health services at the community level .

the statute provides that roughly 85% of the funds appropriated for mch services block grant must be distributed by formula to states and territories and that 15% be distributed on a competitive basis under sprans .

the statute also requires that 12.75% of any amounts appropriated above $600 million must be reserved for ciss .

the mch services block grant has several reporting mechanisms required by law: first , the needs assessment , as discussed in a previous section of this report ; second , an annual report , including program participation data , state maternal and child health measures , and state pediatric and family workforce measures ; third , an independent audit must be performed every two years .

hrsa , in turn , must report to congress on the activities carried out under the sprans and ciss programs , in addition to providing a summary of state reports on block grant activities .

hrsa has developed national performance measures in coordination with states and grantees .

states have also developed and reported additional state - level measures .

the first national performance measures ( npms ) for mch were instituted in 1997 .

in 1998 , hrsa introduced the title v information system ( tvis ) to collect and publicly report state - level title v data .

this interactive , web - based system provides public access to title v performance measures by state .

since 2011 , all states have reported annually on their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 national performance measures ( npms ) that will end with the fy2015 annual report ( see table e - 1 ) .

changing trends in mch risk factors , outcomes , health services , data sources , and advances in scientific knowledge , in conjunction with budgetary constraints led the maternal and child health bureau ( mchb ) to design a new performance measurement system .

the new performance measurement system has three tiers: npms , national outcome measures ( noms ) , and evidence - based / informed strategy measures ( esms ) .

beginning with the annual report for fy2016 , each state title v program selects 8 out of 15 npms for programmatic focus during the five - year reporting cycle ( with at least one npm from each of the following population groups / areas: maternal and women's health , perinatal health , child health , children with special health care needs , adolescent health , and cross - cutting areas ) .

once its npms are selected , a state annually tracks them to determine progress and program impact ( see table e - 2 ) .

the new performance measurement system is expected to increase the flexibility and reduce the reporting burden for states by allowing them to choose eight npms to target , and increase accountability by having states develop actionable esms .

a comprehensive list of national performance measures is provided in appendix e .

in addition to state - reported measures , the maternal and child health bureau administers two surveys , the national survey of children's health and the national survey of children with special health care needs , which are described in the text box below .

the maternal and child health services block grant is not a single program , but rather a combination of block grants to states and two discretionary grant programs to achieve national maternal and child health objectives , including increased access to health care , coverage for preventive services and other health care , and progress toward national health objectives .

this combination of approaches provides flexibility to states in achieving maternal and child health goals , while allowing both congress and hrsa to maintain a degree of control in guiding national initiatives .

the issues related to the mch services block grant span the intersection of clinical health services , prevention , and public health , and include optimizing the balance of federal and state resources to achieve the program's objectives , and ensuring program effectiveness and accountability .

according to hrsa , the mch services block grant provided services to over 34 million children in fy2013 .

of those children , nearly 15 million had medicaid or chip coverage .

changes to public and private insurance markets under the aca may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant , because of expanded medicaid eligibility , coverage of preventive care without cost - sharing , and provisions for coverage of individuals with preexisting conditions .

some policymakers contend that during this time of transition , the mch formula block grant and its discretionary grants are integral to assuring the continuity of care and to reducing coverage gaps created by shifts in the insurance eligibility status of individuals .

in addition , states may argue that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet other maternal and child health goals , and not decreased , if medicaid and chip coverage expands to those who currently receive block grant - funded services .

one general concern with block grants may be that federal funds are being used to address state - specific issues and are not held accountable to national concerns .

congress has addressed the issue of national concerns with mch services block grant by requiring the sprans set - aside .

however , states may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost , as shown by data collected by both hrsa and cdc .

filling in the gaps left by medicaid and chip is one such area , due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states .

as mentioned earlier , the indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by hrsa , and improvement in these measures is an objective of title v funding .

however , it is important to note that title v funding is only one component affecting these measures .

other federal and state programs and policies , including medicaid and wic , as well as complex societal issues , also affect the health and well - being of low - income children and their families .

progress toward national health objectives , such as reduction of the infant mortality rate , has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years .

due to the flexibility of funding , varying circumstances in states , and other societal issues , it is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block grant funds on national health indicators such as imr .

congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point , such as imr , with block grant funding , but may use other approaches .

as an alternative to block grant funding , programs such as the maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting program and strong start and targeted national public health initiatives such as cdc's safe motherhood and infant health program have been promoted by policymakers as direct approaches to improving this particular health objective .

healthy start , a national program that targets the infant mortality rate in selected communities , has been successful in targeted communities .

some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability and to hold state and local governments accountable for their decisions .

in addition , the quality of services provided under block grant funding is not currently tracked .

however , the existing data required by title v may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds .

appendix a .

programs in title v added or amended by the aca in addition to the mch services block grant , title v contains a number of provisions that were added or amended by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) .

this appendix provides a summary of those provisions .

most of the provisions created under the aca included mandatory appropriations for fy2010 through fy2014 , with the exception of the postpartum depression program , which was authorized but has not been funded .

ssa §510 , abstinence education this program provides funding to states for abstinence education .

abstinence from sexual activity outside of marriage must be the exclusive focus of the programs funded by these grants .

the aca appropriated $50 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 for this program .

p.l .

113-93 ( the protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ) , which was enacted on april 1 , 2014 , extended the title v abstinence education block grant ( $50 million per year ) through fy2015 ( i.e. , september 30 , 2015 ) .

p.l .

114-10 , the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 , increased the title v abstinence education block grant to $75 million per year for fy2016 and fy2017 .

ssa §511 , maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting programs this program provides grants to states , territories , and tribes for the support of evidence - based early childhood home visiting programs .

these programs support in - home visits by health or social service professionals with at - risk families .

the aca appropriated a total of $1.5 billion for fy2010 through fy2014 for the home visitation grant program: $100 million for fy2010 ; $250 million for fy2011 ; $350 million for fy2012 ; $400 million for fy2013 ; and $400 million for fy2014 .

p.l .

113-93 extended funding for the program through the first six months of fy2015 .

p.l .

114-10 extended funding for the program through fy2015 and also provided $400 million for fy2016 and $400 million for fy2017 .

of the amount appropriated for this program , 3% must be reserved for research and evaluation , and 3% for making grants to tribal entities for home visitation services to indian families .

the new early childhood home visitation grant program is collaboratively administered by the administration for children and families and the maternal and child health bureau at hrsa .

ssa §512 , postpartum depression this program provides grants for epidemiologic research , improved screening and diagnosis , clinical research , and public education to expand understanding of the causes and treatments for postpartum depression and related conditions .

the aca authorized funding of $3 million for these grants for fy2010 , and such sums as necessary for each of fy2011 and fy2012 .

funds were not appropriated for this program .

ssa §513 , personal responsibility education the personal responsibility education program is administered by the administration for children and families .

a personal responsibility education program is defined as a program that is designed to educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections , including hiv / aids , and at least three of the six stipulated adulthood preparation subjects .

the adulthood preparation subjects are ( 1 ) healthy relationships , including marriage and family interactions ; ( 2 ) adolescent development , including the development of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and development , body image , racial and ethnic diversity , and other related subjects ; ( 3 ) financial literacy ; ( 4 ) parent - child communication ; ( 5 ) educational and career success , including developing skills for employment preparation , job seeking , independent living , financial self - sufficiency , and workplace productivity ; and ( 6 ) healthy life skills , including goal - setting , decisionmaking , negotiation , communication and interpersonal skills , and stress management .

the aca appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years fy2010 through fy2014 .

p.l .

113-93 ( the protecting access to medicare act of 2014 extended prep ( $75 million per year ) through fy2015 .

p.l .

114-10 ( the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ) extended prep ( $75 million per year ) through fy2017 ( i.e. , september 30 , 2017 ) .

appendix b .

source of funding for title v block grants to states , the district of columbia , and other jurisdictions , by state , fy2015 appendix c. mch services block grant funding history appendix d. selected maternal and child health measures , by state appendix e. national title v performance and outcome measures table e - 1 shows the national performance measures for title v for fy2011-fy2015 .

table e - 2 shows the national performance measures for title v for fy2016 and later years .

table e - 3 and table e - 4 show the national outcome measures .

in addition , the maternal and child health bureau ( mchb ) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants .

table e - 5 shows the discretionary grant information system ( dgis ) performance measures .

the maternal and child health bureau ( mchb ) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants .

the mchb discretionary grant information system ( dgis ) electronically captures performance measures ( see table e - 5 ) , program , financial , and abstract data , and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees .

the data collected are used by mchb project officers to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating mchb's programs .

the mchb is planning to revise the performance measures requirements for its discretionary programs .

the notice pertaining to changes in the dgis was published in the federal register on march 15 , 2016 .

according to the mchb , mchb's purpose in revising the performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals .

these program goals include alignment with and support of the title v block grant , specifically population domains and national performance measures , where reasonable .

further , the revised measures will more accurately capture the scope of services provided through this grant funding .

the overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior dgis data collection , and the average number of performance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced as well .

further , the structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides .

this revision will allow a more accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by mchb .

