american indians in general are victims of violent crimes at a rate much higher than the general population .

this trend carries over to domestic violence: american indian women are victims of domestic and dating violence at more than twice the rate of non - indian women .

it is reported that most of this violence involves an offender of a different race .

this fact creates a jurisdictional problem because tribal courts do not have criminal jurisdiction over crimes committed within the tribe's jurisdiction by non - indians .

states generally do not have jurisdiction over such crimes either .

although such crimes are subject to federal jurisdiction , frequently overburdened federal prosecutors are not able to prosecute them .

thus , it appears that american indian women are left with a higher risk of domestic violence and less protection than non - indian women .

in the 112 th congress , the senate passed s. 1925 , which included proposed amendments to the violence against women act ( vawa ) aimed at remedying this practical jurisdictional void .

s. 47 and h.r .

11 , the violence against women reauthorization act ( vawa reauthorization ) are nearly identical to s. 1925 and have been introduced in the 113 th congress .

section ix of these bills would , among other things , expand the inherent jurisdiction of tribal courts to include non - indian - on - indian crimes of domestic and dating violence committed within the tribes' jurisdictions .

opponents of the proposed amendments in s. 1925 were concerned that , under current law , tribal courts are not required to provide the identical constitutional protections to criminal defendants as state and federal courts .

the vawa reauthorization would provide that courts exercising special domestic violence criminal jurisdiction shall provide to defendants "all other rights whose protection is necessary under the constitution of the united states in order for congress to recognize and affirm the inherent power of the participating tribe to exercise criminal jurisdiction over the defendant. .

as discussed below , it is not clear what protections the tribes must provide to exercise this power .

criminal jurisdiction in indian country is complex .

indian country is defined by 18 u.s.c .

section 1151 as indian reservations , dependent indian communities , and allotments .

depending on the crime and the identities of the victim and the perpetrator , there can be exclusive tribal jurisdiction , exclusive federal jurisdiction , concurrent tribal and federal jurisdiction , or exclusive state jurisdiction .

the following chart sets forth which governments have jurisdiction over crimes in indian country .

in cases of dating and domestic violence where the offender is non - indian and the victim is indian , which appear to constitute the greatest percentage of domestic and dating violence involving indians , tribal and most state courts do not have jurisdiction .

federal jurisdiction is exclusive , unless a state has criminal jurisdiction under p.l .

280 .

as a practical matter , there is a jurisdictional void for domestic and dating violence between non - indians and indians because federal prosecutors frequently cannot make such crimes a priority for prosecution on account of the demands of their workload and the difficulty of investigating such crimes , which usually occur far away from federal investigators .

therefore , it is argued that domestic violence between non - indian perpetrators and indian victims frequently goes unprosecuted and unpunished , and the victims of such violence go unprotected .

to address the jurisdictional issue concerning domestic and dating violence involving non - indians and indians , the vawa reauthorization would give tribal courts jurisdiction over domestic and dating violence between non - indians and indians that occur within the tribes' jurisdiction , provided there are sufficient ties to the indian tribes .

special domestic violence criminal jurisdiction would be limited to "act[s] of domestic or dating violence that occur[] in the indian country of the participating tribe" and violations of protection orders .

the vawa reauthorization does not purport to delegate federal authority to the tribes .

rather , it would declare that the tribes' "powers of self - government ... include the inherent power of that tribe , which is hereby recognized and affirmed , to exercise special domestic violence criminal jurisdiction over all persons. .

as mentioned above , the vawa reauthorization would extend the tribes' inherent sovereignty to include criminal jurisdiction over non - indians committing domestic or dating violence against indians .

"the powers of indian tribes are , in general , inherent powers of a limited sovereignty which has never been extinguished .

before the coming of the europeans , the tribes were self - governing sovereign political communities. .

the supreme court has recognized that "[a] basic attribute of full territorial sovereignty is the power to enforce laws against all who come within the sovereign's territory. .

although tribes once enjoyed full sovereignty , since their incorporation into the united states , aspects of their full sovereignty have been restricted or lost , including the authority to punish non - indians .

the supreme court has stated , however , that congress has authority to relax restrictions on the tribes' inherent sovereignty .

for example , in duro v. reina , the supreme court held that indian tribes had lost the inherent authority to try nonmember indians .

the court wrote that prosecution of a nonmember indian was "inconsistent with the tribe's dependent status and could only have come to the tribe by delegation from congress , subject to the constraints of the constitution. .

congress passed an amendment to the indian civil rights act to provide tribes with jurisdiction to try nonmember indians .

however , rather than delegating federal authority to the tribes , as the supreme court suggested , congress "recognize[d] and affirm[ed] in each tribe the inherent tribal power ( not delegated federal power ) to prosecute nonmember indians. .

in united states v. lara , the court considered whether a nonmember indian defendant who was tried and convicted in tribal court could be tried for the same conduct in federal court or whether the double jeopardy clause prohibited the federal prosecution .

based on the language of the statute and its legislative history , which indicated congressional intent to affirm and acknowledge the tribes' inherent authority , the court concluded the tribal court exercised its own non - federal authority in trying the defendant .

because the tribe and the federal government were exercising different authorities in prosecuting the defendant , the double jeopardy clause did not apply .

the majority also wrote broadly that the constitution authorized congress to relax the restrictions on the tribes' inherent authority to allow tribes to try nonmember indians .

the vawa reauthorization would purport to exercise this congressional authority and expand the inherent sovereign authority of tribes to include the authority to try defendants involved in non - indian on indian domestic and dating violence .

it is unclear whether the supreme court would find that congress has this authority .

in oliphant v. suquamish indian tribe , the supreme court implicitly recognized that prior to "submitting to the overriding sovereignty of the united states" indian tribes possessed the power to try non - indians .

the power to try non - indians , therefore , is an aspect of inherent sovereignty which the tribes lost , like the power to try nonmember indians .

in lara , the majority opinion concluded that the constitution authorized congress to relax the restrictions on tribes' inherent authority to try nonmember indians .

it could be argued that because nonmember indians and non - indians are both outsiders to the tribe , there appears to be no reason to distinguish congress's authority to relax restrictions on the tribes' inherent sovereignty to try nonmember indians from its authority to relax restrictions on the tribes' authority to try non - indians .

in other words , if the tribe can exercise inherent authority over nonmember indians , it appears it would be able to exercise inherent authority over non - indians .

however , it is not clear whether the court would adopt that reasoning .

in his concurrence in lara , justice kennedy took issue with the majority's statement that the constitution authorized congress to relax the restrictions on the tribes' inherent authority and subject nonmembers to inherent tribal criminal authority .

he questioned whether congress has authority to subject citizens to a sovereign outside the structure of the constitution .

the constitution is premised on consent of the governed , he wrote .

the constitution established a system of two sovereigns — the nation and the state — to which the citizen owes duties and against which the citizen has rights .

justice kennedy wrote that by amending the indian civil rights act to extend inherent tribal criminal jurisdiction over nonmember indians , "the national government seeks to subject a citizen to the criminal jurisdiction of a third entity to be tried for conduct occurring wholly within the territorial borders of the nation and one of the states .

this is unprecedented .

there is a historical exception for indian tribes , but only to the limited extent that a member of a tribe consents to be subjected to the jurisdiction of his own tribe. .

justice kennedy , therefore , seems to believe that congress may not have authority to subject nonmember citizens to the criminal jurisdiction of tribes , extra - constitutional sovereigns , to which they have not consented .

further , the supreme court considered the issue of tribal court civil jurisdiction over nonmembers in a case that , although it did not concern criminal jurisdiction , may be informative with regard to jurisdiction generally in tribal courts .

in plains commerce bank v. long family land and cattle co. , decided four years after lara , the majority held that the tribal court did not have civil jurisdiction over a non - indian bank that had allegedly discriminated against a tribal member in connection with the sale of a parcel of non - indian land on the reservation .

the majority opinion , which cites justice kennedy's concurrence , notes that an exercise of tribal court jurisdiction must be based on the consent of the nonmember: not only is regulation of fee land sale beyond the tribe's sovereign powers , it runs the risk of subjecting nonmembers to tribal regulatory authority without commensurate consent .

tribal sovereignty , it should be remembered , is "a sovereignty outside the basic structure of the constitution. .

united states v. lara , ... ( kennedy , j. , concurring in judgment ) .

the bill of rights does not apply to indian tribes .

indian courts "differ from traditional courts in a number of significant respects. .

and nonmembers have no part in tribal government — they have no say in the laws and regulations that govern tribal territory .

consequently , those laws and regulations may be fairly imposed on nonmembers only if the nonmember has consented , either expressly or by his actions .

even then , the regulation must stem from the tribe's inherent sovereign authority to set conditions on entry , preserve tribal self - government , or control internal relations .

although the supreme court stated in lara that congress has authority to relax restrictions on the tribes' inherent authority so that they may try nonmember indians , it is not clear whether today's court would reach the same result .

of the five justices signing on to that statement , only justice breyer and ginsburg are on the court today .

justice kennedy expressed doubt about whether congress had that authority .

justice thomas questioned whether tribes had inherent sovereignty at all and stated that he believed tribes did not have inherent authority to try their own members , but that under existing precedent , he believed congress had the authority to change the contours of the tribes' inherent sovereignty .

justice scalia , in signing on to justice souter's dissent , apparently believed congress did not have authority to expand the inherent sovereignty of indian tribes to try nonmember indians .

indian law is full of contradictions and confusion , making it difficult to predict how the court will decide .

as justice thomas wrote in his concurrence in lara , "federal indian policy is , to say the least , schizophrenic .

and this confusion continues to infuse federal indian law and our cases. .

therefore , it is not clear whether the court considering a tribal court conviction under the vawa reauthorization would find that congress has the authority to expand the inherent sovereignty of tribes to try non - indian defendants .

if congress does not have authority to subject citizens to inherent tribal criminal authority , it is possible that the courts would uphold tribal authority to try defendants involved in non - indian on indian domestic and dating violence as a delegation of federal authority .

this is what justice souter would have done in lara .

he , with justice scalia , dissented because they believed that prior precedent referring to the need for congress to delegate authority to the tribes to try nonmember indians was binding and that , by virtue of their dependent status , tribes simply cannot exercise inherent authority to try nonmembers .

to fulfill congress's intention to fill the jurisdictional void created by duro , they would have found that congress delegated federal authority to the tribes to try nonmember indians .

supporters of the vawa reauthorization assert there is a significant problem of domestic and dating violence against american indian women .

currently , although tribes may prosecute indian perpetrators , they may not prosecute non - indian perpetrators .

in addition , most states do not have jurisdiction to prosecute non - indians who commit domestic and dating violence against indians .

usually , the federal government has exclusive jurisdiction to try such non - indian perpetrators .

however , because federal prosecutors usually are located a long distance from reservations and have heavy workloads , investigation and prosecution of non - indian on indian domestic and dating violence are said to be inadequate .

the vawa reauthorization would provide tribal courts with criminal jurisdiction to prosecute non - indians charged with domestic or dating violence against an indian that occurs within their jurisdictions .

with the vawa reauthorization's tribal jurisdiction provisions , there are two fundamental legal questions that must be asked: ( 1 ) if congress grants indian tribes criminal jurisdiction over non - indians , would this be a recognition of inherent sovereignty or a delegation of federal prosecutorial power ? .

 ; and ( 2 ) depending on which form of authority is employed , what procedural safeguards will be accorded criminal defendants ? .

through a series of cases and federal statutes , indian tribes exercise their inherent sovereignty over member indians and nonmember indians .

it is not clear from the supreme court case law whether this theory would be extended to prosecutions of non - indians .

if it is extended under an inherent sovereignty theory , it appears that tribes will not be bound by the constitution but only by protections in the indian civil rights act , tribal law and order act , and the individual tribal laws .

if , on the other hand , the tribes are exercising delegated federal authority , it appears the full catalog of protections in the bill of rights would apply against the tribes .

