today , indian gaming is big business .

in 2010 , 237 of the 565 federally recognized tribes operated 422 tribal gaming enterprises which generated $25.6 billion in revenues .

twenty - eight states have some form of indian gaming .

indian gaming accounted for 25% of the total revenues of the legal gaming industry and is its fastest - growing segment .

indian gaming started out small .

in the 1980s , when the federal government severely cut funds for indian tribes , indian tribes began to turn to high - stakes bingo and other gaming to raise money to fund tribal government operations .

the department of the interior and other federal agencies actively encouraged tribal bingo to raise revenue to fund tribal governments .

however , the legality of these operations was uncertain .

local and state authorities threatened to shut down these operations , claiming that they violated state law .

although federal courts enjoined state enforcement actions , states continued to pursue them .

the legality of indian gaming under federal law was also questionable .

meanwhile , a number of bills were introduced in congress to regulate the growing indian gaming industry .

in 1987 , in california v. cabazon band of mission indians , the supreme court settled that indian tribes could engage in gaming on tribal land free from state law .

the court held that federal and tribal interests supporting tribal gaming preempted state laws regulating tribal gaming on tribal land .

it did not address federal authority over indian gaming .

cabazon focused congressional efforts to regulate indian gaming that culminated in the passage of the indian gaming regulatory act ( igra ) .

igra provides a statutory basis for indian tribes to conduct gaming on "indian lands" ; establishes a framework for regulating indian gaming that divides authority between tribes , states , and the federal government ; and created the national indian gaming commission ( nigc ) with authority to regulate tribal gaming on the federal level .

igra prohibits gaming on most land acquired in trust after its effective date , october 17 , 1988 .

however , there are important exceptions for certain newly acquired lands .

for the purposes of regulation , igra divided indian gaming into three classes: class i gaming includes social or traditional gaming played for prizes of minimal value and is subject to exclusive tribal regulation ; class ii gaming includes bingo and similar games and non - banked card games , and is subject to regulation by the tribes and nigc , and may be conducted only in states that allow such gaming ; and , class iii gaming includes all other games and may be conducted only pursuant to tribal - state compacts approved by the secretary of the interior ( secretary ) in states that allow such gaming or pursuant to procedures approved by the secretary under circumstances specified by igra .

igra also created the nigc .

nigc has responsibility to monitor class ii gaming and to approve tribal gaming ordinances and management contracts , and authority to impose fines and close gaming operations based on a violation of igra , nigc regulations , or tribal gaming ordinances .

class iii gaming is the most lucrative class of gaming , and a tribal - state compact is the key to a tribe's ability to engage in class iii gaming .

igra requires that states negotiate class iii gaming compacts in "good faith. .

in order to provide states with an incentive to negotiate class iii gaming compacts , igra provided that tribes may sue states in federal district court to enforce the good faith requirement .

upon a judicial finding of bad faith , igra provided a mechanism by which tribes may engage in class iii gaming in the face of recalcitrant states .

however , in seminole tribe of florida v. florida , the supreme court held that congress did not have authority under the indian commerce clause to waive the states' sovereign immunity to lawsuits by tribes to enforce the requirement that states negotiate class iii gaming compacts in good faith .

seminole shifted the balance of power struck in igra between the tribes and the states in favor of the states by taking away the tribes' recourse when states refuse to negotiate class iii compacts or demand concessions prohibited by igra .

increasingly , states have demanded that tribes agree to share gaming revenues and make concessions on issues unrelated to gaming in order to obtain class iii gaming compacts .

more recently , congress's attention has focused primarily on off - reservation gaming — that is , gaming on indian lands located away from a tribe's reservation .

there have been several bills introduced which would amend igra to limit tribes' ability to game on land located away from their reservations .

although the indian tribes won a big victory in cabazon , their right to engage in gaming was vulnerable because if the executive branch ever decided not to encourage indian gaming as a means to realize federal policy goals of self - determination and economic self - sufficiency , under the reasoning of cabazon , states would be able to enforce their gaming laws against tribal gaming on tribal land .

moreover , tribal gaming operations apparently were still subject to closure under faca and occa .

therefore , federal legislation was needed to secure the tribes' ability to engage in gaming free from state regulation .

one of igra's policy goals was "to provide a statutory basis for the operation of gaming by indian tribes as a means of promoting tribal economic development , self - sufficiency , and strong tribal governments. .

furthermore , congress needed to provide for regulation of indian gaming to satisfy state and federal entities concerned about criminal infiltration of indian gaming .

congress had been considering indian gaming bills for approximately four years when the supreme court decided cabazon .

igra was not so much a direct response to cabazon , as it was the culmination of congressional efforts which were focused by the court's decision in cabazon .

as explained in the senate report on the bill that became igra , congress sought to "preserve the right of tribes to self - government while , at the same time , to protect both the tribes and the gaming public from unscrupulous persons .

an additional objective inherent in any government regulatory scheme is to achieve a fair balancing of competitive economic interests. .

the states wanted congress to authorize state regulation of indian gaming , to subject indian gaming to the same rules as non - indian gaming , and to allow state taxation of indian gaming .

the tribes opposed any state regulation and lobbied for exclusive tribal regulation .

as a fallback position , tribes were prepared to accept federal , but not state , regulation .

in igra , congress maintained the current regulatory scheme of tribal and federal regulation of bingo and provided a framework for the regulation of indian casino gaming which would not unilaterally impose state jurisdiction on the tribe's gaming , but would allow tribes to determine the extent to which they were willing to subject themselves to state jurisdiction through a tribal - state compact .

igra provided a statutory basis for indian gaming on "indian lands" and struck a balance between tribal , state , and federal interests in its scheme for regulating indian gaming .

it also created the national indian gaming commission ( nigc ) as an independent agency to oversee and regulate indian gaming on the federal level .

recent proposed amendments to igra have been aimed primarily at igra's provisions allowing gaming on newly acquired lands .

because location near a large metropolitan center may be critical to large profits for indian gaming , tribes have tried to acquire indian lands away from their reservations near population centers under the exceptions to igra's prohibition on gaming on newly acquired lands .

gaming on land acquired in trust pursuant to the exceptions is controversial .

as of june 2010 , 31 applications for land into trust were granted under the exceptions .

because of the controversy , however , off - reservation gaming has caught the attention of congress .

introduced in the 112 th congress , s. 771 would restrict gaming on newly acquired lands by requiring that tribes demonstrate to the secretary that they have a "substantial , direct , modern connection" and a "substantial , direct , aboriginal connection" to the newly acquired lands .

if the secretary determines there is a modern connection to the land , he would have to certify the following: if the tribe has a reservation , the land is within 25 miles of the tribal headquarters or other government facilities on the reservation ; from october 17 , 1988 , the tribe has demonstrated a routine presence on the land ; and the tribe has not been restored to federal recognition or acknowledged within the preceding five years .

if the tribe does not have a reservation , the land is located within 25 miles of where a substantial number of members live ; from october 17 , 1988 , the tribe has demonstrated a routine presence on the land ; the land was within the first - submitted request for land since acknowledgment or restoration or the application to take land into trust was within five years of acknowledgment or restoration ; and the tribe is not gaming on other land .

in determining that the tribe has an aboriginal connection to the land , the secretary would have to consider the following: the tribe's historical presence on the land ; whether the membership can demonstrate lineal descent or cultural affiliation with the land ; the area in which the tribe's language was spoke ; the proximity of tribal sacred sites ; forcible removal from the land ; and other factors that demonstrate the tribe's presence prior to its fist interactions with non - natives , the federal government , or another sovereign .

s. 2676 , introduced in the 110 th congress , would have amended igra in several ways .

first , it would have struck all the exceptions to the prohibition on gaming on newly acquired lands , except for the two part determination .

second , it would have amended the two part determination to require that the secretary consult with tribal , state , and local jurisdictions within 60 miles of the trust land and require that the secretary consider the "results of a study of the economic impact of the gaming establishment" in determining that the gaming operation would not have a negative impact on any tribal , state , or local jurisdiction located within 60 miles .

the proposed bill would also require the concurrence of the state legislature , as well as the governor , for the two part determination .

in addition , it would have required that the tribe satisfy certain criteria to demonstrate that it has a "geographic , social , and historical nexus" to the land .

the proposed bill would have amended igra's authorization of class ii gaming by restricting class ii gaming to lands that were indian lands on the date of enactment or land acquired afterwards provided the tribe indicated it would engage in class ii gaming on the land when it filed its application for taking the land into trust .

it also would restrict a tribe's ability to change the use of non - gaming trust land to use it for gaming .

s. 2676 would also have amended the authority of the chairman of nigc to authorize background checks of the ten persons or entities with the greatest financial interest in any of the gaming enterprises regulated by the nigc and any other person the nigc deems appropriate .

the limitation of tribal gaming to existing tribal lands act of 2007 , h.r .

2562 from the 110 th congress , would have struck all of igra's exceptions for gaming on newly acquired lands , except for the two part determination .

it would have amended the two part determination to require concurrence of the state legislature , as well as the governor .

h.r .

1654 , also introduced in the 110 th congress , would require the secretary to determine that gaming on all newly acquired lands was in the best interest of the tribe and not detrimental to the surrounding community .

in addition , in the 112 th congress , h.r .

4033 , the giving local communities a voice in tribal gaming act , has been introduced .

this bill would amend igra to give local jurisdictions a veto over class iii gaming establishments to which the state has agreed in compacts entered after january 1 , 2011 .

initially , indian gaming arose on a small scale in response to cut - backs in funding for tribes in the 1980s .

because of the executive branch's support of indian gaming as a legitimate source of tribal revenues , in cabazon , the supreme court found that federal and tribal interests supporting tribal gaming outweighed state interests in regulating indian gaming .

congress passed igra after cabazon to provide a statutory basis for tribal gaming , to establish a system for regulating indian gaming , and to establish the nigc .

igra divides indian gaming into three classes .

class i gaming includes traditional or social gaming and is regulated exclusively by the tribes .

congress affirmed cabazon as to bingo , or class ii gaming , by providing that it is subject to tribal regulation with federal oversight by the nigc .

however , congress recognized that states had greater interests in casino - style , or class iii , gaming and , therefore , gave states a role in regulating class iii gaming through the tribal - state compact .

in order to engage in class iii gaming , a tribe must have a gaming compact that allows them to do so , or have procedures issued by the secretary after a good faith lawsuit .

the nigc plays an important role in regulating tribal gaming by approving tribal gaming ordinances , approving management contracts , imposing fines and closing gaming operations for violations of igra , nigc regulations , or tribal ordinances , and monitoring class ii operations .

nigc also makes determinations about whether land qualifies as "indian land. .

igra created an incentive for states to negotiate gaming compacts by providing that tribes could take states that did not negotiate in good faith to federal court .

if , after a finding by the court of bad faith on the part of the state , the state and the tribe could not agree to a compact , igra provided a mechanism by which a tribe could engage in class iii gaming without a state's agreement .

however , in seminole , the supreme court held that congress did not have authority to waive the states' sovereign immunity to the tribes' lawsuits .

although igra bars states from imposing a tax or fee on indian gaming and limits the issues subject to negotiation between tribes and states to those that are gaming related , states have been negotiating for a share of tribal gaming revenues and bringing non - gaming issues into compact negotiations .

because , after seminole , tribes cannot resort to the courts to enforce igra's limitations , they have tended to accept arguably prohibited conditions in their compacts .

congress has been most interested in off - reservation gaming on newly acquired lands .

in the past five years , several bills have been introduced which would amend igra to limit the ability of tribes to game on newly acquired lands .

