the section 8 housing choice voucher ( hcv ) program is the federal government's largest needs - based housing assistance program , in terms of both the number of families served and the cost to the federal budget .

the program serves roughly 2 million low - income families at a cost of approximately $19 billion ( in fy2012 ) in discretionary appropriations .

the section 8 hcv program provides eligible low - income families with subsidies that they can use to rent the housing of their choice from private market landlords .

families are generally eligible to receive a voucher if they are very low income ( earning 50% or less of the local area median income ) or if they are low income ( earning 80% or less of the local area median income ) and meet other special criteria such as being elderly or having disabilities .

however , 75% of all vouchers available in a year must be provided to extremely low - income families ( earning 30% or less of the area median income ) .

the subsidies cover the difference between a family's minimum contribution toward their rent ( generally , 30% of family income ) and the market rent for the housing unit .

the section 8 hcv program has a unique administrative structure .

the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) provides federal funds to public housing authorities ( phas ) — which are state - chartered local government entities — to administer the program .

while the basic structure of the program , such as the type of assistance provided and who is eligible , is governed by federal statutes and regulations , many important elements of the program are left to the discretion of local phas .

that local discretion is the subject of the crs study presented in this report .

this study presents findings on the use of pha discretionary authority .

it characterizes pha discretionary policies into three major categories: tenant selection , income and rent determination , and program administration .

the study focuses upon discretionary policies within these areas because they affect which families receive assistance , the level of assistance families receive , and the way in which families access that assistance .

crs collected data on the following specific pha discretionary policies: local preferences , screening and denial of assistance , termination of assistance , minimum rent level , interim recertifications , waiting list administration , and search time and extensions .

the following summarizes the data sources and the data collection process for this study , and it also describes previous research on phas' discretionary authority .

 ( a more thorough discussion of the methodology can be found in appendix b . ) .

descriptions of the selected pha discretionary policies and the data collected on these policies are provided in the research findings section of this report .

the federal government invests more federal resources in the housing choice voucher program than any other direct housing assistance program for low - income families .

however , there is limited information available about how the program is being administered in many communities .

this study was designed to expand the knowledge of how phas use some of the discretionary authority they are provided under federal law .

the choices made by phas have implications not only for how they administer their local programs , but also for how families experience the program , how communities and stakeholders perceive the program , and the cost of the program in the federal budget .

the implications of specific policy choices and related policy considerations are discussed throughout the report .

however , the findings of this study raise a broader set of considerations that may be of interest to policymakers as they relate to program flexibility and accountability .

program flexibility and accountability are elements of an ongoing tension in the administration of many social services programs , including the housing choice voucher program .

the balance between flexibility and accountability in the program's structure may affect the achievement of federal policy goals and creates benefits and drawbacks for phas and tenants .

the limited scope of this study does not inform what the proper balance between flexibility and accountability might be , but it does offer observations on how the current level of local discretion affects the achievement of federal goals , phas , and tenants .

the need to undertake this research is indicative of the lack of information about phas' use of discretionary authority .

currently , hud field offices ensure that phas administer their hcv programs according to the policies stated in their administrative plans ; hud does not make available the general trends in the administration of the hcv program , as is done in this study .

yet , the administration of the program affects the achievement of federal goals , including equitable access to the program .

for instance , the local preferences selected by phas determine , in part , who has access to assistance .

however , it might not be necessary to know about the program's daily administration if phas are meeting federal policy goals .

in an outcome - based form of accountability , the meeting of federal goals would be monitored ; in a regulatory form of accountability , the manner in which phas administer the program would be monitored .

thus , a question raised by this study is what type and level of oversight for discretionary policies is appropriate to ensure that federal policy objectives are met ? .

it is often argued that administrative flexibility decreases administrative burdens , which results in cost savings .

pha industry groups generally support efforts to increase administrative flexibilities , citing the administrative burden and the administrative costs associated with the current hcv program .

as federal policymakers look for ways to reduce the cost of the hcv program , there is an ongoing interest in the deregulation of assisted housing programs and expansion of the moving - to - work demonstration ( see earlier description of the mtw program ) .

however , there is some indication that the cost savings associated with administrative flexibility have not always occurred in the housing choice voucher program .

within this study , the statements of some pha officials suggested that some of the discretion granted to phas has created its own administrative burden .

for instance , one pha official stated that he wished hud would develop a uniform policy for denials based on criminal activity so that there would be fewer challenges to the pha's policy .

this finding is supported by testimony phas have provided to congress .

one pha official testified to congress in 2006 that "the deregulation contemplated in qhwra is really re - regulation .

we now spend a large amount of staff time on the new administrative provisions of qhwra , specifically , the agency plan ... the income targeting strategy , rental integrity and its associated pic reporting. .

the official also shared her belief that the reporting requirements tied to areas of discretion negate the benefit of discretion and are costly for the administration of assisted housing programs .

this study thus raises the question of whether increased administrative flexibility always leads to decreased administrative burden and decreased administrative costs , particularly when increased administrative flexibility is tied to new reporting requirements and the increased use of tenant protection procedures .

following passage of qhwra , tenant advocates expressed concern that increased local discretion within assisted housing programs could harm tenants by leading to decreased housing assistance payments and increased tenant rents .

tenant advocates have also expressed concern that inconsistency in program procedures could cause confusion for program applicants and participants , leading to reduced access to the program .

this study does not draw conclusions about whether the discretionary policies adopted by phas are more or less advantageous to certain program applicants and participants than prior federal policies .

however , this study does provide data on the level of variation within the program .

in some areas of pha local discretion , such as the application of the minimum rent , phas appear to be administering the hcv program fairly consistently .

on the other hand , there are areas of discretion in which pha practices diverge , such as local preferences .

it may be that these variations in local policy benefit applicants and tenants as phas explore the ways in which they use their administrative flexibility to best serve their communities .

while this study does not evaluate the effects of local discretionary policies on tenants , it raises the possibility that further research could be valuable .

appendix a. observations about administrative plans according to hud's housing choice voucher program guidebook , "a pha's administrative plan must describe the policies the pha has adopted in each area where the pha has discretion. .

the guidebook goes on to state that "the housing choice voucher program administrative plan is a supporting document to the pha plan , and must be made available for public review. .

since the section 8 administrative plan must ( 1 ) describe a pha's use of its discretion and ( 2 ) be made available to the public , it is an ideal source of information for a study of how phas use their local discretion .

during the process of collecting and examining phas' section 8 housing choice voucher administrative plans , crs made a number of observations about the availability of the plans , their content , and their intended purposes that may be of interest to policymakers .

availability while federal regulations and guidance require that phas make the section 8 hcv program administrative plans available for public review , they do not specify what constitutes "public review. .

hud collects other pha plans , namely the one - year and five - year plans that phas are required to develop , and makes them publicly available on the department's website .

section 8 hcv administrative plans do not appear to be similarly collected and posted online in one place .

some phas make their administrative plans available on their own websites .

most of the phas selected for this study had websites , but the majority did not have copies of their administrative plans readily accessible on their websites .

for those phas that do not make their plans available on their websites , the process through which they can be publicly accessed is less clear .

pha annual and five - year plans generally contain language stating that administrative plans are available for review in a pha's office and an address is generally given .

since it was not feasible to physically visit the offices of the phas whose plans were not readily available from their website , crs staff emailed or called pha offices to request a copy .

most phas contacted by phone or email were willing to email an electronic copy of the plan .

however , a subset of phas did not send an electronic copy of their plans via email .

most of these phas were willing to mail paper copies of their plans , but a few phas preferred to respond to a questionnaire via email in lieu of sending a plan .

some phas that preferred to answer a questionnaire felt it was too onerous to send a copy of their plan , while other phas felt that their existing plans were out - of - date and therefore did not reflect the pha's current practices .

most phas that were contacted sent copies of plans shortly after the request was made , with a minimal number of reminders .

roughly a quarter of phas ( 36 out of 131 ) required extensive follow - up , which involved multiple phone calls and emails requesting a copy of the administrative plan , and at times formal follow - up letters and hud field office assistance in obtaining the plans were necessary .

two phas failed to supply copies of their plans for the study .

the level of effort required to obtain these public documents from many phas was unexpected and raised questions about the extent to which the documents are available to hud , the public , stakeholders , and tenants for both oversight and public information purposes .

content and audience as noted earlier , phas are required to include their discretionary policies in the hcv administrative plans .

hud's housing choice voucher program guidebook advises phas to limit the scope of their plans to include only their discretionary policies .

specifically , the guidebook states because changes to the administrative plan require formal approval by the board of commissioners or other governing body , including hud regulations in areas where the pha has no discretion is not advised .

the administrative plan should address only those policies areas [ sic ] in which the pha has discretion .

program regulations and the pha's operating procedures for complying with those regulations can be addressed in a separate procedures manual that can be updated more easily .

despite this guidance from hud , of the plans reviewed by crs , all of them included policies beyond those in which the pha has discretion .

many of them repeated hud regulations verbatim , although some merely summarized hud regulations , with references to the regulations .

one possible reason for the deviation from hud's guidance is that plans including all program rules and regulations can serve as a procedures manual for pha staff .

when asked about how the plan was used , nearly all of the pha officials interviewed for this study reported that the pha plan was used primarily or at least regularly by program staff .

many of the pha officials interviewed used terms like "bible" and "guidebook" to describe their administrative plans .

when asked about the primary audience for the plan , pha officials gave different responses , including pha staff , hud , local legal aid offices , and tenant advocates .

several pha officials stated that the plan was meant for landlords and tenants , whereas others stated that they did not think their plans would be understood by residents because of their complexity and the way in which the plans were written .

these observations highlight that the administrative plans , in their current forms , have multiple audiences .

further , the observations of pha officials raise the question of whether the plans meet the needs of their multiple audiences .

a limited discretion - only plan would be easier to use for hud's oversight , and would be administratively easier to maintain for phas .

however , a discretion - only plan would be less useful as a policy guide .

if , as described by pha officials , the administrative plans are being used as policy guidance for program staff , it follows that the plans would include detail on all of the relevant program rules and regulations .

tenants , landlords , and advocates ( such as legal services attorneys ) may also find an exhaustive listing of pha policies more useful than a discretion - only plan .

although phas appeared to use these plans as definitive guides , at times the plans reviewed contained contradictory information or unclear policies .

this may have resulted from phas stating all of the options provided under the regulations as well as their own choices of policies from those options .

further , most of the plans were lengthy ( i.e. , hundreds of pages ) , and some were dated more than 5 to 10 years before the date of this study .

several pha officials , during the data collection process , remarked that their plans needed to be updated ; several noted that updating the plans was a cumbersome process because they are so large .

the infrequency of updating and the length of the plans themselves may also contribute to contradictions and unclear policies within some plans .

policymakers and phas may wish to revisit the current administrative plan model , and / or the plans themselves , to ensure they meet the intended purposes and are relevant to the intended audiences .

form a number of pha officials who were interviewed mentioned that they purchased their section 8 administrative plans from private companies .

these officials thought that the purchase of the plan , and a related updating service , was worth the cost to ensure that the pha was in compliance with program rules .

among the phas in this study , 42% had plans that appeared to come from an outside consultant .

the private , for - profit companies that sell plan templates generally provide phas a set of options from which to choose in order to customize their plans .

as noted in the findings of this study , in several cases phas appeared to view their policy discretion in the housing choice voucher program from the perspective of the options provided in the plan they had purchased rather than from the perspective of the full set of discretionary options provided under the law .

the high percentage of phas purchasing plans from private entities may raise several questions for policymakers .

one question may be whether the existing program guidance could be streamlined or improved so that phas could redirect the funds spent on plans for other purposes .

a related question is how well phas understand the authority they are currently granted under the program and what value it has to phas .

to the extent that phas are not fully exercising their local discretion to tailor their programs to local needs , a final question is whether it is appropriate that private companies are effectively establishing a set of dominant local policies .

appendix b .

methodology the sampling frame used for this research limits the public housing authority ( pha ) universe , takes a census of very large phas ( those with more than 6,000 units ) , and takes a random sample of the remaining pha universe consisting of large , medium , and small phas .

crs defined the pha universe and the pha groupings similarly to the hud study in 2000 on pha discretionary authority , the uses of discretionary authority in the tenant - based section 8 program , as described below .

the chosen sampling frame allowed crs to observe the discretionary choices of very large phas and to make comparisons between very large phas and a statistical representation of all other phas in the pha universe .

in this report , comparisons between very large phas and a statistical representation of all other phas have not been made , but the data collected could be used to do so in future reports .

pha universe the pha universe excludes all phas that operate outside of typical program rules or models .

these include moving - to - work ( mtw ) phas , phas in territories , and phas administering state - level programs .

while these types of phas also have discretionary authority , the parameters for their discretionary choices differ from those of the typical pha and thus are not used for comparison .

for instance , phas participating in the moving - to - work demonstration have greater discretionary authority than that of a typical pha and are able to act outside of many of the statutory and regulatory rules that govern assisted housing programs .

 ( for more information , see crs report r42562 , moving to work ( mtw ) : housing assistance demonstration program , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in addition , the pha universe for this study excludes all phas with fewer than 100 units , which is consistent with the earlier hud study .

although there is an interest in the discretionary choices of phas with fewer than 100 units , the time and resource constraints of this study required a limited pha universe to reduce the necessary sample size .

although phas with fewer than 100 units represent approximately 24% of all phas , they represent only 1% of all vouchers in the program .

therefore , despite the exclusion of phas with fewer than 100 units and the exclusion of mtw and state - level phas , the pha universe of this study , containing 1,732 phas , represents 99% of housing vouchers .

sample size as noted earlier , the sampling approach used for this study has two components: a census and a stratified random sample .

very large phas ( those with more than 6,000 units ) represent only 2% of all phas , but they administer 29% of all subsidies in the program .

given the outsized impacts of the policies of this relatively small group of phas , crs chose to include all very large phas in the sample .

this census approach captured the discretionary choices of the 40 very large phas with statistical certainty .

a stratified random sample was then drawn from the remaining 1,692 phas .

to make the study size manageable , a sample of 91 phas was drawn , which was sufficient to allow a confidence level at 95% and a margin of error at + / - 10% .

crs believes this level of sampling accuracy is appropriate for this study , as it is an initial examination of pha discretionary choices in which the results will be used for further research and analysis .

the time constraints of this study did not allow for stratified random sampling based upon the size and regions of phas , but the study includes phas from the various size categories and regions to ensure that the sample does not inadvertently exclude a particular type of pha .

the size and region groupings replicate those of hud's study to ensure similar representation .

the size groupings for the sample are small ( 100-999 units ) , medium ( 1,000-2,499 units ) , and large ( 2,500-5,999 units ) .

the region groupings for the sample include the northeast , the mid - atlantic , the south , the midwest , the southwest , the west , and the northwest .

we randomly selected four or five phas from each size - region cross - section to meet the minimum sample size of 91 phas .

cross - sections representing the largest number of phas were assigned five phas in order to slightly reduce their under - representation .

the sampling frame below reflects the random sampling of small , medium , and large phas and the census of the very large phas .

in total , data were collected from 131 phas .

with these data , crs was able to describe the stated discretionary choices of very large phas with certainty and the stated discretionary choices of all other phas in the pha universe with 95% confidence and a margin of error of + / - 10% .

crs did not attempt to make observations about the size or region groupings within this report .

instead , the groupings merely ensured that each type of pha received representation in the study .

appendix c. description of common local preferences phas adopted a wide variety of local preferences and provided varying levels of specificity about their preferences .

for the purposes of this study , crs categorized phas' local preferences and identified those that were commonly used ; they are described below .

persons with disabilities: phas did not specify a definition of who would qualify as a person with a disability .

residency ( live or work ) : according to program regulations , a pha's residency preference category must apply to households that live or work in a pha's jurisdiction .

phas may include workforce training as an eligible activity for the residency preference .

elderly: phas generally did not specify the age defined as elderly , although some phas did note that the preference applied to those 65 years and older .

government a ction: this preference category includes families that are displaced because of pha or other government action .

it applies to households that are displaced from public housing and private residences .

government action may entail such actions as the demolition and redevelopment of public housing , code enforcement , or the public development of a neighborhood .

displaced for disaster: some phas limited this preference to victims of federal disasters , while others did not .

domestic violence: this category captures phas that offer a preference to victims of domestic violence .

some phas in this category require documentation ( eg , third - party verification form ) of the victim's status and other phas require a referral from a social service agency .

some phas limit the period of eligibility for this preference .

veteran / military: this category encompasses phas that granted a preference related to military service .

some phas extended veterans preference to active duty military members and some phas extended their veterans preference to the spouse of the veteran / active duty member or to the surviving spouse or dependents of the veteran .

one pha extended the veteran preference to the surviving parents of a deceased veteran .

some phas also restricted the veterans preference to specific definitions for veterans found in federal and state law .

finally , some phas restricted the veterans preference to veterans that were honorably discharged or to veterans that were not dishonorably discharged .

homeless / at - r isk of homelessness: there are a range of pha definitions for the homeless preference .

some phas have a broad definition for those that are homeless , while other phas have a more limited definition .

there are phas that require a referral from a shelter or a social service agency to prove an applicant's homeless status , and some phas limit their homeless preference to households leaving transitional services .

phas that only had a preference for homeless individuals that were graduating from the shelter - plus - care program were not included in the homeless preference category because such a preference would only apply to a subset of the homeless population .

reference to old federal preferences: phas that refer to rent burden , substandard housing , and displaced persons are marked as possibly deriving from the old federal preferences .

phas that list all categories of displaced persons as included in the old federal preferences are also marked .

working families ( including training ) : this category encompasses pha preferences for families that participate in the workforce or that participate in workforce training or education programs .

some phas specify that the head of household must work or that a certain number of hours must be worked to qualify for the preference .

according to program regulations , the elderly and those with disabilities may also claim a working families preference .

previously terminated for insufficient funds: this category captures phas that offer a preference to former program participants who had been terminated from the program due to insufficient funding .

witness protection / avoid reprisals: this category includes preferences for households in witness protection programs , households at risk of reprisal , and households relocated to prevent crime ( eg , imminent threat of violence ) .

some phas specify the witness protection programs ( eg , hud ig witness protection program ) applicable for the preference .

landlord action: phas grant a preference to families that are displaced due to landlord action .

family: phas granted a preference to families , with families defined as two or more persons , or families with children .

hate crime victim: this category captures phas that offer a preference to those who are victims of or displaced by hate crimes .

some phas specify that the household must be in danger to claim the preference .

