f ederal policies and programs traditionally have offered voluntary incentives to producers to plan and apply resource - conserving practices on private lands .

it was not until the 1980s that congress took an alternative approach to agricultural conservation through enactment of the food security act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-198 , 1985 farm bill ) .

the bill's more publicized provisions — the conservation reserve program ( crp ) , highly erodible land conservation ( sodbuster ) , and wetland conservation ( swampbuster ) — remain significant today .

the latter two "conservation compliance" provisions require that in exchange for certain u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) program benefits , a producer agrees to maintain a minimum level of conservation on highly erodible land and not to convert wetlands to crop production .

the agricultural act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 ) added federal crop insurance subsidies to the list of program benefits that could be lost if a producer were found to be out of compliance with conservation requirements on highly erodible land and wetlands .

compliance violations related to the loss of federal crop insurance premium subsidies now have separate considerations from violations related to the loss of other farm program benefits .

how compliance is calculated , where compliance provisions apply , and traditional exemptions and variances were not amended .

the 2014 farm bill also extended limited protection for native sod in select states .

the 1985 farm bill included a number of significant conservation provisions designed to reduce crop production and conserve soil and water resources .

the highly erodible land conservation provision ( sodbuster ) introduced in the 1985 farm bill was not intended to "allow the federal government to impose demands on any farmer or rancher concerning what may be done with their land ; ... only that the federal government will no longer subsidize producers who choose to convert highly erodible land to cropland unless they also agree to install conservation system ( s ) . .

similarly , the wetland conservation provision introduced in the 1985 farm bill does not authorize usda "to regulate the use of private , or non - federal land" ; rather , "the objective of this provision is to deny various federal benefits to those producers who choose to drain wetlands for the purpose of producing agricultural commodities. .

since the enactment of the 1985 farm bill , each succeeding farm bill has amended the compliance provisions .

for a brief history of the farm bill legislative changes to the conservation compliance provisions since the 1985 farm bill , see appendix .

the 1985 farm bill created the highly erodible land conservation and wetland conservation compliance provisions , which tied various farm program benefits to conservation standards .

these provisions have been amended with each subsequent farm bill , including the most recent 2014 farm bill .

as the 114 th congress continues to review the implementation of farm programs , issues related to conservation compliance could be debated .

since its introduction in the 1985 farm bill , conservation compliance has remained a controversial issue .

most producers prefer voluntary financial incentive programs such as eqip , to policies such as conservation compliance , which discourages the degradation of private lands by restricting access to other federal benefits .

with continued fiscal challenges , increasing or maintaining funding levels for financial incentive programs could be difficult .

conservation compliance , on the other hand , does not increase federal spending but continues to be unpopular among many producer groups .

the compliance requirements have also made significant contributions to reducing soil erosion and maintaining wetlands since the 1980s .

these environmental gains appear to be leveling off , however , and raise questions about conservation compliance's ability to further conservation goals .

similar to previous farm bills , the changes to conservation compliance in the 2014 farm bill debate were controversial .

as congress evaluates the implementation of the 2014 farm bill , conservation compliance might continue to generate interest .

prior to the 1985 farm bill , approximately two dozen soil and water conservation programs existed .

these programs reflected a pattern that was established in the 1930s — voluntary cooperation from land users and incentive - based programs — and changed little in 50 years .

the expansion of agricultural production in the 1970s to respond to growing world demand for farm products was accompanied by an increase in soil erosion .

much of this erosion was attributed to producers expanding their acreage into "marginal" land — land that easily erodes and is often less productive .

intense production practices were supported by many of the federal farm policies in place at the time .

in 1977 , congress enacted the soil and water resources conservation act ( p.l .

95-192 , referred to as the rca ) .

the rca required usda to appraise the nation's natural resources on nonfederal land and provide congress with an annual evaluation report .

many of the soil and water resource issues were highlighted in the 1980 rca report and drew attention to the high societal cost of soil erosion and wetland conservation that resulted from intense production .

as part of the national program for soil and water conservation , usda presented the alternative of "cross - compliance," in which farmers who receive usda benefits would be required to meet minimum conservation standards .

in the early 1980s , large - scale commodity surpluses of certain agricultural products developed from weak global demand and advances in agricultural productivity .

in response , during the 1985 farm bill debate , congress sought new farm policies to increase export markets and reduce domestic production , thereby reducing surpluses .

the result was what some classified as a radical departure from the traditional conservation approach .

1985 farm bill the food security act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-198 , 1985 farm bill ) included a number of significant conservation provisions designed to reduce production and conserve soil and water resources .

the conservation reserve program ( crp ) , as authorized in the 1985 farm bill , was allowed to remove up to 45 million acres of land from production under multi - year rental agreements .

the financial incentives of crp far exceeded those of most early conservation programs , and crp remains the largest conservation program ( in terms of funding ) to date .

the other conservation provisions were highly erodible land conservation ( sodbuster ) and wetland conservation ( swampbuster ) .

despite the historic significance of these provisions there was surprisingly little debate recorded at the time .

sodbuster the highly erodible land conservation provision , as enacted in the 1985 farm bill , introduced the requirement that in exchange for certain federal farm benefits a producer must implement a minimum level of conservation .

the provision applies the loss of benefits to land classified as highly erodible that was not in cultivation between 1980 and 1985 ( i.e. , newly broken land , referred to as sodbuster ) and any highly erodible land in production after 1990 , regardless of when the land was put into production .

land meeting this classification could be considered eligible for usda program benefits if the land user agreed to cultivate the land using an approved conservation plan .

there were two main exceptions .

first , the farmer had until january 1 , 1990 , or two years after the completion of a soil survey — whichever was later — to be actively applying an approved conservation plan .

second , if a farmer was actively applying an approved conservation plan , then they had until january 1 , 1995 , to be full in compliance with the plan .

the program benefits that could be lost included price supports and related payments , farm storage facility loans , crop insurance , disaster payments , any farm loans that will contribute to excessive erosion of highly erodible land , and storage payments made to producers for crops acquired by the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

swampbuster the "swampbuster" or wetland conservation provision extends the sodbuster requirement to wetland areas .

producers who plant a program crop on a converted wetland would be ineligible for certain usda program benefits .

the most controversial debate over the swampbuster provision was on the definition of an affected wetland areas .

this resulted in many wetland areas being exempt , including wetlands converted before enactment ( december 23 , 1985 ) , artificially created lakes , ponds , or wetlands , wetlands created by irrigation delivery systems , wetlands on which agricultural production is naturally possible , or wetlands converted if the effect of such action is minimal .

changes since the 1985 farm bill since the enactment of the 1985 farm bill , each succeeding farm bill has amended the compliance provisions ( both highly erodible land and wetland conservation ) .

1990 farm bill the compliance provisions were amended in several ways in the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-624 , 1990 farm bill ) .

conservation provisions were expanded to include wetlands converted after enactment ( november 28 , 1990 ) , where agricultural commodity production was made possible .

this meant that crop production did not actually have to occur in order to be found out of compliance , only that production was made possible through activities such as draining , dredging , filling , or leveling the wetland .

the 1990 farm bill added six more federal farm programs to the list of benefits that could be lost for non - compliance , including many of the conservation programs .

a graduated penalty was added so that under some circumstances , producers could be subject to a loss in benefits of between $500 and $5,000 .

this graduated penalty may be applied only once every five years .

the revisions protect tenant farmers who may be ruled out of compliance because of the actions of the landowner or previous tenants .

compliance exemptions were also expanded to include highly erodible land set aside , or taken out of production , under the commodity support programs .

1996 farm bill beginning in 1994 , conservation policy discussions in congress focused on identifying ways to make the compliance programs less intrusive on farmer activities .

as a result , conservation compliance provisions were significantly amended in the federal agricultural improvement and reform act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-127 , referred to as the 1996 farm bill ) .

many of the conservation compliance changes enacted in the 1996 farm bill were meant to provide producer flexibility and reduce the impact on farm operations .

some of the major amendments to highly erodible land conservation compliance in the 1996 farm bill include removing crop insurance from the list of benefits that could be lost if the farmer is found out of compliance ; adding production flexibility contracts to the list of benefits that could be lost if found out of compliance ; highly erodible land exiting crp would not be held to a higher compliance standard than nearby cropland ; providing violators with up to one year to meet compliance requirements ; developing procedures to expedite variances for weather , pest , or disease problems ; requiring an erosion measurement before the conservation system is implemented ; allowing third parties to measure residue and require that residue measurements take into account the top two inches of soil ; allowing producers to modify plans as long as the same level of treatment is maintained ; allowing local county committees to permit relief if a conservation system causes a producer undue economic hardship ; and establishing a wind erosion estimation pilot study to review and modify as necessary wind erosion factors used to administer conservation compliance .

several changes were made in the 1996 farm bill to the wetland conservation provisions as well .

similar to the provisions for highly erodible land , wetland conservation provisions were meant to provide greater program flexibility .

major changes included exempting swampbuster penalties when wetland values and functions are voluntarily restored following a specified procedure ; providing that prior converted wetlands will not be considered "abandoned" as long as the land is only used for agriculture ; giving the secretary of agriculture discretion to determine which program benefits violators are ineligible for and to provide good - faith exemptions ; establishing a pilot mitigation banking program ( using the crp ) ; repealing required consultation with the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ; and expanding the definition of agricultural lands used in a 1994 interagency memorandum of agreement .

while the 1996 farm bill reduced the impact of the compliance requirements it also expanded the voluntary incentive - based programs for agricultural conservation .

for the first time the majority of conservation funding was authorized as mandatory funding .

total funding levels for conservation were increased .

the conservation agenda was also broadened by adding wildlife considerations and evaluating nonpoint source pollution from agricultural sources .

2002 farm bill the food security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 , 2002 farm bill ) continued and expanded many of the conservation priorities in the 1996 farm bill , especially those related to voluntary incentive programs and increased funding .

few changes were made to the conservation compliance provisions .

the primary change was the requirement that usda not delegate authority to other parties to make highly erodible land determinations .

also , any person who had highly erodible land enrolled in the crp was given two years after a contract expires to be in full compliance .

2008 farm bill the food , conservation and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , referred to as the 2008 farm bill ) again made few changes to the conservation compliance provisions .

the primary change was the addition of a second level of review by the state or district fsa director , with technical concurrence from the state or area nrcs conservationist if usda determines that this exception should apply .

the 2008 farm bill also created the "sodsaver" provision under the crop insurance title ( xii ) .

the sodsaver provision would have made producers who planted crops ( five or more acres ) on native sod ineligible for crop insurance and the noninsured crop disaster assistance ( nap ) program for the first five years of planting .

the 2008 farm bill limited the provision to virgin prairie converted to cropland in the prairie pothole national priority area , but only if elected by the state .

states included in the prairie pothole national priority area are portions of montana , north dakota , south dakota , minnesota , and iowa .

ultimately no governors opted to participate in the program and sodsaver was never activated .

2014 farm bill when the farm bill debate began in 2012 , the fiscal climate made reductions in the farm bill baseline all but certain .

one of the largest programs on the chopping block was direct payments in the commodity title .

because conservation compliance is tied to farm program benefits the loss of such a large benefit would ultimately reduce the incentive to comply with conservation requirements .

conservation advocates cited the need for additional farm program benefits to be tied to conservation compliance in exchange for the loss of direct payments .

ultimately the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 , 2014 farm bill ) added the federally funded portion of crop insurance premiums to the list of benefits that could possibly be lost if a producer were found out of compliance .

the amendments , however , treat compliance violations and the loss of federal crop insurance premium subsidies separate from the loss of other farm program benefits .

additionally , the 2014 farm bill amended the sodsaver provision by removing the elective option , reducing crop insurance subsidies rather than eliminating them , and expanding the provision to six states .

for a more detailed comparison of changes made by the 2014 farm bill , see crs report r43504 , conservation provisions in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

