federal regulations generally result from an act of congress and are one significant means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established .

congress delegates rulemaking authority to agencies for a variety of reasons , and in a variety of ways .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , as amended ) is a particularly noteworthy example of congressional delegation of rulemaking authority to federal agencies .

aca is a comprehensive overhaul of the health care system that includes such provisions as the expansion of eligibility for medicaid , amendments to medicare that are intended to reduce its growth , an individual mandate for the purchase of health insurance , and the establishment of insurance exchanges through which individuals and families can receive federal subsidies to help them purchase insurance .

a previous crs report identified more than 40 provisions in aca that explicitly require or permit the issuance of rules to implement the legislation .

the rules that agencies issue pursuant to aca are expected to have a major impact on how the legislation is implemented .

for example , in an article entitled "the war isn't over" that was posted on the new england journal of medicine's health care reform center shortly after aca was signed into law , henry j. aaron and robert d. reischauer wrote: making the legislation a success requires not only that it survive but also that it be effectively implemented .

although the bill runs to more than 2000 pages , much remains to be decided .

the legislation tasks federal or state officials with writing regulations , making appointments , and giving precise meaning to many terms .

many of these actions will provoke controversy.... far from having ended , the war to make health care reform an enduring success has just begun .

winning that war will require administrative determination and imagination and as much political resolve as was needed to pass the legislation .

the january 20 , 2012 , edition of the unified agenda listed 26 aca - related actions in the "proposed rule stage" ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue proposed rules on the topics within the next 12 months , or for which the closing dates of the comment periods are the next step ) .

fourteen of the 26 upcoming proposed rules were expected to be issued by components of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) : the health resources and services administration ( hrsa , one action ) ; indian health service ( ihs , three actions ) ; office of the inspector general ( oig , one action ) ; and centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms , nine actions ) .

other proposed rules were expected to be issued by the department of labor's ( dol's ) employee benefits security administration ( ebsa , two actions ) and office of workers' compensation programs ( owcp , one action ) ; the treasury department's internal revenue service ( irs , three actions ) ; the architectural and transportation barriers compliance board ( atbcb , one action ) ; and the office of personnel management ( opm , five actions ) .

the january 20 , 2012 , edition of the unified agenda listed 25 aca - related actions in the "final rule stage" section ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue final rules on the subjects within the next 12 months ) .

fifteen of the 25 upcoming final actions were expected to be issued by components of health and human services ( hhs ) : the health resources and services administration ( hrsa , one action ) ; the food and drug administration ( fda , two actions ) ; and the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms , 12 actions ) .

eight of the upcoming final rules were expected to be issued by two components of the treasury department , the departmental offices ( do , one action ) and the internal revenue service ( irs , seven actions ) .

other final rules were expected to be issued by the department of labor's ( dol's ) occupational safety and health administration ( osha , one action ) and the social security administration ( ssa , one action ) .

as noted earlier in this report , the unified agenda also identifies "long - term actions" ( i.e. , regulatory actions that are under development which the agencies do not expect to take action on in the next 12 months ) .

the january 20 , 2012 , edition of the unified agenda listed 14 long - term actions related to aca .

in comparison to the proposed and final rules previously discussed , it is much less clear when the aca - related long - term actions are expected to occur .

in 11 of the 14 cases , the agencies said that the dates for the actions were "to be determined. .

of the three remaining long - term actions , two are expected in december 2012 , and one is expected in may 2013 .

as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations , they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress .

therefore , it is appropriate for congress to oversee the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and the rulemaking requirements established in various statutes and executive orders .

in order for congress to oversee the rules being issued pursuant to aca , it must first know that they are being issued — ideally as early as possible .

the unified agenda is perhaps the best vehicle to provide that early information , describing not only what rules are expected to be issued , but also providing information regarding their significance and timing .

congress has a range of tools available to oversee the rules that federal agencies are expected to issue to implement aca , including oversight hearings and confirmation hearings for the heads of regulatory agencies .

individual members of congress may also participate in the rulemaking process by , among other things , meeting with agency officials and filing public comments .

congress , committees , and individual members can also request that the government accountability office ( gao ) evaluate the agencies' rulemaking activities .

another option is the congressional review act ( cra , 5 u.s.c .

§§801-808 ) , which was enacted in 1996 to establish procedures detailing congressional authority over rulemaking "without at the same time requiring congress to become a super regulatory agency. .

the act generally requires federal agencies to submit all of their covered final rules to both houses of congress and gao before they can take effect .

it also established expedited legislative procedures ( primarily in the senate ) by which congress may disapprove agencies' final rules by enacting a joint resolution of disapproval .

the definition of a covered rule in the cra is quite broad , arguably including any type of document ( eg , legislative rules , policy statements , guidance , manuals , and memoranda ) that the agency wishes to make binding on the affected public .

after these rules are submitted , congress can use the expedited procedures specified in the cra to disapprove any of the rules .

cra resolutions of disapproval must be presented to the president for signature or veto .

for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove of only one rule in the 16 years since it was enacted .

perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto .

congress can also use regular ( i.e. , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted may also be vetoed by the president .

although the cra has been used only once to overturn an agency rule , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills directing or preventing the development of particular regulations .

such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions .

appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations , or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance .

the inclusion of regulatory provisions in appropriations legislation as a matter of legislative strategy appears to arise from two factors: ( 1 ) congress's ability via its "power of the purse" to control agency action , and ( 2 ) the fact that appropriations bills are considered "must pass" legislation .

congress's use of regulatory appropriations restrictions has fluctuated somewhat over time , and previous experience suggests that such use may be somewhat less frequent when congress and the president are of the same party .

