federal policy makers have a long - standing interest in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education .

this interest is largely driven by concerns about the national science and engineering workforce , which is widely believed to play a central role in u.s. global economic competitiveness and national security .

the u.s .

stem education system is a primary source of scientists and engineers in the united states .

approximately 6% of the u.s. workforce was employed in a stem field in 2011 .

about 70% of those workers had at least a bachelor's degree .

further , of college graduates who were employed in a stem field , 73% had a science or engineering major .

given the oft - cited connection between stem education and key national priorities , federal policy makers have historically paid close attention to the u.s .

stem education system .

the federal stem education effort is wide - ranging .

analysts have identified between 105 and 252 stem education programs and activities at 13 to 15 federal agencies .

annual federal appropriations for stem education are typically in the range of $2.8 billion to $3.4 billion .

published inventories of the federal stem education effort identify the department of education ( ed ) , national science foundation ( nsf ) , and department of health and human services ( hhs ) as key agencies in the federal effort .

of these , the nsf has the most stem education funding and largest number of programs ( typically ) .

the foundation is also the only federal agency whose primary mission includes supporting education across all fields of science and engineering .

as such , the nsf is a key component of the federal stem education portfolio .

funding for stem education decreased as a percentage of the total nsf budget between fy2003 and fy2012 .

further , funding levels for the foundation's main education account were lower than the previous year in both fy2011 and fy2012 .

fy2013 current plan funding for the main education account appears to be close to fy2012 levels .

the significance of these funding trends for nsf's education and research missions , as well as for the federal stem education effort overall , depends in part on how these changes fit within historical funding trends at the nsf .

this report analyzes those trends — and addresses selected stem education policy issues — in order to place the conversation about federal funding for stem education at nsf in broader fiscal and policy context .

as the previous section's analysis of historical funding trends at nsf shows , congress reduced funding for nsf's main education account in both fy2011 and fy2012 .

those year - over - year reductions followed several years of fluctuating funding for e&hr .

in addition , changes in the distribution of the foundation budget reduced funding for the main education account as a percentage of the total nsf budget .

these changes generally appear to result from a combination of holding the main education account more or less constant while applying most of the foundation's fy2003-fy2012 budget growth to r&ra .

however , in constant ( 2005 ) dollars , at least some of the growth in nsf research funding appears to come from the foundation's education - related activities .

it is not clear if these funding changes reflect evolving congressional and administration policy priorities and an intentional prioritization of research over educational activities at the nsf .

they may simply reflect the cumulative impact of funding decisions made in response to specific conditions in specific fiscal years .

further , methodological and research limitations can impede the types of economic analyses that might otherwise be used to assess optimal funding levels for nsf accounts .

the period of time for which comparable budgetary account data exist , for example , is limited to 10 years .

it can also be difficult to definitively link federal investments in research and education writ large with social , scientific , or economic outcomes .

however , historical funding trends at the nsf raise several questions for congress as it considers funding for the foundation , as well as for the federal stem education effort overall .

these questions include what is the policy rationale behind funding for stem education at nsf ? .

what are nsf's stem education activities ? .

what is nsf's role within the federal stem education portfolio ? .

what impact might changes in the nsf stem education account have on research activities at nsf ? .

what are the policy options for congress as it considers future nsf budgets ? .

among the several options available to congress are the following .

maintain nsf budget as it is .

if congress seeks to preserve nsf's budgetary autonomy , it could maintain the nsf budget as it is , making no significant increases or reductions and without directing the agency to change the distribution of funding between its main research and education accounts .

this would provide the foundation its historical discretion , while congress could continue to guide its activities through the oversight process .

increase funding for stem education at nsf .

if congress seeks to increase nsf's stem education capacity and its role in the federal portfolio , it could provide additional funding for nsf's stem education activities .

it could increase funding for e&hr — congress could do this by either shifting funding from other appropriations accounts to e&hr or by providing additional funding directly to the main education account .

a shift in funding from other accounts to e&hr would not necessarily result in a real increase to nsf's stem education programs ( particularly if the reductions were to r&ra , which could presumably offset such reductions by limiting its contributions to co - funded programs ) .

further , reductions to other accounts may limit nsf's ability to meet congress's non - stem education priorities .

increase the r&ra contribution to e&t — another way to increase overall funding for education at the nsf would be to increase the r&ra contribution to e&t activities through increased contributions to co - funded activities .

congress could do this with or without overall increases to the nsf and r&ra ; however , if r&d funding does not also increase at the rate of inflation , purchasing power may be lost .

increasing r&ra contributions to e&t activities may deepen the integration of these complementary nsf missions or may put pressure on research activities .

decrease funding for stem education at nsf .

if congress seeks to capture savings from the nsf budget or prioritize stem education activities at other federal agencies , it could reduce funding for nsf stem education programs .

to this end , congress has at least two options .

it could prioritize certain programs — for example , by either portfolio role or performance — and reduce others .

alternatively , it could reduce topline support for e&hr and limit the percentage of r&ra that may be used for e&t .

prioritization — in general , prioritization of certain programs might result in savings , depending on the choices policy makers make about reductions and support for the programs it preserves .

however , congressional prioritization of nsf's stem education programs may challenge the foundation's historical autonomy , which many analysts see as essential to its scientific mission .

congress has at least two options for prioritizing nsf's stem education programs: portfolio role and performance .

by portfolio role — instead of treating nsf's education activities as a single function , congress could separate nsf's stem education r&d programs from its student and institutional aid programs .

congress could then establish differential funding rates for nsf's stem education r&d and aid programs .

for example , some analysts suggest that research funding is most efficient when provided in predictable incremental increases ( as opposed to wide variations , which impose adjustment costs ) .

however , demand for student and institutional aid tends to be affected by factors that vary — such as population size , general economic conditions , and state education budgets , among others .

by performance — congress could direct nsf to develop a framework for evaluating its stem education programs .

that framework could incorporate factors that reflect the importance of the program to nsf's mission , to the federal stem education portfolio , to the constituencies served , to the field ( eg , intellectual merit ) , and to other congressional criteria .

policy makers at nsf and congress could use this information to prioritize funding for nsf's stem education programs .

a performance approach to reductions could increase the effectiveness of nsf's stem education programs .

however , one of the challenges of the performance approach is that the criteria by which decisions are made may not reflect the full value of the programs and as a result , effective programs may be unintentionally terminated .

decrease topline funding for e&hr and limit the percentage of r&ra that may be used for e&t .

given the important role played by federal funding for fundamental research — most of nsf - funded research is basic research — congress could prioritize nsf's research activities over its education activities and continue assigning most of the foundation's funding growth to the research account .

to the extent that nsf's stem education programs are unique to the federal effort , this may affect the portfolio .

use mechanisms other than the nsf to achieve federal stem education goals .

congress could meet federal stem education goals in any number of ways , depending on what those goals are and the policy strategies policy makers pursue .

for example , congress could increase the number of students who are interested in and prepared to study stem subjects in college by increasing funding for advanced placement or other gifted student programs at ed .

other analysts may seek to increase general federal student aid ( eg , pell program ) , which also serves stem students ( along with all others ) but does not create incentives for students to pursue degrees in certain fields .

some policy makers may prefer to leave such matters to state and local governments to decide .

decrease funding for stem education across the portfolio .

if congress seeks to prioritize other national concerns ( eg , national debt , defense , health care ) , it may choose to reduce funding for stem education across the federal enterprise .

federal agencies may respond to reduced funding levels by limiting stem education activities .

congress may wish to consider providing guidance to federal agencies to ensure that legislative priorities are maintained .

as congress weighs these various options , it may be useful to consider the short - , medium - , and long - term impact of congressional funding choices on the entire federal stem education portfolio , on the respective research and education missions of the nsf , and on the general policy purposes ( eg , advancement of the national stem labor supply ) these investments seek to serve .

appendix a .

character class data appendix b. appropriations dat .

