one long - standing policy question facing congress is how to budget for and deal with the unexpected costs incurred in response and recovery from disasters .

this question was raised in congress periodically in the 112 th and 113 th congresses ( 2011-2013 ) as part of larger discussions about how government funding decisions impact the economy , the budget deficit , and the national debt .

the budget control act ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) , passed in the first session of the 112 th congress as part of a deal to raise the debt limit , literally changed the terms of the debate .

the new law included provisions that outlined separate treatment for disaster relief , distinct from emergency funding .

furthermore , p.l .

112-25 redefined "disaster relief" as being federal government assistance provided pursuant to a major disaster declared under the stafford act , rather than assistance provided through the disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

funding designated as disaster relief in future spending bills could be "paid for" by adjusting upward the discretionary spending caps .

this allowable adjustment for disaster relief is limited , however , to an amount based on the 10-year rolling average of what has been spent by the federal government on relief efforts for major disasters .

in may 2011 , the house appropriations committee proposed offsetting $1 billion of emergency supplemental appropriations for the federal emergency management agency's ( fema's ) disaster relief fund — the primary source of federal government assistance for people and communities affected by major disasters — which had been depleted at a faster rate than had been projected due to a number of major storms and floods earlier in the year .

the house rescinded unspent money from another department's budget to pay for the additional funding , in a proposal that was ultimately not supported in the senate's version of the bill .

the issue of offsets for supplemental appropriations for the drf returned to the debate as the house and senate worked on stopgap funding legislation as fy2011 drew to a close .

the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) congressional authorizing committees also debated whether disaster assistance funding should be offset as they marked up their bills .

no resolution was reached on the issue , as the fiscal year ended and the drf was replenished through a continuing resolution .

hurricane sandy struck the united states on october 29 , 2012 .

beginning in november 2012 there were calls for supplemental appropriations for hurricane sandy relief efforts , as well as calls for offsets to pay for them .

on december 7 , 2012 , the administration released a request for $60.4 billion in supplemental appropriations in connection with hurricane sandy , including $11.5 billion for the drf .

the preamble to the request opposed offsetting the cost of the legislation , and amendments to offset the cost of the legislation in the house and senate failed .

the result of multiple rounds of congressional deliberations from 1990 through 2013 has been that while disaster assistance from other agencies has at times been funded through shifting resources from one program to another through appropriations legislation , the drf has generally been given a priority status and been funded promptly in times of need , without offsets .

this report outlines crs's analysis of supplemental appropriations laws from fy1990 through fy2013 , when the first disaster relief supplemental appropriations law was enacted under the terms of the bca .

crs examined legislation with offsetting rescissions and provisions affecting the drf , looking for connections between supplemental drf funding and offsets .

the analysis takes a detailed look at three cases where legislation affecting the drf was fully offset , but ultimately finds that from fy1990 through fy2013 , congress fully offset supplemental funding for the drf through cuts elsewhere in the budget only once .

the report goes on to survey actions taken by congress from 2011 through 2013 regarding offsetting funding for the drf , as the bca came into effect and congress interpreted its provisions in funding disaster relief in the wake of hurricane sandy .

it closes with an examination of issues surrounding offsetting disaster assistance and the use of special budgetary designations to accommodate disaster relief funding .

this report will not be updated .

according to cbo analysis , fema was the second - largest recipient of supplemental appropriations in the 1990s , behind only the department of defense .

most of these appropriations have been for disaster relief .

over the 24 fiscal years stretching from october 1 , 1989 , to september 31 , 2013 , there were 59 bills signed into law that included supplemental appropriations .

as figure 1 indicates , 31 of these measures included rescissions to offset some of the discretionary budget authority in the legislation — an analysis of these bills identified 18 that carried provisions affecting the drf .

none had provisions explicitly linking their rescissions to additional monies for the drf .

however , six of the bills with rescissions had discretionary spending reductions of such a size that the entire discretionary cost of the bill was offset .

three of those fully offset bills carried provisions affecting the drf .

crs analyzed these three bills to see whether these were cases where supplemental disaster relief was paid for by offsetting cuts to other parts of the budget .

the background on each of these three instances follows .

as these analyses illustrate , supplemental disaster relief has only been fully offset once since 1990 .

as congress looks to the future of how it budgets for disasters , it may find itself again considering whether or not to offset disaster relief .

it may also find itself in the next few years considering whether to continue or modify the bca provisions providing budgetary flexibility for disaster relief , or whether to take a different approach .

with the one exception noted above ( p.l .

104-19 ) , in the timeframe reviewed , congress did not fully offset supplemental funding for the drf , although it has provided some offsets at times for disaster assistance .

however , the appropriations process for fy2012 and consideration of supplemental appropriations in fy2013 saw extensive debate on this topic .

while congress has provided a precedent for those asking how it would approach funding disaster relief under the bca in response to a catastrophic disaster , funding the federal response to similar future events and ongoing concern about federal spending will likely continue to maintain congressional interest in this issue .

in the timeframe assessed by this report , supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance , including those for the drf , were requested after the disaster had struck and were on the scale of hundreds of millions to billions of dollars .

although initial emergency needs had usually been met before congress provided funding , congress faced political pressure to respond in a timely fashion to ensure needed relief resources are available beyond the immediate term .

adding the additional step to the process of identifying offsets would have extended the time it takes for congress to respond .

the most common types of offsets are spending cuts .

during the debate on supplemental appropriations in the wake of hurricane sandy , amendments were offered proposing two types of offsets: specific programmatic cuts and across - the - board cuts .

it would likely be difficult in a time of crisis to identify broadly acceptable single sources of cuts in the discretionary budget that could be used to offset billions of dollars of requested spending in response to a catastrophic disaster .

although across - the - board cuts can be relatively simple for congress to calculate , it is possible that unintended consequences could result , potentially cutting programs important to the recovery of the area affected by the disaster .

offsets could also be made through raising additional revenues to cover costs from the disaster .

however , raising revenues carries political implications for some members of congress , and there are significant obstacles in both the house and senate to a combined revenue and appropriations bill .

the house ways and means and senate finance committees are the committees of jurisdiction for revenue matters , while the house and senate appropriations committees have jurisdiction over discretionary spending of that revenue .

the regular procedures of the house and senate provide for separate consideration of revenue and appropriations legislation .

rule xxi in the house mandates that legislative provisions are barred from general appropriations bills .

most revenue - raising provisions would qualify as legislative and therefore would not be in order .

the senate's rule xvi serves a similar purpose .

in accordance with the constitution , revenue provisions must begin in the house , further complicating any possible senate effort to initiate the use of such provisions as offsets .

while house rules are waived periodically , the appearance of revenue provisions in appropriations bills is rare .

based on the historical evidence presented , offsetting supplemental funding for the drf would be a change in the standard practice of congress .

one of the first questions that then arises is whether or not the current situation warrants a change to this traditional pattern of action .

the primary focus of the discussion thus far has been the relative severity of the present budgetary situation — congress may consider how much our current practice of funding disaster needs contributes to the deficit and debt .

one complicating factor in assessing this is the inherent unpredictability of disasters .

identifying emerging trends in events that cannot be accurately forecast in terms of timing , frequency , or magnitude , and then determining whether those trends warrant policy change , is extremely difficult .

there is also a question of fairness — making a change to the way disaster assistance is approached by congress may disadvantage those hit by disasters in the future compared to those hit by disasters in the past , either by adding constraints on the amount of aid provided or by incurring delays in the process due to the processes needed to identify and secure offsets .

on the other hand , the government constantly changes policies and practices to save money and to improve efficiency , changing the availability or timing of assistance through a variety of other programs .

while some may benefit or suffer as a result , that is in many cases not adequate justification in itself for not attempting to make needed reforms .

as noted above , one potential impact of requiring a search for offsets in the immediate wake of a disaster is that it might delay the availability of federal relief funds .

opponents of offsets note that developing options to pay for disaster assistance may slow the delivery of that aid , especially as recent budget reductions have arguably thinned the availability of quickly agreeable offsets .

also , the urgency of the process may not permit the necessary careful review of programs facing sudden reductions .

proponents might well argue that given the initial failures to deliver aid in the wake of hurricane katrina , an accelerated timeline for congressional action does not , on its own , beget an effective , efficient response .

what was a traditional pattern of using the supplemental appropriations process to cover the costs of major disasters may have changed with the enactment of the budget control act and its allowable adjustment which can be used to cover the costs of major disasters under the stafford act .

this allowable adjustment has allowed funding that in the past might have been provided through the supplemental appropriations process to move through the annual appropriations process without competing with the rest of the discretionary budget .

only two supplemental appropriations containing disaster relief have been enacted since the bca went into effect: p.l .

112-77 , which moved in parallel with a consolidation annual appropriations act for fy2012 , replenishing the drf , and p.l .

113-2 , which passed in the wake of hurricane sandy .

each provided multiple billions of dollars in disaster assistance , including billions of dollars for the drf .

emergency designations have been used in the past to provide additional funding without violating caps on discretionary budget authority established by congressional budget resolutions .

most supplemental disaster assistance in the past has been designated as emergency funding .

one of the primary reasons that supplemental funding for the drf had not been offset over the period of analysis used in this report is the simple fact that it has not had to be offset , given the availability of the emergency funding mechanism to work around the budget caps .

disaster relief is defined under the bca as assistance provided pursuant to the declaration of a major disaster under the stafford act .

this definition is made as part of creating an "allowable adjustment" to the discretionary budget caps for disaster relief .

the bca also says that "appropriations considered disaster relief under this subparagraph in a fiscal year shall not be eligible" for the unlimited adjustment available for emergencies .

initially , some observers took a broad reading of these provisions , and envisioned a future where disaster relief funding would be constrained by the size of the allowable adjustment ( possibly in a year with multiple costly disasters ) and the option of providing emergency funding for major disasters would no longer be on the table .

however , the law makes no such explicit delineation — despite the creation of two adjustment mechanisms for emergencies and for disaster relief , there is no explicit statement that the emergency funding adjustment may not be used to pay for disaster assistance or relief .

additionally , it is worth noting that initially , no enforcement mechanisms were provided in the bca to prevent broad application of disaster relief or emergency designations .

congress could have chosen to constrain itself from going beyond the allowable adjustment , requiring offsets for further disaster relief from the regular budget , or — in a more proactive step — simply funding a larger proportion of disaster relief in the base budget .

the appropriate level of base funding for the drf was a recurring issue over the time period examined .

instead , in the absence of an explicit prohibition on the practice as noted above , congress chose to use emergency designations to fund disaster relief in excess of the allowable adjustment under the bca .

as house appropriations committee chairman rogers noted in debate opposing an across - the - board offset for disaster relief in the wake of hurricane sandy: i believe we can and should attempt to budget for disasters , as we did under the bca .

there are times when a disaster simply goes beyond our ability to offset .

hurricane sandy is one of those times .

in the current budgetary environment , using allowable adjustments or emergency designations in supplemental appropriations legislation results in additional deficit spending .

strictly conforming to the budget limits means that meeting unexpected demands for resources ( such as for disaster relief ) will likely result in unplanned reductions in other parts of the budget , reducing services available through other programs .

in addition to the potential fiscal repercussions , the consequences of a political backlash from overuse of these special authorities should not be ignored .

overly broad use of emergency or disaster relief designations to cover spending not appropriate to those categories could lead to more strictly drafted budget control legislation in the future , reducing or eliminating flexibility that may otherwise be needed on short notice in dire circumstances .

the budget constraints of the budget control act will expire at the end of fy2021 .

congress may choose to continue to set long - term limits on discretionary spending or take a new approach to the federal budget .

as part of those discussions , congress may consider a new approach to budgeting for major disasters , or extend the current system of discretionary spending caps and adjustments with modifications .

to show the relative impact of offsets on supplemental spending and the drf , table a - 1 provides a breakdown of all appropriations bills that have become law carrying both supplemental spending and rescissions from fy1990 through fy2013 .

the columns indicate the total amount of supplemental appropriations in the bill , the rescissions in the bill , and the amount of additional funding for the drf .

the table then notes whether there are provisions indicating that the funding for the drf is offset .

the table also notes when drf funding has been used as an offset for other activities .

