surface transportation authorization acts authorize spending on federal highway and mass transit programs , surface transportation safety and research , and some rail programs .

the most recent multi - year authorization for federal surface transportation programs , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu or safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) , expired on september 30 , 2009 .

since then these programs have operated on a series of extension acts and continuing resolutions .

the budgetary environment has changed since the passage of safetea in 2005 .

the financial resources available to authorizers are more constrained .

the highway trust fund ( htf ) has provided most of the funding for surface transportation authorization bills since the fund was created in 1956 , but the revenues from highway taxes ( mostly on gasoline and diesel fuel ) that support the htf have declined in recent years due to the condition of the economy and improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency .

consequently , how to pass a multi - year bill without cutting infrastructure spending , raising the gas tax , or increasing the budget deficit is an underlying theme in the ongoing debate .

other issues such as alternative finance , tolling , public - private partnerships , acceleration of project delivery , and performance management are also being debated in this fiscal context .

in addition , the question of equity in the distribution of federal spending among the states , which has been resolved in the past by providing large increases in funding for all states , cannot be solved so easily given currently forecast revenues .

for a detailed review of the underlying issues , see crs report r41512 , surface transportation program reauthorization issues for the 112 th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

on march 14 , 2012 , the senate passed map - 21 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ) .

the bill would reauthorize the surface transportation programs and activities of the federal government for two years ( fy2012-fy2013 ) .

in early february 2012 , the house committees of jurisdiction over surface transportation reauthorization all reported favorably on their contributions to h.r .

7 , the american energy and infrastructure jobs act ( h.rept .

112-397 ) .

counting the already - appropriated fy2012 , h.r .

7 is a five - year bill providing for a total authorization of roughly $260 billion .

the bill , as reported , would link the usual surface transportation reauthorization components with provisions designed to increase oil and gas production , the revenues from which would be provided for highway infrastructure .

especially controversial is a provision to discontinue funding mass transit with htf revenues .

map - 21 and h.r .

7 differ significantly in programmatic content and treatment of the htf .

both , however , reduce the number of programs by roughly two - thirds and are free of program earmarks .

on april 18 , 2012 , the house passed the surface transportation extension act of 2012 , part ii ( h.r .

4348 ) .

the bill would extend surface transportation authorizations through the end of fy2012 .

it also includes language in regard to the keystone xl pipeline ; a proposed gulf coast restoration trust fund ; a proposed harbor maintenance trust fund guarantee ; the text of the coal residuals reuse and management act ( h.r .

2273 ) ; and the environmental streamlining provisions of title iii of h.r .

7 .

the senate , on april 24 , 2012 , agreed by unanimous consent to an amendment that struck the house - passed language from h.r .

4348 and substituted the language of map - 21 .

this action enabled the house and senate to send the measure to conference .

reportedly , transportation and infrastructure committee chairman john mica has taken the position that negotiations will involve the entire substance of h.r .

7 as well as provisions of the extension bill .

accordingly , this report retains analysis of h.r .

7 .

surface transportation reauthorization is one of the more legislatively complex issues before congress , because it addresses matters under the jurisdictions of many committees .

portions of the pending reauthorization bills , under various bill numbers , were marked up in seven different committees ( see table 1 ) before consolidation under a single bill number in each house .

the budget control act requires sequestration of certain funding authorizations in the event a special joint committee fails to reach an agreement on spending reductions .

the budget control "super committee" announced in november 2011 that it had failed to reach such an agreement .

however , exemptions to the sequester process under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended ( codified in 2 u.s.c .

§905 ( j ) ) , likely mean that sequestration would not significantly reduce any surface transportation spending authorized for years beyond fy2012 .

the surface transportation programs and activities exempted , to the extent that their budgetary resources are subject to appropriations bill obligation limitations , are the following: federal - aid highways highway traffic safety grants nhtsa operations and research and national driver register motor carrier safety operations and programs motor carrier safety grants transit formula and bus grants the $739 million of annual contract authority that is typically exempt from the obligation limitation appears to be subject to sequester .

the federal transit administration's new starts program , which is supported with general fund revenues , also appears to be subject to sequester .

safetea expired on september 30 , 2009 .

surface transportation programs and activities have been operating on the extension legislation set forth in table 2 .

most of the provisions of the finance titles are intended to close the gap between projected htf revenues and the total authorizations included in the bills .

an existing federal program supporting large transportation projects is the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) , enacted in 1998 as part of the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ) as amended ( p.l .

105-178 ; p.l .

105-206 ) .

currently , tifia provides federal credit assistance , up to a maximum of 33% of project costs , in the form of secured loans , loan guarantees , and lines of credit .

loans must be repaid with a dedicated revenue stream , typically a project - related user fee .

map - 21 proposes several significant changes to tifia .

perhaps most importantly , the bill proposes to greatly enlarge the tifia program by authorizing $1 billion annually from the highway trust fund , up from the $122 million annually in safetea .

these funds would be available to pay the administrative and subsidy costs of the program .

administrative costs would be capped at 1% of this amount , leaving about $990 million to pay loan subsidy costs .

assuming an average subsidy cost of 10% , this may provide dot with the capacity to make loans totaling $9.9 billion per year .

at the same time , map - 21 also proposes to increase the share of project costs that tifia may provide from 33% to 49% , potentially lowering the share of nonfederal resources leveraged with federal loans .

another significant change in map - 21 would allow credit assistance to be provided for a program of projects secured by a common security pledge .

this would be accomplished through a "master credit agreement. .

currently , tifia only allows agreements on a project - by - project basis .

the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority ( metro ) , for one , has sought this change to accelerate the financing of 12 transit projects ( known as the 30 / 10 initiative ) .

the existing tifia threshold for eligible projects of $50 million generally or $15 million for intelligent transportation system projects remains , except that map - 21 proposes a threshold of $25 million for rural infrastructure projects .

rural infrastructure projects are defined as those " ( a ) located in any area other than an urbanized area that has a population of greater than 250,000 inhabitants or ( b ) connects a rural area to a city with a population of less than 250,000 inhabitants within the city limits" ( section 2002 ) .

additionally , whereas loans for urban projects must charge interest not less than the treasury rate , rural projects are to be offered loans that are half the treasury rate .

furthermore , 10% of tifia funds made available in map - 21 are set aside for rural projects .

currently , projects seeking tifia assistance are evaluated on eight criteria .

these criteria would be abolished , and projects ( or programs involving multiple projects ) would be evaluated solely on their eligibility on a first - come , first - served basis .

once funding is exhausted for a year , a project sponsor could enter into a master credit agreement for future credit assistance or it could decide to pay its own credit subsidy to permit an immediate loan .

map - 21 would permit the payment of the credit subsidy from federal surface transportation apportionments .

alternatively , if not all tifia funding is used it may be apportioned to the states for the purposes of the transportation mobility program .

like map - 21 , h.r .

7 authorizes $1 billion annually for tifia from the highway trust fund .

these funds will be available to pay the administrative and subsidy costs of the program .

administrative costs are capped $3.250 million in h.r .

7 .

the bill also contains provisions to establish master credit agreements to provide credit assistance for programs of related projects .

as with map - 21 , h.r .

7 eliminates the evaluation criteria for tifia assistance and provides assistance on a first - come , first - served basis if a project or program of projects is eligible .

h.r .

7 maintains the $50 million threshold for non - its projects and $15 million threshold for its projects .

but it also adds a $25 million threshold for rural projects , consistent with map - 21 , and a $1 billion threshold for assistance provided under a master credit agreement .

h.r .

7 also raises the maximum amount of federal assistance to 49% .

in addition to enlarging tifia , h.r .

7 proposes to authorize $750 million per year specifically for capitalizing state infrastructure banks .

currently , each state is allowed to use a portion of its federal surface transportation funds to capitalize a state infrastructure bank if it so chooses .

there is no separate federal freight transportation program in safetea , only a loose collection of freight - related programs that are embedded in a larger surface transportation program aimed at supporting both passenger and freight mobility .

most of the freight - related funding authorized by safetea is provided to the states through the regular highway programs , such as the surface transportation program ( stp ) .

safetea specifically dedicates minor funding to freight transportation improvements , leaving state dots and metropolitan planning organizations to make most decisions about the priority to be accorded freight .

a large , well - defined federal freight program would be a significant departure from safetea .

whether the federal government should make a more focused effort towards funding freight improvements has been one of the policy questions leading up to the reauthorization debate .

the senate bill ( map - 21 ) would create a new dedicated funding program for freight transport .

while the house bill ( h.r .

7 ) does not create a similar program , it does contain a number of provisions that significantly affect freight transport .

both the senate and house bills require the u.s. department of transportation to prepare and update a national freight transport plan , in consultation with stakeholders , that is intended to articulate the nation's priorities with respect to freight improvements .

also , provisions in both bills seeking to increase private - sector participation in financing transportation improvements , such as expanding the tifia program , could enhance freight carriers and shippers' roles in project planning and development .

budgetary pressures at all levels of government have increased concern about using resources for transportation projects as effectively as possible .

the speed with which transportation projects are delivered , and the role the federal government plays in the project delivery process , have received particular attention .

 ( see crs report r41947 , accelerating highway and transit project delivery: issues and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

both the house and senate proposals include provisions intended to expedite project delivery by changing elements of the environmental review process .

for individual highway and transit projects , activities included within that process may begin during the planning stage of project development and are generally concluded during the preliminary engineering and design stage .

the process involves preparing documentation and analysis necessary to demonstrate that all potential project - related impacts to the human , natural , or cultural environment are identified ; the effects of those impacts are taken into consideration among other factors considered during the decision - making process ( eg , economic or community benefits ) ; and compliance with all state , tribal , or federal requirements , applicable as a result of those impacts , is met .

depending on project - specific impacts , various environmental requirements may apply to a given transportation project .

those requirements may involve activities such as obtaining necessary permits from the army corps of engineers or the u.s. coast guard for a bridge reconstruction project ; determining activities necessary to mitigate project effects on a historic site in consultation with a state historic preservation office ; or identifying a project alternative that avoids adverse impacts to parks , recreation areas , wildlife refuges , or historic sites or structures .

for all proposed federal - aid highway or transit projects , some level of documentation , analysis , and review will be required pursuant to nepa .

under nepa , among other requirements , federal agencies must identify and consider the environmental impacts of a proposed action before proceeding with it .

before final design activities , property acquisition , or project construction can proceed , the fhwa or fta must approve the nepa documentation .

further , it is dot policy that all environmental investigations , reviews , and consultations be coordinated as a single process , and compliance with all applicable environmental requirements be reflected in the nepa document .

under this umbrella compliance process , the distinction between what is required by nepa and requirements identified during the nepa compliance process may be blurred .

recognizing that distinction is relevant in identifying root causes of project delay associated with , or effective solutions that may expedite , the environmental review process .

recent legislative efforts intended to expedite environmental reviews ( enacted under safetea and tea - 21 ) focused primarily on elements of nepa compliance , particularly requirements applicable to major , new highway and transit projects .

provisions applicable to the environmental review process in h.r .

7 and map - 21 also focus primarily on nepa compliance , but extend beyond nepa .

generally, the house proposal would involve more sweeping changes to the existing process than proposed in map - 21 .

provisions in both bills are broadly intended to expedite highway and transit project delivery by changing existing environmental compliance requirements .

a complex range of factors would affect the degree to which the proposed changes may accelerate environmental reviews , and ultimately project delivery , or may result in procedural changes that may actually slow project delivery ( eg , by removing mechanisms to coordinate the potentially complex environmental compliance process or by adding requirements to that process ) .

under section 1113 of map - 21 , the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) would be essentially re - written .

the cmaq program was established to provide funds for projects and programs which may reduce the emissions of transportation - related pollutants that may cause an area within a state to exceed certain air quality standards .

under the clean air act , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) was directed to set air quality standards for certain pollutants .

of relevance to transportation planning agencies were the resulting national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) established for ozone , carbon monoxide , and particulate matter ( distinguished as coarse and fine particulate , referred to as pm 10 and pm 2.5 , respectively ) .

a geographic area that meets or exceeds naaqs for a particular pollutant is considered to be in "attainment" ; an area that does not meet a standard is in "nonattainment. .

a "maintenance" area is one that was previously in nonattainment , but is currently attaining the naaqs subject to a maintenance plan .

the cmaq program was established to provide funds particularly for projects in nonattainment and maintenance areas .

under map - 21 , cmaq program goals , criteria specifying project eligibility , and requirements regarding partnerships with private entities would be largely unchanged .

however , proposed amendments to the cmaq program would significantly change how program funding levels are established and how those funds would be apportioned to and distributed within individual states .

since the early 1990s congress authorized specific annual cmaq program funding levels .

those funds have been apportioned to each state according to a formula based on the state's population and regional pollution levels ( eg , depending on an area's level of nonattainment for a particular pollutant ) .

map - 21's cmaq apportionment for fys 2012 and 2013 would not be a specific dollar amount .

instead , as discussed in " senate bill highway formula programs ," cmaq funds apportioned to each state would be tied to the amount of cmaq funds apportioned to that state in fy2009 plus 10% of the apportioned amount to stp funds for that year .

cmaq funds apportioned to each state would then be distributed within each state based on certain limitations and suballocations established under the new cmaq program .

current laws provide incentives to promote the use of alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles .

these incentives include tax credits for the purchase of plug - in vehicles and for the production of biofuels from cellulose .

 ( other credits , including a credit of 45 cents per gallon to blend ethanol into gasoline and a credit for the purchase of alternative fuel vehicles , have expired. ) .

non - tax incentives include credits automakers receive under the corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) program for the production and sale of alternative fuel vehicles .

various highway programs also provide non - tax incentives .

for example , safetea allowed states to permit low - emission and energy - efficient vehicles to travel in high occupancy vehicle ( hov ) lanes , although this authority expired at the end of fy2009 .

h.r .

7 would extend this authority through the end of fy2016 ; map - 21 would extend this authority indefinitely .

however , h.r .

7 ( section 1205 ) and map - 21 ( section 1510 ) , would also limit states' authority to exempt these vehicles if the hov lanes become "degraded" to the point that vehicles fall below minimum average speed — generally 45 mph — over 90% of the time during peak travel hours .

under current law , states must limit exemptions if the exempted vehicles cause the degradation , while under both the house and senate bills , actions to address degradation include limits to access regardless of the cause of the degradation .

to support the expansion of electric vehicle infrastructure , h.r .

7 ( section 1720 ) and map - 21 ( section 1509 ) , would allow highway funds to be used for new charging stations at existing or new parking facilities funded through the law .

map - 21 ( section 20009 ) would also amend the existing clean fuels grant program .

the current program authorizes grants to states and public transportation authorities to purchase alternative fuel , advanced diesel , and other low - emission buses .

map - 21 would amend definitions to include both buses and other vehicles , although at least 65% of the funds would be used for clean fuel buses and at least 10% for clean fuel bus facilities .

map - 21 would also explicitly include "zero emission buses" that do not directly emit carbon or particulate matter .

h.r .

7 has no comparable provisions .

the senate's public transit provisions are contained in division b of map - 21 and titled the federal public transportation act ( fpta ) of 2012 .

the bill authorizes $10.458 billion for federal transit programs annually for fy2012 and fy2013 , the current funding level , with $8.361 billion coming from the mass transit account of the highway trust fund and $2.098 billion from the general fund ( see table 6 ) .

the revenue section of the house surface transportation reauthorization ( h.r .

7 ) would rename the mass transit account of the highway trust fund as the alternative transportation account .

h.r .

7 would authorize $10.458 billion for fy2012 and $10.498 billion each year for fy2013 through fy2016 , with $8.4 billion from the alternative transportation account and $2.098 billion from the general fund ( see table 7 ) .

the legislation would also eliminate the use of motor fuel taxes for mass transit .

revenue in the mass transit account collected in fy2012 would be transferred to the highway account .

in place of revenue from the fuels tax , the bill would transfer $40 billion from the general fund into the alternative transportation account .

both the senate and house bills contain provisions related to passenger rail ( intercity and commuter ) and freight rail .

both the house ( h.r .

7 ) and senate bills would create a clearinghouse of drug and alcohol test results by commercial drivers in order to prevent drivers who have failed a test from avoiding penalties by switching employers .

both bills would also strengthen dot's ability to act against "reincarnated carriers" — bus companies whose operations have been suspended due to safety violations which then resume operations under a new name .

the two bills provide similar levels of funding for truck safety grants to states in fy2013 ( see table 10 and figure a - 11 ) .

currently , dot is prohibited from setting standards for transit agency operations .

although transit is among the safest modes of transportation , several fatal rail transit incidents in 2009 and 2010 led to questions about the effectiveness of state oversight of transit safety .

the transit safety section in map - 21 ( §20021 ) is similar to a proposal made by the administration in 2009 , and to the public transportation safety act of 2010 ( s. 3638 ) , which was reported out of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs in 2010 .

it would authorize dot to establish and enforce minimum safety standards for rail transit systems that are not otherwise regulated by dot ( eg , commuter rail operations are regulated by fra ) ; direct dot to establish a safety certification program , under which states could receive assistance from fta in overseeing rail transit operations ; and require that state safety oversight agencies be financially independent of the transit system ( s ) they oversee , to avoid the moral hazard of a transit agency having influence over the pay or staffing of its oversight agency .

it would authorize "not less than $10 million" for grants to states to carry out this program .

h.r .

7 would not authorize dot to set safety standards .

it would amend current law to allow dot to require that the federal urbanized area formula grant funds for a transit agency be spent on safety and state of good repair projects before any other projects received funding .

it would also direct dot to certify whether state safety oversight organizations have the technical capacity , resources , and authority to carry out their oversight responsibilities .

it would authorize $4.6 million annually for financial assistance to state safety oversight organizations .

map - 21 would authorize $400 million for each of fy2012 and fy2013 for transportation research and education ; h.r .

7 would authorize $440 million annually ( see table 11 ) .

both bills would direct the secretary of transportation to carry out a technology deployment program ; map - 21 includes a competitive grant program to accelerate its deployment .

both bills would authorize the secretary to conduct prize competitions to promote surface transportation innovations .

both bills would direct dot to conduct studies on improving many aspects of transportation , including safety , lifecycle cost analysis , reducing congestion , assessing infrastructure investment needs , and options for financing .

map - 21 would authorize 35 grants to be awarded on a competitive basis annually to university transportation centers for transportation research ; h.r .

7 would authorize 30 such grants annually .

both map - 21 and h.r .

7 contain a provision stating that it is the sense of congress that revenues in the harbor maintenance trust fund should be fully spent by the army corps of engineers for maintenance of waterside infrastructure ( such as channel dredging and maintenance of jetties and breakwaters ) .

currently , congress appropriates just over half of the cargo tax collected for this purpose .

house - passed h.r .

4348 , however , includes language that would require that the total level of budgetary resources provided for a fiscal year equal the level of receipts credited to the harbor maintenance trust fund .

the provision would restrict the use of such amounts to harbor maintenance programs .

this appendix contains 11 figures .

