the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) is responsible for administering a set of programs and activities that are primarily designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs .

these include several programs of rental assistance for persons who are poor , elderly , and / or have disabilities .

three rental assistance programs — public housing , section 8 housing choice vouchers , and section 8 project - based rental assistance — account for the majority of the department's non - emergency funding ( more than three - quarters of total hud appropriations in fy2015 ) .

two flexible block grant programs — home and community development block grants ( cdbg ) — help communities finance a variety of housing and community development activities designed to serve low - income families .

other more specialized grant programs help communities meet the needs of homeless persons , including those with aids .

hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) insures mortgages made by lenders to home buyers with low downpayments and to developers of multifamily rental buildings containing relatively affordable units .

most of the funding for hud's programs and activities comes from discretionary appropriations provided each year in annual appropriations acts .

this report explores the trends in hud's funding since fy2002 .

it begins with an explanation of the key budget concepts necessary to understand those trends .

it concludes with a discussion of factors that may influence hud's budget going forward .

the same factors that have driven the trends in funding for hud and its programs and activities over the last decade are likely to continue to influence future trends .

further , new factors that may influence hud's funding going forward have emerged , such as the budget enforcement provisions in the budget control act .

among the factors that may influence hud's future funding levels , the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) , as amended , may be one of the most important .

in addition to other provisions , the bca established enforceable discretionary spending limits .

it also resulted in a sequestration in fy2013 .

the sequestration process required automatic , largely across - the - board , spending cuts at the account and program level to achieve specified deficit reduction targets .

it took place on march 1 , 2013 , and resulted in a reduction of approximately $3 billion in funding for hud in fy2013 .

looking ahead , the lower discretionary spending limits contained in the bca , as amended , are meant to reduce the growth of discretionary spending over time .

as a result , in order to meet these lower discretionary spending limits , congressional appropriators will be required to provide less in appropriations , more in offsets , or both , across the federal budget and , presumably , also in hud's budget .

future cost growth in the section 8 project - based rental assistance account should begin to slow now that most of the old rental assistance contracts are on an annual renewal cycle , although inflation costs built into renewal contracts may result in the need for increased funding in the future .

cost growth in the section 8 housing choice voucher program is not expected to slow .

the cost of individual vouchers is largely driven by market factors .

the subsidies the program provides make up the difference between the low , income - based rents paid by tenants and the cost of housing in the private market .

if the gap between tenant incomes and private market rents grows , the cost of each individual subsidy also grows .

the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report citing these market factors as being the primary driver of recent cost growth in the section 8 voucher program .

additionally , the section 8 voucher program has seen growth in the number of people it serves , as policy changes have transferred families from other housing assistance programs ( such as public housing , section 8 project - based rental assistance , and section 811 housing for persons with disabilities ) , into the voucher program .

however , it is important to note that , even as more people are served by the program , far more families are eligible for assistance than are served , which means there are waiting lists for assistance in most communities .

congress has heretofore demonstrated a commitment to providing sufficient funding so that all section 8 project - based rental assistance contracts are renewed and every family that is receiving a voucher — roughly 3 million families , including individuals who are elderly or have disabilities and families with children — can continue to receive assistance .

as the cost of the programs has risen in recent years , due to the expiration of old pbra contracts and growth in the cost and number of vouchers , questions about the future of that commitment have arisen and interest has grown in reforms that could lead to cost savings .

however , to the extent that commitment remains , and assuming market trends continue and significant cost - saving reforms are not enacted , it is unlikely that the cost of the pbra and voucher programs will decline , and they may continue to increase .

as noted earlier , as funding for section 8 has increased , funding for all other hud programs has decreased , particularly , but not limited to , funding for hud's two largest block grant programs: home and cdbg .

this dynamic may be attributable , in part , to the way the different programs are perceived by funders .

unlike the section 8 voucher program , where a potential cut in funding can easily translate into a specified number of families losing their assistance , the implications of cutting funding for many of the other hud programs — particularly broad - purpose block grant programs — may be less clear to congressional appropriators .

this perception , to the extent it continues , may make the remaining hud programs more vulnerable to future funding reductions in a limited funding environment .

if the pressure to reduce funding continues , federal policymakers may re - evaluate hud's programs and activities and consider cost - saving program reforms .

such reforms may include program eliminations ; as noted in table 1 , some such eliminations have already occurred .

reforms may also include program consolidations .

program consolidations may include proposals to merge programs considered duplicative or proposals to expand the role or purposes of block grant programs to absorb existing or new programs or activities .

as noted earlier , increases in the amount of offsets available from fha receipts may have served to shield appropriations for hud programs from deeper cuts .

however , the future of fha is uncertain .

part of the reason fha has generated such large surplus receipts in recent years is because its business has grown as credit availability has tightened .

if housing credit markets fully recover , fha loans may become less desirable , which means less business and less offsetting receipts .

similarly , due in part to tightened credit availability , fha is insuring loans made to borrowers with higher credit profiles , setting stronger underwriting standards and requiring some borrowers to provide higher downpayments .

this means the loans that are being insured today are considered less risky than those fha has backed in the past .

to the extent that fha returns to serving a higher share of borrowers with lower credit scores in the future , as markets recover and those with higher credit profiles can more easily qualify for other types of loans , estimates of future loan performance might not be as strong and fha offsetting receipts could consequently decrease .

also , both congress and the obama administration have expressed interest in revisiting the role of the federal government in u.s. mortgage markets .

future reforms could serve to shrink the role of fha , thus shrinking its offsetting receipts .

finally , some budget experts and policymakers have proposed requiring the congressional budget office ( cbo ) to change the way that it accounts for fha in the budget .

while the details of the accounting change are complicated , it is generally understood that this change would mean that fha would generate fewer offsetting receipts , and it may end up needing regular appropriations .

any of these changes to fha and any resulting reduction in offsetting receipts could increase pressure to further reduce appropriations for hud's programs and activities .

