the provision of $8 billion for intercity passenger rail projects in the 2009 american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) reinvigorated the development of high speed intercity passenger rail ( hsr ) transportation in the united states .

while congress has been interested in hsr since the 1960s , the arra funding represented an enormous appropriation in historical terms .

the $8 billion was included in arra largely at the behest of president obama , and a subsequent announcement in april 2009 made it clear that the development of hsr is a priority of his administration .

another $2.5 billion was provided for high speed rail and intercity passenger rail projects in the transportation , housing , and urban development , and related agencies ( thud ) appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

since then , no additional funding has been appropriated for this program .

the fy2011 thud appropriations act ( p.l .

112-10 ) rescinded $400 million from prior year unobligated balances for high speed and intercity passenger rail projects .

other than the rescinded amounts , virtually all of the federal hsr funding made available over the past few years has been obligated and various projects are proceeding .

in most places , these projects entail upgrading existing lines owned and operated by freight railroads to allow somewhat faster passenger train speeds than are currently possible .

on the chicago - st. louis line , for example , funding is being used to increase the maximum speed from 79 miles per hour ( mph ) to 110 mph .

only the hsr project in california is using federal funds for tracks dedicated to passenger trains , on which speeds could reach 220 mph .

plans for hsr in some states , including florida , wisconsin , and ohio , were shelved by political leaders opposed to the substantial spending such projects entail , particularly for capital and operating costs .

some projects were stopped after federal funds were awarded ; these funds were subsequently redirected to hsr projects in other states .

debate on the merits of hsr may continue where projects are ongoing because these projects are often only small steps along the way to providing much faster service in an entire corridor .

a key aspect of the debate concerns prospects for the continued development of hsr if no more federal funds are forthcoming .

congress has long been interested in the potential benefits of high speed rail .

the first high speed rail act , in 1965 , contributed to the establishment of the nation's fastest rail service , the metroliner , on the washington , dc , to new york city portion of the northeast corridor ( nec ) , when that line was still under private ownership .

in the 1970s , ownership of the nec was transferred from the bankrupt penn central to amtrak , a government - controlled company .

at the same time , congress initiated the northeast corridor improvement program , which has funded major infrastructure improvements and , in the late 1990s , purchase of new high speed acela trains for amtrak .

congress has also supported research into various high speed rail technologies and studies of potential high speed corridors outside of the nec where speeds are currently slower ( see table 1 ) .

the federal railroad administration ( fra ) has calculated that congress provided a total of $4.17 billion to various high speed rail projects between 1990 and 2007 , an average of $232 million annually ( not adjusted for inflation ) .

most of that money went to improvements on the nec .

there have also been state and private sector efforts to develop dedicated high speed rail lines without federal support .

but it was only in february 2009 , when congress passed the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , that the federal government dedicated large sums to a national high speed rail program .

arra provided $8 billion specifically for intercity passenger rail projects , including high speed rail projects .

intercity passenger rail projects were also eligible uses for the $27 billion provided for highways ( at the discretion of individual states ) and for the $1.5 billion provided for discretionary grants for surface transportation projects "that will have a significant impact on the nation , a metropolitan area , or a region. .

another $90 million was provided for grants to states for intercity passenger rail projects in the fy2009 appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) , following a $30 million appropriation for such purposes in the fy2008 appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

in march 2009 , the obama administration announced that it would ask congress to provide $1 billion annually for high speed and intercity passenger rail projects .

it has requested that much or more in its annual budget proposals .

congress approved $2.5 billion for high speed rail and intercity passenger rail in fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) , but has provided no funding since then .

in addition , the fy2011 appropriations act rescinded $400 million from prior year unobligated balances of program funding .

there have been several other recent congressional initiatives supporting high speed rail ( see table 2 ) .

the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu ; p.l .

109-59 ) , as amended by the safetea - lu technical corrections act ( p.l .

110-244 ) , made $90 million available for maglev projects .

in the fall of 2008 , congress passed the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( division b of p.l .

110-432 ) .

among other things , this act created a high speed rail development grant program with a total authorization of $1.5 billion over fy2009-fy2013 .

the act also authorized additional funding for amtrak to address some of the backlog of maintenance needed to bring the northeast corridor up to a state of good repair .

it included a provision directing the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) to seek private companies to build and operate one or more high speed lines .

in evaluating these efforts , it is important to note that there is no single definition of what constitutes high speed rail .

the european union defines hsr as separate lines built for speeds of 250 kilometers per hour ( kph ) ( 155 mph ) , or existing lines upgraded to speeds of 200 kph ( 124 mph ) , or upgraded lines whose speeds are constrained by circumstances such as topography or urban development .

the u.s. government also has several definitions of what constitutes high speed rail .

fra has defined high speed rail as service "that is time - competitive with air and / or auto for travel markets in the approximate range of 100 to 500 miles. .

as fra notes , this is a market - driven definition which recognizes that , in choosing a transportation mode , travelers are more interested in total trip time than in top speed , and that travelers evaluate transportation modes not in isolation , but by how those modes compare to each other .

congress has , at different times , established high speed rail funding programs using different speed - based definitions and eligibility criteria ( see table 3 ) .

in its strategic plan for high speed rail , fra defined three categories of high speed rail corridors .

these categories differ in terms of top speeds , track characteristics , and service frequency ( see table 4 ) .

a map of the corridors defined by fra appears in figure 1 .

as these various definitions show , discussions of high speed rail in the united states can refer to trains briefly reaching speeds of 90 mph on tracks shared with freight trains or trains traveling over 200 mph for sustained periods on dedicated track , or both .

for clarity , in this report the term "higher speed rail" will refer to hsr on shared tracks with speeds up to 150 mph ( encompassing both fra's "emerging hsr" and "regional hsr" classifications ) , and "very high speed rail" will refer to hsr on dedicated tracks with speeds over 150 mph ( equivalent to fra's "express hsr" classification ) .

there are two options for developing high speed rail service ; the option chosen determines the level of high speed service that can be attained: upgrading existing track , signaling systems , and equipment ( eg , tilting trains ) to enable trains to travel somewhat faster over the existing rail network , or building new rail lines for the exclusive use of passenger trains enabling trains to travel at much higher speeds than are possible over the existing rail network , which is shared with freight rail .

the advantage of upgrading existing track is its lower cost ; a 2007 estimate put the average cost of such upgrades at around $7 million per mile .

in the 1990s amtrak ( and commuter railroads ) spent around $2 billion — an average of around $9 million per mile , in 2003 dollars — to upgrade the 229-mile north end of the northeast corridor ( connecting boston to new york city ) , including electrifying the route and replacing a bridge .

this reduced rail travel time between boston and new york city from 4 hours to 3 hours and 24 minutes — an increase in average speed over the route from 57 mph to 68 mph .

however , track upgrades also have important limitations .

one is that many aspects of the rail infrastructure , such as curves and at - grade road crossings , limit the potential speed improvements .

another is that almost all existing track is used for freight trains that operate at slower speeds than passenger trains .

freight traffic may constrain the speed of passenger trains , and fra regulations limit train speeds on routes that handle both freight and passenger traffic .

conversely , building new rail lines , including the train , the track , and the signal and communications network , makes much higher speeds possible .

one limitation of that approach is the cost , which is estimated to average $35 million per mile , or more in densely populated areas or difficult terrain .

in order to attain such high speeds , freight trains would have to be prohibited from using the track — which also means that freight operators would not be contributing to the construction or maintenance costs .

new lines can use either conventional steel wheel on steel rail technology or magnetic levitation ( maglev ) , in which superconducting magnets levitate a train above a guide rail .

the costs of hsr can be divided into two general categories: infrastructure costs , including the costs of building the line and maintaining it , and operating costs , such as labor and fuel , which tend to vary according to the amount of train service offered .

of the many high speed routes in the world , it is thought that only two have earned enough revenue to cover both their infrastructure and operating costs .

with decades of experience from around the world , conventional hsr can be considered a proven technology that potentially offers a convenient and comfortable way to travel between major urban centers .

however , hsr has come in for criticism based on concerns about its cost - effectiveness compared to travel by air or highway .

assessments of cost - effectiveness are likely to depend , in part , on the ability of hsr to provide various social goods whose benefits will not be reflected in passenger revenues .

the demand for hsr funding is potentially very great .

there are many potential projects , and if currently funded projects result in significantly increased train usage , additional projects are likely to be put forward .

for example , work now underway to improve service between chicago and st. louis may be followed by proposals to double - track the existing line at additional cost , and there have been studies for a future 220 mph line between the two cities at an estimated cost of $12.6 billion ( in 2012 dollars ) .

as noted earlier , the most recent cost estimate for phase 1 of the california hsr is now itself around $60 billion .

in 2009 , the house transportation and infrastructure ( t&i ) committee's proposal for surface transportation authorization included $50 billion over six years for high speed rail development , an average of $8.3 billion annually .

however , the house t&i proposal for high speed rail did not include a dedicated revenue source .

given that hsr projects can require 10 years or more to develop , funding projects in the face of changing political priorities will be difficult without a dedicated funding source .

otherwise , rail projects must compete with the programs for limited discretionary funding .

only about $15 billion of dot's funding came from the general fund in fy2012 , with the balance coming from motor fuel taxes dedicated to the highway trust fund .

providing another $1 billion in general fund money for high speed rail each year , let alone $8.3 billion , would require a significant increase in dot's general fund appropriation .

several options have been advanced to fund a high speed intercity passenger rail development program: dedicating a portion of the highway trust fund's revenues .

this approach is not promising , as the highway trust fund's outlays for highway and transit currently exceed its revenues .

adding a tax onto the tickets of intercity rail passengers , just as the airport and airway trust fund is funded in part by a tax on airline tickets .

in addition to raising the price of the rail travel it is meant to support , this proposal would produce relatively small amounts of revenue: a 10% tax on amtrak tickets in fy2011 would have raised $189 million , assuming that ridership would not have declined as a result of the price increase .

dedicating a portion of the revenues from proposed greenhouse gas emissions reduction programs to a rail trust fund .

to date , however , congress has not established greenhouse gas control programs that would raise significant sums .

using bonds , including tax - exempt bonds and tax - credit bonds , to fund development of high speed rail lines .

based on the revenue experience of high speed lines in other countries , it appears likely that the bonds would have to be repaid primarily by the federal or state governments , or both .

obtaining funding from the private sector .

the united states has not seen private investment in high speed passenger rail infrastructure in many decades ; the most notable proposal now pending , for a privately owned line between victorville , ca , and las vegas , is dependent upon a $4.9 billion federal loan , meaning that taxpayers could be at risk if the project fails to generate sufficient revenue .

proponents of hsr often cite the networks in japan , france , and other countries , with the implication that their adoption of hsr demonstrates the feasibility and desirability of building hsr lines in the united states .

this conclusion may not be warranted .

the motives that led other countries to implement very high speed rail lines are varied .

some , like japan and china , did so originally in part to meet the demand on already overcrowded conventional rail lines .

others did so to promote economic development in certain locations or encourage rail travel in the face of the growing role of car and air travel .

in europe and japan , hsr has succeeded in capturing market share from commercial aviation .

for example , rail has captured 85% of the air / rail market between tokyo and osaka ( a distance of 320 miles , with a fastest scheduled rail travel time of 2 hours 25 minutes ) , and 74% of the air / rail market between rome and bologna ( a distance of 222 miles , with a fastest scheduled rail travel time of 2 hours 44 minutes ) .

the relative efficiency of hsr as a transportation investment varies among countries , depending upon the interplay of many factors , including geography , economics , and government policies .

for example , compared to the united states , countries with hsr have higher population densities , smaller land areas , lower per capita levels of car ownership , higher gasoline prices , lower levels of car use ( measured both by number of trips per day and average distance per trip ) , and higher levels of public transportation availability and use .

also , there is a significant difference in the structure of the rail industry in countries with hsr compared to the united states .

in most of those countries , high speed rail was implemented by state - owned or state - supported rail infrastructure companies and is operated by state - owned rail companies whose principal business is passenger , rather than freight , transportation .

by contrast , in the united states the rail network is almost entirely owned by private companies specializing in freight transportation .

the history of hsr development in other countries reveals a recurring tension between economic analysis and political pressure in hsr development .

a country's initial hsr line is usually built in a location where the investment makes the most sense economically , in terms of population density and travel demand .

once that line is built , and if it is considered successful , the desire for similar benefits in other parts of the country can result in political pressure to build additional lines , even if economic analysis indicates that these are unlikely to be as successful as the initial line .

japan is perhaps the best example , in part because it has been building hsr lines for the longest time: its first hsr line was the most successful the world has seen , but subsequent lines have carried fewer passengers and had weaker financial performance .

for more information on the development of hsr in other countries see the appendix .

in considering further initiatives regarding hsr , there are a number of issues congress may wish to examine .

the first of these is the rationale for building hsr .

proponents of hsr contend that it provides a number of direct and indirect benefits to travelers and the general public , some of which may not be apparent until far into the future .

the extent of those benefits would depend largely on the level of ridership , which is difficult to forecast accurately and is likely to be influenced by the adoption or rejection of policies that would encourage people to use high speed rail .

other countries with high speed rail systems support hsr use through both incentives ( eg , widespread provision of a complementary mode , public transit ) and disincentives ( eg , high road tolls and high taxes on motor fuel to make automobile use more expensive ) .

without similar policies in place , hsr ridership in the united states may not fulfill expectations based on the experiences of other countries .

many of the benefits ascribed to hsr , such as improved mobility , reductions in imported energy , reduced greenhouse gas emissions , and so forth , would come from very high speed rail lines .

yet very high speed lines are expensive and potentially risky investments .

very high speed rail competes primarily with commercial aviation , which receives relatively little support from general treasury funds compared to the level of funding which would likely be required to develop and operate a high speed rail network .

and while very high speed rail might help to relieve airport congestion , congress is supporting improvements which are expected to significantly expand the aviation system's capacity .

should congress decide to continue federal support for hsr , it would need to address a number of issues related to program financing: should overall transportation funding be increased to include funding for hsr , or should some funding from existing highway and transit programs be redirected to hsr ? .

what is the desirable allocation of the costs of high speed rail development among federal , state , and local governments and the private sector ? .

congress specified that the $8 billion provided in arra would be provided without requiring any local matching funds , but the hsr development program authorized in the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( priia ) provided that the federal share of grants under that program should not exceed 80% .

most highway construction receives an 80% federal match , but the federal share of most rail transit projects is less .

how should federal funds be allocated among types of hsr ? .

one or two successful very hsr projects might demonstrate hsr's potential and build public support , but they could also consume large amounts of funding .

incremental improvements to passenger routes in many parts of the country might bring better rail service to more people , but would probably not achieve the high density , very high speed operations generally associated with the concept of hsr .

which hsr projects should receive funding ? .

in the hsr development program , congress required that projects be part of a state rail plan or the national rail plan in order to receive funding .

the fra is currently developing a national rail plan , but high speed rail development grants have been awarded prior to the completion of the plan .

the basis fra has used for selecting projects to be funded is not always clear .

nor is it clear whether fra's national rail plan will reflect the rail plans of the states or will lay out a national rail vision that may not coincide with individual states' priorities .

beyond the development costs , congress may wish to consider how to pay for maintaining and operating an hsr system over the long term .

passenger revenues may not be sufficient to cover the operating costs of high speed lines , including the maintenance of the new hsr infrastructure .

the federal government has not assumed long - term responsibility for infrastructure , other than that owned by amtrak , and has not supported train operations other than those deemed to be part of amtrak's national network .

measures to ensure adequate funding for train operations and infrastructure maintenance may be desirable to protect the federal investment in hsr .

following are brief accounts of high speed rail networks in selected countries .

except where otherwise indicated , these countries have lines currently operating at speeds of 186 mph or more .

japan japan may be the ideal country , geographically , for high speed rail ; its main island is relatively long and narrow , so that its relatively large population is concentrated in cities arrayed along a corridor .

japan opened its first high speed rail line , between tokyo and osaka , in 1964 .

that line was built to expand capacity in an overcrowded rail corridor .

from its inception it earned enough revenue to cover its operating costs , and reportedly earned enough money within its first few years to pay back its construction costs .

the success of the tokyo - osaka line encouraged expansion , and the japanese government has supported construction of other high speed lines .

as of 2011 , the high speed rail network was 1,665 miles in length , with more under construction .

currently , new lines are funded by public - private partnerships , with part of the funding coming from the now - privatized regional rail companies , and the rest from the national and local governments .

since 1987 , when the government began the privatization of japan national railways , all high speed lines have been operated by private companies .

current information on the profitability of individual high speed lines is not available , but all of the more recent lines have much lower ridership than the heavily traveled tokyo - osaka line .

france france opened its first high speed rail line in 1981 , between paris and lyon .

its high speed trains are referred to as tgvs ( trains à grande vitesse ) .

as of 2013 , the system has approximately 1,185 miles of high speed rail line , with more under construction .

because of the relatively low population density of france and the central role of paris ( the nation's capital and largest population center ) , the french high speed rail network has been developed as spokes radiating outward from paris .

regional governments are responsible for a significant share of construction costs .

the state - owned rail operating company , sncf , reports that its tgvs have taken the dominant share of the air - rail travel market in several of the high speed corridors , taking over 90% in the paris - lyon market ( with a tgv travel time of less than two hours ) and about 60% in corridors where the tgv travel time is around three hours .

germany article 87 of the german constitution makes rail transport a government responsibility .

germany opened its first high speed rail line in 1991 .

its high speed trains are called intercityexpress ( ice ) .

germany's network varies significantly from that of its neighbor , france .

due in part to the more geographically distributed political demands of a federal system of government and in part to a denser and more evenly distributed population , germany's high speed rail service has been developed to connect many hubs rather than centering on a single city .

germany's high speed trains also have more stops than those of france , whose system emphasizes connecting distant city pairs with few intermediate stops .

these considerations have led germany to put more emphasis on upgrading existing rail lines to accommodate higher speed service , and less emphasis on building entirely new high speed lines .

one result is that germany's high speed trains have longer average trip times than do those of france over comparable distances .

spain spain opened its first high speed rail line in 1992 .

like france , its population density is relatively low by european standards , and , except for madrid , the capital and largest city , which is located in the center of the country , the population is largely concentrated near the coasts .

spain's conventional rail network was built using a wider gauge ( i.e. , the distance between the two parallel rails ) than the international standard .

its high speed rail network is being built to the international standard , producing two separate rail networks .

many trains have special equipment to allow them to operate on both networks .

as of 2013 , spain had more than 1,900 miles of high speed track in service .

government spending on rail infrastructure ( both high speed and conventional ) surpassed spending on roads in 2003 .

the spanish government's ministry of public works issued a strategic plan for infrastructure and transport for the period 2005-2020 , which called for increasing the size of the high speed rail network to 6,200 miles by the year 2020 .

however , economic and financial issues have led to reconsideration or postponement of some of the projects in the plan .

china china is developing an extensive high speed rail system in part to relieve the pressure of both passenger and freight demand on its overcrowded existing rail system , in part to improve transportation connections between its different regions , and in part to promote the economy of less developed regions .

china is upgrading parts of its existing rail network to achieve speeds of 120-150 mph , and is building new dedicated electrified lines to enable speeds of 180 mph or more .

the national government has announced plans to have approximately 10,000 miles of high speed lines ( including both upgraded existing lines and new dedicated electrified lines ) in operation by 2020 .

china accelerated its hsr construction schedule in 2008-2010 , in part to stimulate the economy .

but in the wake of a high - profile collision between two high - speed trains that killed 40 people in the summer of 2011 , china acknowledged that it expanded the network too quickly , and slowed the pace of its hsr construction .

taiwan taiwan is an island nation slightly smaller than maryland and delaware combined , with a population estimated at around 23 million .

the high speed line runs 214 miles north to south along the western side of the country .

upon completion of its first segment in 2007 , it cut end - to - end travel times from 4.5 hours to 90 minutes .

the taiwanese government executed a build - operate - transfer contract with a private consortium , the taiwan high speed rail corporation , to develop the line at a cost of approximately $15 billion .

some 87% of the line had to be placed either in tunnels or on viaducts .

initial ridership projections were around 65 million passengers annually .

however , subsequent economic difficulties resulted in airline ridership dropping to 9 million in 2005 , and the opening of a new highway also increased the attractiveness of highway travel .

in 2009 , the taiwanese government took control of the taiwan high speed rail corporation , which was on the brink of bankruptcy .

in 2012 , the corporation reported a profit , and said ridership totaled 44.5 million passengers .

south korea the republic of korea is slightly larger in area than the state of indiana , with a population estimated at 49 million people .

korea began construction of a 255-mile high speed line in 1992 , connecting its capital , seoul ( population 10 million ) , with its main port , busan ( population 3 million ) .

this corridor serves 70% of the nation's population , and was previously serviced by a conventional line .

the project was substantially completed in 2010 , with a small amount of new track in central cities yet to be built .

end - to - end travel time was cut from 4 hours to around 2 hours and 20 minutes , and ridership was reported to be 140,000 passengers a day in 2011 ( about 51 million passengers , annually ) .

initial cost estimates were around $5 billion , but the ultimate project cost was around $20 billion .

the project was costly in part due to the challenging terrain ; nearly half the line is in tunnels and another quarter on viaducts , with only a quarter at grade .

