this report provides background information and considers issues for congress related to the worldwide proliferation of "precision strike" capabilities .

precision strike systems utilize projectiles , bombs , missiles , torpedoes , and other weapons that can actively correct for initial - aiming or subsequent errors by homing on their targets or aim - points after being fired , released , or launched .

some analysts state that "the united states took an early lead in exploiting the promise of precision - strike systems and the use of precision weaponry has given the united states a battlefield edge for twenty years .

however , these weapons are now spreading: other countries , and non - state actors , are acquiring them and developing countermeasures against them. .

as precision - strike capabilities spread , will the united states see its edge erode ? .

the fact that this ability of the united states to project power could also diminish , possibly leaving u.s. forces — and eventually the united states itself — increasingly vulnerable to precision weapons in the hands of its adversaries , will raise a number of serious considerations for members of congress .

such proliferation could lead to events such as the following: u.s. ground forces having to fight without the inherent safety of air superiority / supremacy , leaving them vulnerable to attack by enemy air forces for the first time in nearly 70 years .

u.s. naval forces being restricted from protecting the world's waterways by anti - access / area denial measures , such as those under development in china , which could directly affect the u.s. ability to support key allies and greatly affect international trade and commerce .

use of guided rockets , artillery , mortars and other missiles ( g - ramm ) against a u.s. expeditionary force's forward operating bases ( fobs ) .

the proliferation of precision strike creates potential issues for congress .

oversight issues include whether the department of defense ( dod ) is properly taking adversary precision strike weapons into account in its own plans and programs .

authorization and appropriations issues include whether congress should approve , reject , or modify proposed dod programs for responding to those weapons .

congress's decisions regarding combating the proliferation of precision strike in its oversight role could be wide - ranging , substantially affecting a variety of key factors , including capabilities and funding requirements ; service force levels and missions ; technology proliferation strategy ; forward - deployed basing considerations ; level of support given to allies ; strength of u.s. influence around the globe ; and the defense industrial base .

finally , should congress legislate requirements for dod to develop precision strike countermeasures and then provide funding for that research and development ? .

guided weapons , including the v - 1 cruise missile and v - 2 ballistic missile , but also the fritz x air - to - surface weapon , were first used in combat by germany during world war ii .

however , the united states took the lead in developing the precision weapons in the decades that followed .

indeed , many of the weapon systems associated with the information revolution — precision - guided munitions ( pgms ) , unmanned air vehicles ( uavs ) and sensors — date back to the 1960s and 1970s , and many saw their debut in the vietnam war .

between 1968 and 1973 , for example , the air force and navy expended more than 28,000 laser guided bombs ( lgbs ) in southeast asia , mainly against bridges and transportation chokepoints .

these quotes highlight the fact that precision weapons are not a new idea , even though they have gained prominence in relatively recent years .

in 2007 , center for strategic and budgetary assessments ( csba ) analyst barry watts released a report detailing the history of precision - guided weapons starting at the end of world war ii ( wwii ) covering the past six decades .

he notes , "the fact that early trials of weapons conceptually recognizable as guided munitions occurred so many decades ago suggest how long , uneven , and troubled an emergence many of these weapons have had , notwithstanding some early successes in actual combat. .

only recently , starting with the successful use by the united states during operation desert storm , has the world seen the kind of impact precision guided weapons can have .

the military services have accepted the development and employment of precision - guided weapons at both different rates and to different degrees .

for example , the u.s. navy began employing guided torpedoes during world war ii and , during the cold war that followed , the only unguided torpedo the usn's submarine community accepted into operational service had a nuclear warhead .

the u.s. army's tank community , on the other hand , relies to this day primarily on aimed fire from a high - velocity main gun for tank - on - tank engagements .

the fundamental reason for the wide variation in when different services and communities within those services embraced guided munitions appears to lie in the complexity of engagement dynamics .

the more dimensions in which the delivery platform , the target platform , or both , can maneuver , the stronger the tactical imperative to move to guided munitions .

in addition , the navy historically has faced a greater number of asymmetric threats requiring pgm technology in order to counter .

examples include the german u - boats , as well as the japanese kamikazes , which explains , to a certain extent , the fondness the navy has shown over the years for pgms and their associated technology .

effective pgms took some time to "arrive. .

"for the most part , the conventional guided weapons of the 1940s , 1950s , 1960s and early 1970s were too few , too inaccurate , too unreliable , or too susceptible to simple countermeasures to precipitate anything approaching a revolution of military affairs ( rma ) comparable to the rise of armored warfare ( blitzkrieg ) or carrier aviation during the interwar years 1918-1939. .

it was not until the 1991 gulf war that pgms as known today really came into their own .

jdams were not the only new technology to be used during the kosovo war .

modern uavs , such as the air force rq - 1a predator , were used for the first time for reconnaissance and surveillance .

today , as technology and tactics have evolved , those same uav platforms armed with such weapons as hellfire missiles are being used extensively in the war on terror .

hellfire missiles have multi - mission , multi - target precision - strike capability , and can be launched from multiple air , sea , and ground platforms .

"in november 2002 , an agm - 114a hellfire air - to - surface missile launched by a predator destroyed a car carrying six terrorists , including salim sinan al - harethi , al qaeda's chief operative in yemen and a suspect in the october 2000 bombing of the destroyer uss cole. .

more recently in september 2011 , armed drones reportedly operated by the cia successfully unleashed a barrage of hellfire missiles at a car carrying anwar al - awlaki , an american - born muslim cleric , and other top operatives of al qaeda's branch in yemen , killing mr. awlaki after a two - year manhunt .

the use of precision strike has influenced warfare to such an extent that military forces now have the capability of accurately targeting specific individuals .

there is also the inherent ability to limit collateral damage by picking the right - sized weapon for the respective target .

a further example of this capability is provided by a dod press release related to u.s. operations in afghanistan: coalition forces conducted a precision air strike august 21 , 2010 , targeting a taliban subcommander in charge of about 10 fighters and facilitation of foreign fighters from pakistan to nangarhar .

afghan and coalition forces tracked the commander as he met with at least 25 insurgents armed with assault rifles and rocket - propelled grenades in deh bala district to plan an upcoming attack .

the commander and a group of 15 insurgents eventually broke from the group and began walking toward an insurgent camp .

after positively identifying the commander and ensuring no women or children were present , coalition forces conducted the precision air strike against the commander... .

the security force estimated the strike killed 12 insurgents , possibly including multiple pakistani fighters from waziristan as well as taliban fighters .

no civilians were wounded or killed .

the global positioning system ( gps ) is a space - based satellite navigation system that provides location and time information in all weather , anywhere on or near the earth , where there is an unobstructed line of sight to four or more gps satellites .

it is maintained by the u.s. government and is freely accessible by anyone with a gps receiver .

some civilian receivers are controlled by the u.s. government via export controls .

all gps receivers capable of functioning above 18kms ( 11 miles ) and speeds in excess of 515 meters per second ( 1,000 nautical miles per hour ) are classified as weapons or munitions capable for which state department - approved export licenses are required .

the restrictions attempt to prevent use of the receiver in a ballistic missile , but the restrictions would not prevent the use in a cruise missile , which travels at much lower altitudes and slower speeds .

many experts believe the proliferation of precision strike has already begun and will continue to accelerate as more and more countries continue to develop and purchase precision strike weaponry .

the chart below was developed by james howe in association with the office of the secretary of defense net assessment summer study in 2010 titled "the growth and spread of the precision strike regime. .

the chart displays a snapshot of estimated worldwide precision strike capabilities between 2020 and 2040 .

according to the study , "this map offers a first - order estimate of the geography of the mature precision - strike regime .

it shows that the growth and spread of the precision strike regime is likely to be quite uneven .

category i countries are those that are capable of fielding all elements of a precision strike system .

category ii countries are those that are capable of fielding some elements of a precision strike system and purchase the rest .

category iii countries are those that will be forced to purchase most elements of a precision strike system .

category iv countries are those that will have commercial access to some precision strike munitions , particularly short range systems. .

in addition , some countries are developing capabilities aimed at countering u.s. precision strike dominance .

the following is a sampling of a few countries actively developing and / or purchasing precision strike weapons and / or countermeasures .

these three countries are a sampling and by no means a comprehensive worldwide overview .

pentagon planners have considered the potential impact of the loss of u.s. precision strike dominance on future military operations .

the observation that u.s. opponents will employ asymmetric capabilities and strategies to counter american conventional military superiority has been made frequently over the past decade .

this phenomenon is not new , however , nor is it limited to land warfare .

throughout the 19 th and early 20 th centuries rival nations sought to compete with british naval power while conserving their own resources by developing new weapons platforms , utilizing the inherent advantages of land - based firepower , and exploiting britain's dependence on overseas resources and extended lines of communication .

although these efforts often failed due to technological and political constraints , in several cases they are being revived today by existing and prospective u.s. opponents , many of whom have a greater incentive to compete asymmetrically than their predecessors given the scale of u.s. dominance , in addition to having access to capabilities far superior in range , accuracy , and endurance than those employed a century ago .

most importantly , however , although it appears increasingly clear that nations such as china and iran are pursuing these asymmetric capabilities and strategies , they are unlikely to be the only ones .

many observers believe that future adversaries are developing sophisticated new anti - access networks with long - range targeting capabilities , as well as advanced conventional missiles of greater range and precision that can attack both fixed land targets and ships at sea .

in future crises , these developments could put some of the u.s.'s most prized navy and joint - force assets at risk from far greater ranges than before .

in other words , these developments threaten to eliminate the virtual operational sanctuaries the u.s. navy - marine corps and joint team has enjoyed since the end of world war ii .

the following are a few theoretical examples of the impacts on u.s. expeditionary warfighting that can potentially occur as precision strike capabilities grow and proliferate .

this report focuses primarily on proliferating precision strike weapons systems and not the myriad issues associated with the ramifications of such proliferation or strategies to defend against them .

the following is a short list of possible further questions for congress to consider: 1 .

what are some asymmetric examples of combating the proliferation of precision strike ? .

what are the benefits and risks associated with targeted technology proliferation to u.s. friends and allies ? .

should the united states increase its building of allied / partner defense capabilities in countries near or surrounding aggressor state and non - state actors ? .

if so , what type of equipment , capabilities and to what extent ? .

2 .

in areas that exploit precision strike capabilities to build sophisticated anti - access / area denial capabilities , does the united states have enough surface and sub - surface ships to economically cripple the aggressor state through a naval blockade ? .

if not , what additional assets need to be acquired ? .

what is the cost of these additional assets ? .

what type of timeline is required ? .

3 .

what are the ramifications to current dod overseas and forward - deployed basing considerations due to the proliferation of precision strike ? .

during the build up to operation desert storm , the united states had access to numerous key foreign bases with little threat from iraq .

would that type of dynamic still be possible today ? .

what about 10 , 20 , or 30 years into the future ? .

if not , then what is dod doing to mitigate these threats ? .

does the dod need to readjust and develop a new strategy to conduct u.s. expeditionary warfare ? .

4 .

in regard to the developed and developing precision strike weapons possessed by china , how does that affect u.s. ability to support democratic taiwan ? .

what is the impact to the region if the united states appears inattentive to china's rapid military buildup ? .

conversely , what are the risks and implications to a bold and aggressive u.s. posture toward china ? .

how does the united states maintain the freedom of movement , trade routes , and global commerce that are key to the united states and world economies , as well as to u.s. national security ? .

