the process by which lower federal court judges are nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate has , in recent decades , been of continuing interest to congress .

during senate debates in the 112 th congress over judicial nominations , differing perspectives have been expressed about the relative degree of success of a president's nominees in gaining senate confirmation , compared with nominees of other recent presidents .

senate debate often has concerned whether a president's judicial nominees , relative to the nominees of other recent presidents , encountered more difficulty or had to wait longer , before receiving consideration by the senate judiciary committee or up - or - down votes on confirmation .

of related concern to congress have been increases in recent years in the number and percentage of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary and the effect of delayed judicial appointments on judicial vacancy levels .

this report seeks to inform the current debate in three ways: first , by providing a statistical overview of president obama's nominees thus far to u.s. circuit court of appeals and u.s. district court judgeships , and of any actions taken on their nominations by the senate judiciary committee and the full senate ; second , by using various statistical measures to compare the success to date of president barack obama's judicial nominees in advancing through the senate confirmation process with the success of the judicial nominees of the four most recent preceding presidents ( ronald reagan , george h.w .

bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush ) ; and third , by identifying various factors which might help explain differences or variations found in judicial appointment statistics across the five presidencies .

most of the statistics presented and discussed below were generated from an internal crs judicial nominations database .

other data sources , however , are noted where appropriate .

the statistics account only for nominations made by presidents reagan through obama to u.s. circuit court and u.s. district court judgeships established by congress under article iii of the constitution .

on march 12 , 2012 , an agreement was reached by senate majority leader harry reid and senate republican leader mitch mcconnell identifying 14 lower court nominations that would receive up - or - down senate confirmation votes by may 7 , 2012 .

the statistics provided in this report include senate confirmation of the 14 nominees subject to the march 12 , 2012 , agreement between the two senate leaders , the confirmation of two additional district court nominees on may 14 , 2012 , and the confirmation of paul j. watford to the ninth circuit court of appeals on may 21 , 2012 .

article iii , section i of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

along with the supreme court , the courts that constitute the article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. circuit courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

as mentioned above , this report focuses on nominations made by president obama and other recent presidents to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts .

outside the report's scope are the occasional nominations that these presidents made to the nine - member court of international trade or to the territorial district courts .

this section provides a statistical overview of president obama's appointments to u.s. circuit courts of appeals and u.s. district courts from january 20 , 2009 , through may 31 , 2012 .

it begins with a statistical summary of the current confirmation status of president obama's circuit and district court nominees .

it then examines the extent to which circuit and district judgeships in each of the nation's judicial circuits are filled by appointees of president obama .

it concludes by comparing the number and percentage of circuit and district court judgeships that were vacant at the start of the obama presidency with current vacancy statistics .

this section uses various statistical measures to compare the judicial nomination and confirmation processes at work during the obama and other recent presidencies .

it first compares the number and percentage of confirmed u.s. circuit and district court nominees from presidents reagan to obama .

it then provides , for presidents clinton to obama , a comparison of the number of circuit and district court vacancies inherited by each of the three presidents and the number of vacancies that existed on february 1 of their second , third , and fourth years in office .

it concludes by comparing selected features of the senate judicial confirmation process during the tenures of the five most recent presidents .

specifically , it compares , for circuit and district court nominees , ( 1 ) the time that elapsed from first nomination to first committee hearing ; ( 2 ) the time from first committee report to confirmation ; and ( 3 ) the percentage of confirmed nominees receiving senate roll call votes .

this report , it should be acknowledged , does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of a president's judicial nominees that would be appropriate for the senate to confirm ; on the average ( or median ) length of time that would be appropriate for , or needed by , the senate judiciary committee to process judicial nominations , or the senate to take final action on them ; or on whether confirmation of circuit and district court nominations should occur by roll call vote or voice vote .

similarly , this report does not analyze or take a position on the appropriate amount of time for an administration to select nominees for circuit and district court judgeships .

this final section identifies selected factors which may influence various statistical aspects of the lower court appointment process and variation in these statistics across presidencies .

the factors are organized and discussed in the approximate order in which they influence the selection and confirmation process from its initial to final stages: from ( 1 ) the appointment opportunities a president has during his tenure ; to ( 2 ) the process used by an administration for identifying , vetting , and selecting judicial nominees ; to ( 3 ) the processing of a president's judicial nominations by the senate .

the factors discussed below do not constitute an exhaustive list of independent variables that affect confirmation rates , and are not always readily quantifiable in terms of how they affect the selection and confirmation process for judicial nominees .

opportunities for a president to make circuit and district court appointments arise when judgeships are vacant or are scheduled to become vacant .

various factors influence the number of such opportunities a president will have during his tenure in office .

one such factor , at the start of a presidency , will be the number of judicial vacancies already in existence ( i.e. , the judicial vacancies a president inherits when taking office ) .

the number of inherited vacancies , in turn , will be influenced by various factors .

these include the frequency with which judicial departures occur and new judgeships are statutorily created in the years or months immediately prior to the new presidency ; the extent to which the outgoing president , during this same period , makes nominations to fill judicial vacancies ; and the rate at which the senate confirms these nominations before the new president takes office .

a large number of judicial vacancies created before the start of a new presidency might or might not result in many appointment opportunities for the incoming president .

much would depend on how prompt the previous president was in making nominations to fill newly created judicial vacancies and on how willing the senate was to confirm those nominations .

the different rate , for instance , at which the senate confirmed district court nominations immediately prior to the g.w .

bush and obama presidencies was one factor in how many district court appointment opportunities each president inherited upon taking office .

during the presidential election year of 2000 , 56 district court nominations were pending in the senate , of which 31 ( or 55.4% ) were confirmed .

in contrast , during the presidential election year of 2008 , 37 district court nominations were pending in the senate , of which 24 ( 64.9% ) were confirmed .

this variation contributed to differences in the number of appointment opportunities for presidents g.w .

bush and obama .

legislation creating new judgeships might also provide a new president with the opportunity to appoint a greater number of judges than he might have inherited .

legislation substantially increasing the number of authorized judgeships was enacted in 1978 ( omnibus judgeship act , p.l .

95-486 ) ; 1984 ( bankruptcy amendments and federal judgeship act , p.l .

98-353 ) ; and 1990 ( federal judgeship act , p.l .

101-650 ) .

the large number of district court vacancies , for example , inherited by president clinton contributed , in turn , to the relatively large number of district court confirmations during his presidency .

the large number of district court vacancies inherited by president clinton was , in part , the result of 74 new district court judgeships created by the federal judgeship act of 1990 .

over the course of a presidency , opportunities for a president to make circuit and district court appointments continue to be affected by the rate at which judges depart office ( by taking senior status , retiring , resigning , or dying ) .

during some presidencies , substantial new judicial appointment opportunities also have arisen because of the statutory creation of new circuit and district court judgeships .

both factors — judicial departures and the statutory creation of new judgeships — can , throughout a president's tenure , affect the number of persons nominated by the president and the number confirmed by the senate .

for example , a study found that , largely as a result of judges retiring from full - time service on the bench , president obama was confronted during his first three years in office with more judicial vacancies than his two immediate predecessors: 92 judges took senior status in the first three years of the obama administration compared to 72 and 70 in the clinton and bush administrations' first three years.... had district judges taken senior status in obama's first three years at the same rate they did under clinton or bush , there would have been almost no increase in vacancies... .

a variety of factors can affect how long a president takes to select a nominee to fill a judicial vacancy .

these factors include how many individuals are involved in identifying and vetting potential nominees , the specific selection criteria a president desires to emphasize in identifying nominees , whether a supreme court vacancy occurs , and , if so , the resources devoted to filling that vacancy .

a vacancy on the supreme court , for example , occurred early in both the clinton and obama administrations , and in both instances , while the administrations' searches were underway for a supreme court nominee , the presidents sent few lower court nominations to the senate .

the level of consultation between a president and a nominee's home state senators also can influence the president's pace in selecting nominees for judicial vacancies .

home state senators traditionally play an important role in the selection of district and , to a lesser extent , circuit court judges .

the pace might be slowed by communication or other difficulties between the president and those senators who represent states with vacant federal judgeships .

additionally , if the home state senators are themselves slow in recommending a candidate , or if they and the president cannot agree on a suitable candidate , the nomination of an individual to fill a vacant judgeship may be delayed .

another factor affecting a president's pace in selecting judicial nominees is the degree of priority he attaches to the process .

according to one account , for example , judicial selection may not have been a priority for the obama administration during the 111 th congress .

"the surest key to understanding the politics , processes , and outcomes of the obama judicial selection record in the 111 th congress," according to the account , is "the recognition that judges were not seen as a priority by those closest to the president .

judicial selection was not a major focal point in the [a]dministration's legislatively driven domestic policy agenda , nor was it seen as a 'legacy' issue. .

finally , the speed at which a president selects nominees might be influenced by the length of his administration's vetting process .

one recent study , for example , found that the time from vacancy to nomination during the first 14 months of the obama administration was longer than at the same point in the g.w .

bush administration , especially for circuit court nominees .

the greater time for president obama to submit nominees , the study said , was likely due in part to the pre - nomination candidate vetting by the aba's standing committee on the federal judiciary .

the g.w .

bush administration , the study noted , chose not to have its judicial candidates rated by the aba committee ( prior to submitting them to congress ) .

by contrast , the obama administration "brought the committee , and thus the additional 30 to 45 days typically consumed by its investigations , back into the pre - nomination stage. .

as in the nominee selection stage , the processing of judicial nominations by the senate from first nomination to final senate action is also affected by many institutional and political factors .

various studies , for example , have concluded that how long lower federal court nominees wait in the senate confirmation process , from first nomination to final action , is affected by such factors as the extent of ideological differences between the president and the opposite party in the senate , or of interest group opposition to certain nominees .

other factors cited were whether nominees had "champions" on the senate judiciary committee , the point in a session when nominations arrived in the senate , and the kind of ratings given nominees by the american bar association's standing committee on the federal judiciary .

some of these factors might also contribute to other features of the confirmation process discussed in this report , eg , whether a nominee is ultimately confirmed , and , if so , whether he or she is confirmed by roll call vote rather than voice vote .

the presence or absence of "divided government" ( with the president and senate majority of opposite political parties ) also might influence the processing of judicial nominations by the senate .

one study concludes , however , that whether the president and senate majority are of the same party or not , "presidents continue to select judges according to the same criteria and the senate confirms or does not confirm nominations according to the same criteria. .

divided government , though , may affect the procedural strategies used to oppose a president's nominees .

it has been suggested , for example , that senators "may rely on certain types of ... tactics during the confirmation process more or less depending on" whether the party controlling the presidency is also the majority party in the senate .

some factors might influence how quickly judicial nominations are processed at the committee level but not on the floor ( and vice versa ) .

for example , the role of the aba's standing committee on the federal judiciary in evaluating judicial candidates may be seen as a factor in the time that a circuit or district court nomination is pending in the judiciary committee ( but not in the time that a reported nomination is pending on the senate executive calendar ) .

if the aba committee's role is ( as it usually has been over the decades ) to evaluate judicial candidates before the president selects a nominee , then the aba's evaluation does not add to the time between when the president makes a nomination and the senate judiciary committee reports it .

if , however , the aba's role is ( as it was during the g.w .

bush presidency ) to evaluate only after a person has been nominated , then the time taken for that evaluation will add to the total time that the nomination is pending in the judiciary committee .

once a nomination has been reported from committee , the time taken until final senate action might be influenced by political or other factors not present ( or minimally so ) at the committee level .

even if a nominee is non - controversial and received bipartisan support from the committee , significant delays in filling a judicial vacancy might occur when a judicial nomination , after being placed on the executive calendar , is blocked for one reason or another from floor consideration by senators through the use of "holds," or objections to unanimous consent requests .

finally , another factor that might affect the processing of judicial nominations by the senate ( and , thus , judicial confirmation statistics ) is the blue slip policy of the senate judiciary committee , as set by its chair .

under this policy , which dates back to at least 1917 , the committee chair seeks the assessment of senators regarding various nominations for offices in their states , including those for u.s. district court judgeships , u.s. circuit court judgeships , u.s. attorneys , and u.s. marshals .

in practice , the chair sends a blue - colored form to both home state senators regarding judicial nominations in their state .

if a home state senator has no objection to a nominee , the blue slip is returned to the chair with a positive response .

if a senator , however , has misgivings about the nominee and wants to stop or slow committee action , he or she can decide not to return the blue slip , delay returning it , or return it with a negative response .

most chairs of the judiciary committee have required a return of positive blue slips by both a state's senators before allowing consideration of a nomination .

it should be noted , however , that the return of positive blue slips by both home state senators does not always lead to a relatively speedy confirmation .

in the 112 th congress , circuit and district court nominations have been reported by the judiciary committee only after home state senators returned positive blue slips for the nominations .

nevertheless , the average time in the current congress during which circuit and district court nominations have been pending on the senate executive calendar before being confirmed has reached historically high levels .

data used for figures 1 and 2 data used for figure 4 data used for figure 5 data used for figure .

