the first responder network authority ( firstnet ) is a federal agency that includes private sector and other non - federal representation on its board of directors .

firstnet was created by congress with provisions in title vi ( spectrum act ) of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) to ensure the deployment and operation of a nationwide , broadband network for public safety communications .

it is established as an "independent authority" within the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , part of the department of commerce .

in addition to establishing the structure and goals for firstnet , congress provided $7 billion for costs related to planning and deploying the broadband network , and a $135 million grant program to assist states with plans to connect to firstnet's broadband network .

these funds are provided from revenue realized through auctioning licenses for radio frequency spectrum , as designated in the act .

the anticipated cost of building and operating a nationwide core broadband network — and the interoperable radio networks that connect to it — is significantly in excess of the amount appropriated .

the act therefore provides for public - private partnerships with firstnet or with states , and for fees ( charged to states and other users ) to ensure that firstnet becomes self - sustaining .

to attract private sector partners , firstnet can offer access to its assets , including radio frequency spectrum capacity , in return for financial payment or other support .

firstnet holds a license for 20 mhz of broadband spectrum , assigned by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , as required by the act .

the act allows states that meet specified requirements to lease spectrum from firstnet and thereby negotiate their own partnerships that share spectrum in radio area networks for their state or region .

the act requires that firstnet deploy its network using the fourth - generation wireless technologies of long term evolution ( lte ) .

lte is a powerful cellular technology with industry standards that are consistently being upgraded to expand its capabilities .

lte is also a platform for commercial carrier - expansion into fifth - generation ( 5g ) wireless communications and the internet of things .

there are many challenges for public safety leaders and policymakers in establishing the framework for a nationwide network that meets state , local , tribal , and territorial needs for robust , interoperable emergency communications .

currently , for example , state emergency communications needs are typically met by separate networks using different technologies .

furthermore , each state has its own laws and procedures for building , managing , and funding communications infrastructure .

among the challenges facing firstnet is establishing a governance model that accommodates current investments and future needs of its clients without compromising the coherence of a national network .

firstnet officials face enormous pressure to produce a functional network in a timely manner , reflecting widespread concerns that public safety communications will not be adequate for response and recovery if a catastrophic national emergency occurs .

among the timelines that the winning bidder must meet is geographical coverage for 95% of the country within six months of receiving the contract .

this obligation suggests that participation of one of the four nationwide carriers ( verizon , at&t , sprint , t - mobile ) to carry firstnet traffic will be essential , even if the carrier acts as a subcontractor and not a lead partner .

agreements with rural carriers may also be used to meet rural coverage goals .

the winning contractor must guarantee priority access to public safety on the 20 mhz of spectrum capacity that firstnet brings to the table .

the requirements for buildout using firstnet spectrum ( referred to as band 14 ) are 20% coverage of population within the first year of operation and 60% coverage within two years .

also within six months , the winning contractor is expected to submit simultaneously to 56 states and territories , as required by the act , a plan for how firstnet would be deployed within that state or territory ( tribal areas are covered in state plans ) .

firstnet will make available $6.5 billion of its federal funding for the buildout .

the bidder must indicate the cost of each state's buildout within the context of its cost model .

states that successfully meet the criteria to build their own network within firstnet will be eligible for a proportionate share of the $6.5 billion , provided in the form of a grant .

the total cost to build out the network is estimated by most experts to be in excess of $30 billion over 10 years .

the successful bidder will sign a contract for 25 years , expiring in fy2042 .

annual payments totaling at least $5.625 billion over the period of the contract are required as a guarantee that firstnet will be financially self - sustaining .

on october 17 , 2016 , two of the bidders — rivada mercury and pdvwireless — were informed by the u.s. government that their proposals had been eliminated from consideration .

this leaves at&t as the one publically known bidder still in consideration .

on november 21 , 2016 , rivada mercury filed a lawsuit against the u.s. government in the u.s. court of appeals of federal claims over what rivada says is the illegal and wrongful exclusion of the consortium from the firstnet procurement process .

the lawsuit is expected to delay the contract award until march 1 , 2017 , at the earliest , although further delays are possible depending on the resolution of the lawsuit .

achievements since the firstnet board first met officially in september 2012 include a number of requests for information ( rfi ) , notably the september 2014 request for information for comprehensive network solution ( s ) .

this document proposed a comprehensive broadband network solution for firstnet that would reach from core network management requirements to include local area networks in many communities , as well as some devices used to access the network .

a second notice , issued by the department of commerce for comment on march 9 , 2015 , provided firstnet's perspective on the intent of congress in enacting language that allows states to build their own networks .

the discussion in the second notice also supplemented the public notice on statutory interpretations , issued in september 2014 .

a number of important issues are raised in these formal statements of proposed interpretation , including possible definitions of "public safety" and "rural. .

a third public notice concerning the definition of "public safety" was released after a firstnet board meeting on april 24 , 2015 .

also on april 24 , the proposed acquisition approach and the draft request for proposal ( s ) ( rfp ) were considered in a closed meeting .

the draft rfp builds on proposals from previous notices and rfis .

the planning process for 2015-2016 centered on circulating the draft request for proposal ( s ) and a final rfp .

firstnet concluded that the contract or contracts would be awarded through the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) process .

according to firstnet , "key goals are to meet the needs of public safety and to provide extensive coverage so federal subscribers and other public safety users can count on the network when they are on the job. .

network coverage includes deployable units , such as vehicles equipped to connect with the network , and local area networks operated by firstnet .

"incident commanders and officials will have local control over the network so , for example , they can assign users and talk groups and determine who can access applications. .

the underlying premise of the strategy is that the chosen network solutions will allow firstnet to "control and operate" national and regional core network infrastructure , radio access networks ( rans ) in states that opt in , as well as devices , applications , and other functions .

to achieve this level of coverage , firstnet's "acquisition strategy centers on maximizing the network's value to public safety while meeting its financial sustainability obligations under the act. .

firstnet is required to consult with regional , state , tribal , and local authorities regarding decisions such as those concerning the costs of the policies it formulates , as required in the law , including expenditures for the core network , placement of towers , coverage areas , security , and priority access for local users .

consultation will be through a state - selected coordinator as specified in the act .

appointment of an individual or governmental body as the single point of contact ( spoc ) is required as a condition of state participation and eligibility to receive grants established by the act .

every state has one or more agencies that plan for public safety , homeland security , and emergency communications .

to be eligible for grants from the department of homeland security , a state establishes a statewide interoperability coordinator ( swic ) to administer its statewide communication interoperability plan ( scip ) .

scips are written to conform with federal guidelines and requirements , such as the national emergency communications plan .

states may decide to use the existing swic as the required single point - of - contact or may choose to appoint a separate coordinator .

each state and other participants have appointed a coordinator to work directly with firstnet .

the coordinator ( spoc ) is responsible for managing firstnet activities in his or her state .

often this includes revising the existing scip to include broadband communications .

the governor of each state is to be notified by firstnet when it has completed its requests for proposals regarding construction , operation , maintenance , and improvement of a nationwide network .

the governor or his designee will receive the details of the proposed plans and notification of the amount of funding available to the state if it participates in the firstnet program .

the act only identifies two options for a state: join firstnet or build a statewide radio access network subject to the provisions of the act .

the act does not include specific provisions for a state that chooses to build its own radio access network without opting out of firstnet , although providing such an option may be within firstnet's charter .

a state might , for example , choose to build its own data management center or mobile access routers while also sharing firstnet's infrastructure for regional and national coverage .

the act also is silent on whether states may choose to opt out of the broadband network entirely , choosing neither to join firstnet nor to build a broadband network on the frequencies assigned to firstnet .

some states may prefer to concentrate their resources on improving mission - critical voice networks and acquire broadband access from a commercial provider or through other means .

firstnet , through its partners , intends to provide service in all states , even if a state chooses not to be a customer or otherwise participate in the network .

the spectrum act specifies that a state that chooses to build its own radio access network must submit an alternative plan for construction , operation , maintenance , and improvement of the radio access network within the state .

the state has 90 days to agree to participate or to notify firstnet , the ntia , and the fcc of its intent to deploy its own part of the radio access network , and an additional 180 days to provide its plan to the fcc .

the state must demonstrate to the fcc , which the law requires to review the plan , that its planned radio access network would comply with minimum technical requirements and be interoperable with firstnet .

if a state's plan is approved it will be eligible to apply for a grant , administered by the ntia , that will be funded from the network construction fund created by the act .

the amount available may be less than what would have been provided if the state had opted in to the firstnet program , because the grant will be applied only toward building the radio access network and may be subject to matching grant requirements .

approval of the grant is contingent on meeting additional requirements established by the ntia , including sustainability , timeliness , cost - effectiveness , security , coverage , and services that are comparable to firstnet .

the state would be required to pay a user fee for access to firstnet's core network .

it would not be permitted to enter commercial markets or lease access to its network except through a public - private partnership .

firstnet has determined that any revenue to the state from a partnership must be used only for costs associated with its participation in firstnet .

if a state's plan meets fcc and ntia requirements , then the ntia may approve lease authority for firstnet to grant a sub - license to a state , to operate on some portion of the firstnet spectrum .

on july 19 , 2016 , the ntia published notice of its proposal for evaluating state alternative plan programs for states that wish to opt out of firstnet .

if a state's plan has met the initial approval of the fcc , it must then demonstrate to the ntia that it meets technical and financial requirements .

to the general parameters provided in the spectrum act , the ntia has added several specific criteria for states that parallel requirements for contractors , including: the state alternative plan proposal submission and the related request for a spectrum lease will be treated as a single request for a grant ( even though the state may choose not to request a grant as described in the spectrum act ) in accordance with provisions of the federal grants and cooperative agreement act of 1977 ( p.l .

95-224 ) .

the forthcoming federal funding opportunity announcement will include additional details regarding the technical capabilities required of a state , in addition to those published in the july 19 notice .

states must submit their application to the ntia within 60 days of fcc approval of the alternative plan .

state network plans must adhere to the same policies as those applied to firstnet .

states will be required to provide information on how it will manage its radio access network , including , for example , its staffing plan and budget documents .

states must disclose partnership agreements and address funding risks ; ntia may require surety bonds to ensure network construction is completed .

deadlines for the state plan must match those presented in firstnet's plan for the state .

a state plan that relies on new buildouts of the network ( "greenfield" ) might not qualify as cost effective .

in evaluating the cost - effectiveness of a state's alternative plan , ntia will include as a factor its assessment of the value of cross - border economies of scale that may be lost .

the following discussion focuses on key statements from firstnet that seem to indicate the agency's current plans for state , tribal , territorial , and local participation in the network .

firstnet may later choose to alter its plans .

firstnet's deployment strategy reportedly will include state - based enodeb's in firstnet's core services , thereby bringing the entire 20 mhz spectrum license under the full control of firstnet and its federal contractors .

this decision , if implemented , represents a change in an earlier statement that proposes including the enode b as part of the radio area network .

provide local area network capacity and connections as an extension of firstnet , limiting state authority to providing fill - in capacity for some under - served areas .

assign to firstnet contractors the responsibility of identifying additional partners or subcontractors to act under the authority of the contractor ; this might include , for example , negotiating an agreement with a local power company for access to its infrastructure .

assign negotiations for access to existing state , local , or tribal infrastructure to contractors , to be pursued after the contract has been issued .

extend coverage to rural areas where there is currently little or no commercial service through new , federally funded build - out to the commercial networks of partners chosen through the rfp process .

a major goal of this network design is to maximize the value of spectrum by capturing its full value , nationwide , in order to provide sufficient funding for rural coverage .

firstnet therefore believes that allowing states to build their own rans "potentially takes with it subscriber fees and / or excess network capacity fees that would have helped fund the firstnet network in all other states. .

apparently not included in firstnet's planning process is an analysis of the costs to be assumed by states as a consequence of its business plan .

these costs include the continued operation and possible expansion of state and local lmr voice networks ; the cost of integration of lmr and broadband infrastructure ; the costs of forfeiting to firstnet the potential economies of scale in network construction and operation ; and the cost of lost opportunities for competition and innovation in wireless services at the state and local level .

it remains to be seen what the winning contractor to deploy firstnet will offer to states to offset costs that states are likely to bear in order to participate in firstnet .

the ntia , in consultation with firstnet , has responsibility for carrying out two grant programs: the state and local implementation grant program ( sligp ) ; and grants from the network construction fund to states that are permitted to build their own radio access networks .

the spectrum act requires that , before the end of fy2022 , the government accountability office ( gao ) is to recommend to congress what actions should be taken in regard to the ending of firstnet's authority , mandated to occur in 2027 .

additionally , at the request of the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , gao has prepared an evaluation of firstnet's organization , including business decisions contained in the request for proposal ; use of commercial , federal , state , local , and tribal infrastructure in deploying the network nationwide ; and financial sustainability .

gao presented preliminary findings as testimony at a commerce committee hearing on march 11 , 2015 , and issued a final report on some of these issues on april 28 , 2015 .

in testimony , gao summarized the progress firstnet has made in meeting its responsibilities but noted that it had not put in place a number of measures that gao considers important .

notably , gao found that firstnet has not fully assessed the risks associated with its planning efforts ( such as conflict of interest ) ; has not established standards of conduct ; and is not fully evaluating the information from five "early builder" projects .

the full report expands on the information provided in testimony .

the full report includes , for example , a timeline and other information regarding the development of firstnet ; more details about the "early builder" program ; and some insight into firstnet's planning process .

regarding the interaction of planning and the cost of building the network , gao's comments include these observations: "as part of its planning and market research , firstnet has developed a cost estimate for its public safety network that met most of the best practices against which we evaluated it. .

"firstnet's cost estimate , including the assumptions it is based on , are not public because of the highly sensitive nature of the information it contains. .

"we did not assess firstnet's cost estimate against all the characteristics established in our cost estimating and assessment guide .

specifically , we did not assess whether firstnet's estimate was 'credible' or 'accurate' because the estimate and its associated documentation were deemed business sensitive. .

"we did not analyze the quantitative input and output of the cost model because the data included procurement sensitive information , and we would therefore be unable to report our findings in a public report. .

"therefore we cannot say if the estimate is in line with the credible and accurate characteristics of our cost estimating and assessment guide. .

criticism by a member of the board of firstnet , in april 2013 — regarding a lack of transparency in information provided to the board and other issues — led to a review of practices by the office of inspector general ( oig. ) .

the primary focus of the review had two main objectives , to determine whether the department of commerce ( doc ) had adequate processes in place to ensure that firstnet board members properly filed financial disclosures and identified potential conflicts of interest ; and used appropriate contracting processes and requirements .

the overall finding is that some monitoring procedures were inadequate , including , for example , a finding that "firstnet contracting practices lacked transparent award competition , sufficient oversight of hiring , adequate monitoring , and procedures to prevent erroneous costs.... " in its review , the oig looked at the roles of the ntia , the doc office of general counsel , and two agencies within doc that were assigned direct responsibilities to assist firstnet ; the bureau of the census and nist were asked to award and manage contracts with outside entities to provide assistance to firstnet .

the oig did not specifically review activities of the ntia office of public safety communications , created to assist firstnet with administrative tasks , including staffing .

the oig review determined that nearly $11 million had been inappropriately spent , much of it going for consulting work that did not meet contractual definitions of deliverables .

the oig referred to this consulting work as "work products" and questioned the expenditures .

the doc responded that it conducted relevant contracting activities in accordance with federal procurement laws and regulations and monitored performance , and that the contracts produced "first - rate feasibility research , technical analysis , strategic planning , and outreach services from highly specialized consultants , whose work product has laid the groundwork for executing firstnet's mission. .

the oig made recommendations to the secretary , the general counsel , the chair of firstnet , and the doc's senior procurement official regarding various procedures and responsibilities .

a joint response from firstnet , the ntia , and the general counsel concurred with the specific recommendations from the oig , although not all the findings .

in general , they defended their actions in the context of unique requirements and time constraints in setting up firstnet .

the oig review covered a limited range of issues linked to oversight procedures .

although it did not go into detail , the oig noted "inconsistent administration" and several instances of significant time lags in the performance of doc officials .

for example , "6 months after the board began regular meetings , senior ntia and office of general counsel officials were still debating [the monitoring] of potential conflicts of interest. .

oig found that most of the lapses occurred in the year after the firstnet board held its first official meeting in september 2012 .

the review observed that "neither a business plan nor a network plan were completed or delivered to firstnet during the 1-year performance period of the contracts.... " the oig has established a team to audit and evaluate firstnet activities .

additionally , it operates a fraud , waste , and abuse hotline for the department of commerce , which has received complaints regarding firstnet .

the oig conducts follow - up on these complaints .

testimony at a senate hearing on june 21 , 2016 , provided an update of oig oversight of firstnet activities .

oig reported ongoing improvements in implementing internal controls and risk assessment at firstnet .

testimony highlighted several short - and long - term risks for firstnet , such as the need for successfully managing the choice of contractor ; setting competitive prices ; and effective consultation with state and other authorities that are firstnet's target customer base .

following is a discussion of other major provisions in the act that pertain to public safety communications , including provisions to improve the nation's 911 emergency call system .

among federal agencies designated by the act to provide consultation and support are the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , and the office of emergency communications ( oec ) .

the fcc manages commercial and non - federal spectrum use , including spectrum allocated to public safety .

the ntia manages federal spectrum resources and , along with nist , is an agency within the department of commerce .

oec is part of the office of cybersecurity and communications , department of homeland security .

legislation in the 115 th congress addressing public safety communications issues includes the following .

h.r .

588 ( pallone ) .

securing access to networks in disasters act .

directs the fcc to conduct a study on network resiliency during times of emergency .

requires the fcc to submit within three years a study on the public safety benefits and technical feasibility and cost of ( 1 ) making telecommunications service provider - owned wifi access points , and other communications technologies operating on unlicensed spectrum , available to the general public for access to 9-1-1 services , without requiring any login credentials during times of emergency when mobile service is unavailable ; ( 2 ) the provision by non - telecommunications service provider - owned wifi access points of public access to 9-1-1 services during times of emergency when mobile service is unavailable ; and ( 3 ) other alternative means of providing the public with access to 9-1-1 services during times of emergency when mobile service is unavailable .

also amends the stafford act to include all communications providers as essential service providers during federally declared emergencies .

introduced january 17 , 2017 ; passed by house ( voice vote ) on january 23 , 2017 .

s. 102 ( cantwell ) .

securing access to networks in disasters act of 2017 .

directs the fcc to conduct a study on alternative access to 9-1-1 services during times of emergency .

requires the fcc to submit within three years a study on the public safety benefits and technical feasibility and cost of ( 1 ) making telecommunications service provider - owned wifi access points , and other telecommunications service provider - owned communications technologies operating on unlicensed spectrum , available to the general public for access to 9 – 1 – 1 services without requiring any login credentials during times of emergency when mobile service is unavailable ; ( 2 ) the provision by non - telecommunications service provider - owned wifi access points of public access to 9-1-1 services during times of emergency when mobile service is unavailable ; and ( 3 ) other alternative means of providing the public with access to 9-1-1 services during times of emergency when mobile service is unavailable .

directs gao to conduct a study on how executive departments can better ensure essential communications services remain operational during times of emergency ; any legislative matters congress could consider to help promote the resiliency of essential communications services ; and whether a nationwide directory of points of contact among providers of essential communications services is needed to facilitate the rapid restoration of such services damaged during times of emergency .

also amends the stafford act to expand list of essential service providers during federally declared emergencies to include all communications providers .

introduced january 11 , 2017 ; ordered to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute favorably by the committee on commerce , science , and transportation on january 24 , 2017 .

h.r .

582 ( gohmert ) .

kari's law act of 2017 .

amends the communications act of 1934 to require multi - line telephone systems to have a configuration that permits users to directly initiate a call to 9-1-1 without dialing any additional digit , code , prefix , or post - fix .

introduced january 17 , 2017 ; passed by house ( 408-0 ) on january 23 , 2017 .

s. 123 ( klobuchar ) .

kari's law act of 2017 .

amends the communications act of 1934 to require multi - line telephone systems to have a default configuration that permits users to directly initiate a call to 9-1-1 without dialing any additional digit , code , prefix , or post - fix .

ordered to be reported favorably by the committee on commerce , science , and transportation on january 24 , 2017 .

