during the spring of 2011 , the secretaries of energy , agriculture , and the navy entered into a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to "assist the development and support of a sustainable commercial biofuels industry. .

the objective is the "construction or retrofit of multiple domestic commercial or pre - commercial scale advanced drop - in biofuel plants and refineries. .

the refineries would have the capability to produce advanced biofuels as "drop - in" replacements for petroleum - based fuels .

drop - in fuels would be able to substitute for standard petroleum products without alteration to ship or aircraft engines , meet military specifications at a price competitive with petroleum , be readily accessible at geographically diverse locations , and have no significant impact on the supply of agricultural commodities for the production of food .

through this and other undertakings , the navy intends to demonstrate that it can reduce its dependence on petroleum - based fuels .

in accordance with the mou , the navy proposes to use some of the authorities of the defense production act ( dpa ) of 1950 ( 50 u.s.c .

appx §2061 et seq .

 ) , as amended , to develop a domestic industrial capacity and supply of biofuel .

the navy plans a feasibility demonstration of drop - in biofuels with a "green strike group" fleet exercise by the end of 2012 composed of nuclear vessels and ships powered in part by biofuel , followed by a 2016 "great green fleet" exercise composed of nuclear ships , and surface combatants and aircraft powered in part by biofuel .

the dpa grants various authorities to the president — subsequently delegated to certain cabinet secretaries — that they may use to support the domestic production of alternative energy sources .

congressional actions on the budget requests for mou funding would help define the parameters by which agencies acting under the dpa may support the domestic development of alternative energy sources as well as how the navy's support of such sources will evolve .

the current debate in congress regarding dpa is whether its authority should extend to developing an industrial capacity for biofuel .

to better the understanding of the potential benefits and drawbacks to the navy the following discussion provides a background on the navy's fleet , fuel requirements , and fuel spending .

the navy , and later dod , have undertaken a number of past initiatives for securing its fuel supply , some under the authority of dpa .

the navy successfully transitioned from exclusive reliance on petroleum in 1955 when it commissioned the uss nautilus , the world's first nuclear - powered submarine .

in past hearings on renewing the dpa , interest in the viability of nuclear - powered navy and a nuclear power industry were part of the debate .

the navy currently lists 395 ships in its inventory — 36 nuclear powered warships , 50 conventional warships , and the remaining consisting of various auxiliary and civilian operated military sealift command ( msc ) ships ( of which 14 are oil tankers — "oilers" ) .

conventional ships consume diesel fuel marine ( dfm or nato equivalent f - 76 , also referred to as ship's bunker fuel ) which has been used in all shipboard propulsion plants ( diesel , gas turbine , and steam boiler ) since 1975 .

naval aircraft consume primarily jp - 5 jet fuel ( mil - dtl - 5624 u or nato code f - 44 ) developed for use in military aircraft stationed aboard aircraft carriers where the risk of fire is a great concern , particularly in the confined spaces of the hanger deck .

the fuel is kerosene - based , and has a relatively higher flash point ( 140 "f ) than other aviation turbine fuels ( commercial jet a and or military jp - 8 ) .

jp - 5 is also suitable for use as ship turbine fuel .

to date , the navy has certified the f - 18 super hornet , the f - 18 legacy hornet , the mv - 22 osprey , and the mh - 60s seahawk to operate on hrj - 5 , a 50 / 50 blend of hydrotreated renewable fuel ( hrj ) and conventional jp - 5 .

hydrotreated refers to the process of cracking vegetable or animal oil through the addition of hydrogen into kerosene - range jet fuel .

the process is similar to refining processes for upgrading petroleum .

department of defense ( dod ) fuel consumption varies from year to year in response to changes in mission and the tempo of operations .

in fy2011 , dod consumed 124.3 million barrels of refined petroleum products domestically , and another 96.6 million barrels overseas .

in contrast , the united states consumed slightly more than 6 billion barrels of refined petroleum products during calendar year 2011 , of which dod domestic consumption represented roughly 2% .

dod overseas spending on ships' bunker fuel exceeded domestic spending — $2.7 billion for 7.5 million barrels from 73 ports in 50 countries , versus $239 million for 2.4 million barrels from 67 domestic ports .

the defense logistics agency – energy ( dla - e ) purchases fuel for all of dod's services and agencies , both in the continental united states ( conus ) and outside ( oconus ) .

in practice , dla - e typically awards fuel contracts based on the lowest cost to the point of delivery , typically for lengths of one year in a one - step process under the defense working capital fund ( dwcf ) .

it internally transfers ( sells ) the fuel to its dod customers with a small markup to cover its operational costs .

dod customers in turn pay dla - e through their annual appropriations for operation and maintenance ( o&m ) .

the dwcf permits dla - e to take advantage of price breaks for large quantity purchases , and in most years provide dod customers a stabilized price for all products during that fiscal year .

dod has the capability to meet contingency fuel needs through the petroleum war - reserve stock that dla - e maintains at its defense fuel supply points throughout the united states , as well as abroad .

dod relies on both nato partners and alliances with regional partners to supply fuel for overseas operations .

dla - e authority to procure fuel extends from authority originally granted to the navy .

under 10 u.s.c .

§7229 ( purchase of fuel ) , "... the secretary of the navy may , in any manner he considers proper , buy the kind of fuel that is best adapted to the purpose for which it is to be used. .

section 7229 superseded 34 u.s.c .

§580 which had been interpreted as authorizing the armed services petroleum purchasing agency to negotiate contracts for the purchase of fuel , not only when acting as a procuring activity for the navy , but also when filling the consolidated fuel requirements of the armed forces .

however , dla - e now relies on the general procurement authority under 10 u.s.c .

§2304 ( contract: competition requirement ) , since this gives dod the authority to buy almost any kind of supply or service .

dod projects that its budget authority and outlay for fuel will decline 3% from the fy2013 base year and remain essentially level through fy2017 .

for the period fy2008 through fy2010 , the navy consumed about 10.9 million barrels of jp - 5 annually .

however , over the same fy2008-fy2010 period , navy fuel spending declined from $4.75 billion to $3.73 billion .

in fy2011 , dla - e spent $1.57 billion to purchase 12.6 million barrels of ( navy ) jp - 5 jet fuel .

in 2011 , the u.s. government purchases of f - 76 military - grade diesel ranged from $2.19 to $2.75 per gallon , and jp - 5 jet propellant ranged from $1.55 to $2.87 per gallon .

in 2009 , dla awarded small contracts for hydrotreated renewable fuel ( hrj - 5 jet fuel ) that ranged in price from $66 to $149 per gallon .

in late 2011 , the navy was able to purchase biofuel for roughly $26 per gallon in a bulk procurement of 450,000 gallons .

congress has previously found it in the interest of national defense preparedness for the federal government to assure some level of industrial capacity to produce both conventional and synthetic fuels .

in the early 20 th century , congress set aside the ( now depleted ) naval oil reserves and oil shale reserves .

world war ii and korean war concerns over fuel shortages led to congressionally authorized programs for developing synthetic fuels that lead up to authorizing a synthetic fuels corporation during the 1970s arab oil embargoes .

in more recent legislation , congress has directed dod to develop a program to accelerate the commercial development of strategic unconventional fuels ( from coal , oil shale or tars sands ) , examine the military utility of alternative and synthetic fuels , and study how to reduce their life - cycle emissions .

the defense production act of 1950 ( dpa ) , as amended , provides the president an "array of authorities to shape national defense preparedness programs and to take appropriate steps to maintain and enhance the domestic industrial base" [italics added] .

as defined , "national defense" establishes the scope of all dpa authorities , and the use of any authority under the dpa must inherently be interpreted to "promote , support , or otherwise be deemed needed or essential for the national defense. .

"national defense" as defined by statute means: programs for military and energy production or construction , military or critical infrastructure assistance to any foreign nation , homeland security , stockpiling , space , and any directly related activity .

such term includes emergency preparedness activities conducted pursuant to title vi of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act [42 u.s.c .

§5195 et seq. .

and critical infrastructure protection and restoration .

therefore , the purpose of the dpa authorities extends beyond shaping the u.s. military preparedness and capabilities , as the authorities may be used to enhance and support domestic preparedness , response , and recovery from natural hazards , terrorist attacks , and other national emergencies , among other issues .

the full purpose of the dpa is discussed in the "declaration of policy" issued as part of the statute .

the dpa has been amended and reauthorized numerous times since its original enactment because the statute includes a sunset provision that has required periodic reauthorization and offered the opportunity for amendment .

congress passed the dpa in 1950 and has thus far reauthorized it 17 times , in 1951 , 1952 , 1953 , 1955 , 1974 , 1975 , 1977 , 1980 , 1984 , 1986 , 1991 , 1992 , 1995 , 2001 , 2003 , 2008 , and 2009 .

the authorities provided in the dpa , with few exceptions , are set to expire on september 30 , 2014 .

on march 30 , 2011 , president obama directed the secretaries of agriculture , energy and the navy to "investigate how they can work together to speed the development of "drop - in" biofuels substitutes for diesel and jet fuel" as one part of a broader plan to develop and secure the united states' energy resources .

three months after the challenge was issued , the department of the navy ( navy ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) issued a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) to , in part , "assist the development and support of a sustainable commercial biofuels industry. .

all three federal agencies have entered into similar mous before , with each other and / or with other nations , to spur the development of biofuels .

this mou is unique in that it focuses solely on commercial - scale development of advanced biofuels and brings in the primary federal agencies involved in the advanced biofuel pathway .

an advanced biofuel is essentially any type of biofuel that is non - corn starch ethanol ( eg , algae - based biofuel , biomass - based diesel , cellulosic ethanol ) .

there are three principal federal agencies involved with advanced biofuel research , development , and production .

typically , congress views usda as the federal agency that provides resources and support for biofuel feedstock development and feedstock supply ( eg , biomass crop assistance program ) .

typically , doe is viewed as the federal agency that provides resources and support for biofuel conversion technologies ( eg , loan guarantees ) .

for this mou , the navy is the customer for the advanced biofuel .

the objective of the mou is the construction or retrofit of multiple domestic commercial or pre - commercial scale advanced drop - in biofuel plants and refineries .

the refineries should have the capability to produce ready drop - in replacement advanced biofuels that meet military specifications at a price competitive with petroleum , be at geographically diverse locations with ready market access , and have no significant impact on the supply of agricultural commodities for the production of food .

usda , doe , and the navy are expected to fund this initiative at an aggregate of $510 million over three years , with that aggregate amount divided equally among them ( table 2 ) .

the mou notes that the timelines and means of contributing to the initiative are subject to change .

as of the this report's date , both the committees on energy and water development , and the armed forces have introduced report language regarding the navy's biofuel initiative .

the house energy and water development committee does not recommend funding , while both senate committees for energy and water development and armed forces support the initiative .

advanced biofuels have been promoted for the past several years as promising potential players in the renewable fuels market .

however , there is presently no operating domestic commercial - scale production facility for an advanced biofuel , although some are under construction .

proponents argue that advanced biofuels are the preferred renewable fuel alternative because advanced biofuel feedstocks might not compete with traditional food crops used for food and feed .

however , there may still be competition for resources to cultivate the feedstock ( eg , land and water ) .

proponents of advanced biofuels argue that it will add to the united states' energy security .

however , others assert that economic and technical barriers will prevent advanced biofuels from entering mainstream consumption for some time to come .

furthermore , the use of agricultural land for advanced biofuel production was a key sticking point as epa considered public comment about this aspect of advanced biofuels production eligibility for the renewable fuels standard .

others question whether the federal government should be involved in advanced biofuel production at all .

some proponents who support advanced biofuels generally question the form that federal involvement should take .

for example , some question whether the navy , using defense funding , should be the testing ground for advanced biofuels — particularly aviation biofuels — that at present cost significantly more than conventional fuels .

some analysts and government officials counter that argument by reporting that dod is the single largest consumer of oil in the united states and therefore represents a relatively significant share of total national petroleum use , and that dod relies "far too much on sometimes politically unstable foreign sources of fossil fuels. .

the advanced biofuel industry appears to be most focused on demonstrating that the technology exists to produce advanced biofuels at commercial scale .

another important consideration for the advanced biofuel industry at this moment is the planning and development of other production factors ( eg , feedstock supply , infrastructure ) which will play a role in a stable advanced biofuel market — the ultimate goal for the industry .

generally , military / operational fuel supply problems present logistical challenges that may fall under the process of peacetime planning or "deliberate planning" — the process of preparing contingency plans for military action .

a domestic biofuel industry , fostered through dpa authorities , would appear to address the contingency of a long - term petroleum supply disruption , assuming that north american production and resources have declined precipitously and shifted reliance to imported crude oil .

at present , the united states imports 49% of its petroleum , which includes crude oil ( roughly 40% ) and refined products .

canada provides the united states with 25% of its imports , and could likely increase the amount depending upon the approval of the keystone xl pipeline .

however , in the case of short - term disruptions , the united states maintains the strategic petroleum reserve as part of an obligation to the international energy agency ( iea ) agreement .

the spr's utility in meeting department of defense ( dod ) needs is limited by volume of jet or diesel fuel a refinery can produce from a barrel of oil .

on average , gulf coast refineries yield only 6% to 8% kerosene - jet fuel per barrel of oil .

that is , a 42-gallon barrel of oil yields at most 3 to 4 gallons of jet fuel when refined .

were it not for motorists , truckers , and airlines purchasing most of the remaining products refined from a barrel of crude oil , the cost of refining jet fuel exclusively for military use would be considerably higher .

 ( this would assume little or no value in upgrading the leftover portion of the barrel ) .

that is , consumers , not taxpayers , effectively subsidize the military jet fuel production .

the policy question writ large is whether a biofuel industry is necessary for national defense .

if the answer is yes , then the defense production act may be the appropriate authority for the navy to proceed with its mou .

proponents of a domestic biofuel industry view it as necessary in guaranteeing a fuel supply for the needs of the navy , presuming that the future availability of both domestic and international petroleum resources are may be uncertain .

projections of north american fossil energy supply would call the proponent's argument into question .

just a few years ago , fears of "peak oil" production drove policy discussions on u.s. energy security .

however , domestic crude oil production has increased over the past few years , reversing a decline that began in 1986 .

the united states is now a net exporter of refined petroleum products .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) reports that u.s. crude oil production increased from 5.1 million barrels per day in 2007 to 5.5 million barrels per day in 2010 .

over the next 10 years , eia sees continued development of tight oil , in combination with the ongoing development of offshore resources in the gulf of mexico , pushing domestic crude oil production in the eia reference case to 6.7 million barrels per day by 2020 , a level not seen since 1994 .

even with a projected decline after 2020 , eia projects that u.s. crude oil production will remain above 6.1 million barrels per day through 2035 .

u.s. refineries consumed just over 5.4 billion barrels of crude oil in 2011 , or approximately 14.8 million barrels per day .

biofuel proponents would also argue that spending u.s. dollars on imported crude oil supports foreign adversaries or props up corrupt regimes .

however , out of all the major oil exporting nations , currently the u.s. state department lists only iran as a terrorist country , and the united nations security council trade sanctions in place ( unsc resolution 1929 ) significantly restricts iran's oil exports .

no matter whether fuels are domestically or foreign sourced , certain logistical challenges arise with delivering or acquiring fuel in overseas operational areas .

for example , during u.s. operations in afghanistan , insurgent forces frequently attacked over - the - road fuel convoys and that caused numerous u.s. and contractor casualties as well as equipment and fuel losses .

despite the fuel convoys' vulnerability , dla - e generally found fuel sources to be available ; though the sources' alliances and loyalties may have been questionable , the transactions may have gained some regional cooperation .

refueling in foreign ports also introduces certain vulnerabilities , as tragically illustrated by the al - qaeda attack on uss cole at aden , yemen , in october of 2000 ; the unforeseen consequence of state department efforts to cultivate u.s. - yemeni ties .

relying solely on at - sea refueling for fleet units worldwide would also introduce challenges requiring a substantial increase in the number of military sealift command oilers in service .

for routine operations , the navy can expect to keep only about one third of its 14-oiler force at sea at any given moment .

the four or five oilers routinely deployed cannot indefinitely sustain a seagoing fleet of three to four carrier battle groups and three to four amphibious readiness groups deployed worldwide , plus a number of naval units steaming independently .

therefore , decisions on whether to refuel navy ships at sea or in foreign ports depends on both the tactical calculus of committing scarce fleet oilers and the political calculus of "showing the flag" by sending fleet units into port .

to some extent , then , this offers an opportunity for the exercise of relatively inexpensive diplomatic "soft power" by the united states in the form of contracts with local companies for the supply of marine fuel .

dod might argue that it faces financial , operational , as well as strategic risks from its reliance on petroleum - based fuels , as detailed in the crs report r42558 , department of defense energy initiatives: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

the financial risks include rising fuel costs over the long term , and increasing price volatility in the short term .

operational risks include the diversion of resources to the task of moving fuel to the battlefield , fuel requirements restraining the mobility u.s. forces and the combat effectiveness of u.s. equipment , and the vulnerability of fuel supply lines to disruption .

strategic challenges include getting fuel to the area of operations , and dod's role in ensuring the global free flow of oil .

the navy might argue that investing in a domestic biofuels industry would insulate the navy from the effects of volatile crude oil prices , decrease its reliance on foreign oil exports from politically unstable or hostile regimes , as well as enhance u.s. energy independence and energy security by creating a reliable energy source .

in testimony before the senate subcommittee on readiness and management support , the vice chief of naval operations underscored the pressure on readiness accounts from increased fuel prices , adding that ''every $1 increase in the price per barrel of fuel results in approximately $31m of additional cost annually above our budgeted level.' .

the navy has a lower dependence on petroleum than other services because its aircraft carriers and submarines are nuclear - powered .

in fy2010 , the navy met 59% of its overall energy needs from petroleum , 22% from nuclear - powered ships , and 19% from electricity ( for shore operations ) .

the navy nuclear reactor program , an outcome of the defense production act , not only validated nuclear power , but also paved the way for commercial nuclear power and provided the first trained reactor operators .

with the exception of the navy's nuclear power program , policies designed to replace petroleum - based fuels with fuels derived from alternative resources in the past have given way when newly discovered petroleum resources presented clear economic advantages .

that risk remains even if the biofuel mou is funded .

whatever advantages biofuels may convey , the navy is not without recourse in acquiring them directly by the customary acquisition process , as limited quantity procurements have already demonstrated .

at $26 per gallon , the $510 million the navy seeks to fund the mou would purchase 467 thousand barrels of hrj - 5 .

assuming that private interests successfully developed biofuel plants under dpa funding , they would still have to submit competitive bids on future fuel contracts under current procurement rules .

