the moving to work ( mtw ) demonstration program was created by congress in 1996 to give the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) and local public housing authorities ( phas ) the flexibility to test alternative policies for providing housing assistance through the nation's two largest housing assistance programs: the section 8 housing choice voucher program and the public housing program .

the alternative policies are meant to increase the cost - effectiveness of assisted housing programs , promote the self - sufficiency of assisted families , and increase housing choices for low - income families .

today , more than 30 phas are participating in mtw , and as of 2010 , they managed approximately $2.7 billion in section 8 housing choice voucher funding and $1.1 billion in public housing funding , supporting 13% of all vouchers and 11% of all public housing units .

more than a decade and a half since the inception of the demonstration , the future of mtw is uncertain .

the current set of hud - pha agreements is set to expire in 2018 , but calls for earlier changes to the program have emerged .

critics of the demonstration have argued that mtw agencies have been given unprecedented flexibilities , yet there is little understanding of the impacts those flexibilities have had on the lives of the low - income families phas are responsible for serving , and some concern that those impacts have been negative .

supporters of the demonstration have argued that the flexibility of the mtw demonstration program has allowed participating phas to serve more families in unique , improved , and cost - effective ways .

these competing perceptions of the mtw demonstration program have translated to conflicting calls to end the program , change the program , or expand the program .

given the way the demonstration was designed and implemented , it is difficult to evaluate the effectiveness or efficiency of mtw agencies' specific policies , as measured against the program's statutory goals , and thus to assess the claims of critics or supporters .

these conflicting views of the mtw demonstration program's success highlight a key point for understanding discussions around the program's future .

the mtw demonstration was initially intended to serve as a testing ground for innovations in the provision of assisted housing ; some have contended that it should be restructured to better serve that purpose .

others believe that mtw agencies have demonstrated that phas can successfully operate outside of the traditional regulatory structure , and thus some version of the program should be considered as the future of assisted housing .

despite the controversy around the future of the mtw demonstration program itself , the policies developed by mtw agencies have informed discussions about reforms to the mainstream assisted housing programs .

for example , several of the program reforms being considered for the public housing and section 8 housing choice voucher programs have been implemented by mtw agencies .

as congress considers future reforms of federal housing assistance programs , policymakers may look to lessons from the mtw demonstration program for insight .

this report provides an overview of the history and purpose of the mtw demonstration program , followed by a description of some of the policies adopted by participating phas .

it concludes by providing some observations about the outcomes of the program and discussing policy options for the future .

as stated previously , mtw agencies have adopted a wide range of program activities .

some agencies have used the mtw demonstration program to fully transform their assisted housing programs , while others have made more modest policy changes .

some agencies have applied their mtw policies to all of their assisted households while others have applied their mtw policies to subsets of their assisted housing populations or to select properties .

the following section describes three policy areas in which mtw agencies have discretion and provides some examples of the policies that mtw agencies have developed in these areas .

the three areas discussed are ( 1 ) the merging of assisted housing program funding streams and development activities ; ( 2 ) the level of assistance provided to program participants and conditions of assistance ; and ( 3 ) other administrative flexibilities .

given the differences in scope and scale of mtw programs at participating agencies , the policies described in this section may also vary .

when possible , this section will note how mtw agencies have altered their policies over time .

given the limitations described earlier , this report does not attempt to evaluate the effectiveness or efficiency of the policies adopted by mtw agencies in relation to the goals of the program .

as previously stated , there has been no systematic evaluation of the outcomes of the policies adopted by mtw agencies in achieving the goals of the program ( reduce costs and increase cost - effectiveness in the provision of assisted housing , encourage the self - sufficiency of assisted families , and increase the housing choices for low - income families ) .

a more systematic evaluation may be possible in the future , as hud standardizes the program and increases the program's data collection .

despite the lack of verified evidence regarding the effectiveness and efficiency of mtw activities , tenant advocates , phas , and hud have made observations about the way in which the program has affected tenants and the way it has affected phas' operations .

these observations are neither tested nor quantified , but they do inform policy debates about the future of the mtw demonstration program and about overall reform of assisted housing programs .

the current mtw agreements are all scheduled to expire in 2018 .

if no other actions are taken , the program is slated to continue as - is until that time , and it will be at hud's discretion whether to renew the agreements again .

however , the future of the mtw demonstration remains uncertain .

some supporters have proposed expanding mtw , converting it from a demonstration into a permanent program , and allowing more phas to participate in it .

other proposals have called for continuation of the program , with perhaps a limited expansion , but with changes designed to address concerns raised by tenant - advocates and to allow for a stronger evaluation component .

critics of mtw have called for it to be phased out and , in some cases , replaced with targeted demonstrations that would allow for more meaningful evaluations to inform future policy changes .

these differences of opinion highlight the outstanding question of whether the mtw demonstration program should be considered a lab for testing new ideas for reforming the primary rental assistance programs or whether some version of the mtw program is the future of assisted housing .

depending on their perspective about the purpose of the program , policymakers may consider changing the mtw program to make it a more effective demonstration , changing the mtw demonstration into a permanent and expanded program , or maintaining the status quo .

the purpose of the mtw demonstration program , as articulated in its authorizing statute , is to "design and test various approaches for providing and administering housing assistance" that meet the goals of the program .

as noted earlier , those goals involve reducing cost and increasing cost - effectiveness , promoting work and self - sufficiency , and increasing family choice .

the statute charged the secretary of hud with evaluating participating agencies "in an effort to identify replicable program models promoting the purpose of the demonstration. .

as discussed throughout this report , the way that the mtw demonstration program was designed and implemented has limited the effectiveness of the program as a true demonstration .

while phas have used the mtw flexibilities to "test various approaches for providing and administering housing assistance," those models have not been fully assessed in terms of whether they effectively or efficiently meet the purposes of the demonstration .

recognizing the limitations of the mtw program as a demonstration , some have called for changes to mtw to allow it to more clearly serve research - oriented purposes .

for example , the center on budget and policy priorities has argued that a set of targeted , temporary demonstrations would be a more effective mechanism to test specific policy changes .

recently , hud has proposed expanding the mtw demonstration program to 60 agencies as part of an effort to structure a systematic evaluation .

hud's proposals include a more targeted selection of mtw agencies , which would allow for the study of particular policies ( eg , admitting a subset of agencies that plan to implement a particular rent policy ) .

hud has also stressed the importance of selecting high - performing agencies that have the capacity to take part in a rigorous evaluation .

hud's intended goal would be to evaluate the policies implemented by mtw agencies for national adoption .

similar proposals have been included in assisted housing reform legislative proposals , such as the section 8 voucher reform act and the draft affordable housing and self sufficiency improvement act ( ahssia ) .

as noted earlier in this report , the legislative history of the mtw demonstration program indicates that its creation was a compromise between policymakers who thought that the existing set of rental assistance programs should be transformed into a flexible block grant program and those who thought the existing programs should be retained .

the mtw compromise allowed for the creation of a new , block grant - like housing program for a small number of phas , and the maintenance of the existing programs for most phas .

over time , more phas have been added to mtw than originally envisioned and many additional phas wish to receive mtw status .

the desirability of mtw for phas has led to calls to expand and make mtw a permanent program .

for example , the moving to work charter program act , which has been introduced in each of the past several congresses , would expand to at least 250 the number of phas eligible to participate in mtw and make it a permanent program .

others have called for block granting and deregulating federal housing assistance for all phas , along the lines of mtw .

for example , in 2004 the bush administration proposed the housing assistance for needy families program , which was modeled on mtw and would have converted housing assistance into a block grant , allowing phas many of the same flexibilities provided under mtw .

that proposal did not receive wide support .

pha industry groups raised concerns that a block grant funding model could lead to funding reductions down the road , as has been seen with other hud block grant programs .

tenant advocates raised concerns that deregulation would mean that they would lose protection in the law against policies that would raise tenants' rents and subject them to conditions of assistance they felt would be unreasonable .

a differently structured block grant proposal could garner wider support , although some of the same concerns raised in 2004 could be raised again .

in addition , hud has expressed concern about the capacity of some agencies entering the mtw demonstration program .

as previously mentioned , some of the phas admitted to the current program were considered poor performers prior to entering .

hud argues that high performers are more likely to succeed because they have proven their ability to meet reporting requirements and thus will be able to report on their activities and outcomes as required in the mtw demonstration program .

hud has also recommended that phas be selected for the program based on evaluation capacity , previously demonstrated innovation , and the level of local support .

finally , it is unclear if the mtw program as currently designed , or if a fully deregulated block grant program , would be a good program model for small phas , particularly those that administer only the public housing program or only the housing choice voucher program .

another option for policymakers is to make no changes and allow the mtw demonstration program to continue as it is currently structured .

the existing mtw agencies have agreements through 2018 ( with the possibility for extensions beyond that date , at hud's discretion ) .

congress may also consider adding small numbers of additional agencies , as it has done the past several years .

further , as noted earlier , hud has taken some steps to address concerns raised by critics of the existing program , such as increasing mtw reporting requirements , standardizing agreements , and including evaluation requirements for new agencies entering the program .

if the program continues as is , participating phas will continue to experiment with new policies that may influence the primary assisted housing programs .

even without a full evaluation of the policies adopted by mtw phas , it appears that both hud and policymakers are considering incorporating some of the reforms adopted by mtw agencies into the mainstream programs .

both the obama administration and some members of congress from both parties have proposed or supported changes to hud rental assistance programs that would either require or allow phas to adopt policies that mtw phas have experimented with , including changes to inspection rules , including allowing biennial inspections ; changes to income calculation rules , including allowing alternate sources of documentation or definitions of income and a streamlined calculation process ; changes to rent policies , including higher minimum rents and / or a limited rent policy demonstration ; expanded authority to phas to "voucher - out" their public housing and replace it with project - based assistance ; and allowance for phas to blend their public housing operating and capital funding .

while bipartisan consensus seems to be forming in favor of adopting some reforms based on the mtw demonstration , other policies remain controversial , particularly those involving changing the amount of assistance provided to residents and placing conditions ( such as time limits and work requirements ) on the receipt of such assistance .

tenant advocates and researchers continue to have questions and concerns about the effects of these and other policies on tenant outcomes , as well as the other stated purposes of the demonstration .

