this report answers frequently asked questions about presidential primaries and caucuses , and the national party nominating conventions that follow them .

the nominating process elicits questions because it relies on a dense combination of national and state party rules and state election laws to conduct the primaries and caucuses , and it proceeds according to a seemingly haphazard calendar of events .

furthermore , the conventions officially select the presidential candidates , but the nominating contest is almost always resolved earlier , during the primary season , as soon as one candidate can claim a majority of delegates .

the role of the modern conventions is to officially ratify the primary season results .

despite its complicated nature , the presidential nominating process is simply a race among presidential candidates to accumulate a majority of delegates , in order to claim the nomination at the national convention .

this report discusses selected aspects of the convoluted process of choosing delegates in the primaries and caucuses and the national conventions that officially mark the end of the nominating season .

presidential primaries are paid for by each state , or more specifically , by local election jurisdictions within each state , as are other federal elections .

on rare occasions , a state party will conduct its own primary , sometimes called a "firehouse" primary , but generally presidential primaries are financed by the state .

a state party might hold a firehouse primary to exert greater control over the delegate selection process .

an issue that emerged for the 2012 election cycle was the additional cost of a separate presidential primary in some states , if the regular state primary was held on a different date , which caused a few to cancel the presidential primary altogether .

caucuses are conducted and paid for by the state parties .

between 1976 and 2012 , the two major parties and qualifying minor parties received funds from the taxpayer checkoff program to finance the national nominating conventions , as part of the presidential public financing system — the presidential election campaign fund ( pecf ) .

the amount for the major parties was initially set at $2 million , with an inflation adjustment for future elections .

the program provided $17.7 million each to the democratic and republican convention committees for 2012 .

the program was eliminated with the enactment of p.l .

113-94 in april 2014 .

additional federal funds have been provided since 2004 for convention security , coordinated by the u.s. secret service in conjunction with state and local law enforcement in jurisdictions where the conventions were held .

congress appropriated $100 million for convention security in 2004 , 2008 , and 2012 , of which $50 million was for each convention in each year .

contemporary national nominating conventions give the parties a rare opportunity to showcase nominees , party leaders , and positions before a national television audience , but they are no longer the venue in which the nominee is chosen .

although some observers speculated that a contested convention could occur at the 2012 republican national convention , that did not occur .

there has been speculation that the 2016 republican nomination could be contested in some fashion , if a candidate does not emerge from the primary season with a majority of delegates .

if that does not occur , the 2016 conventions will again be largely ceremonial , campaign driven events .

in recent decades , the role of the national conventions has been to ratify , rather than select , the party nominees .

elections without an incumbent president running , even if they are competitive , are usually resolved early in the primary season , well before the convention meets .

elections that include an incumbent president are usually concluded without much drama as well , and the delegates are elected in primaries and caucuses that attract little attention because of the lack of competition ( i.e. , president reagan in 1984 , president clinton in 1996 , president bush in 2004 , and president obama in 2012 ) .

both the 1976 republican and 1980 democratic conventions provided a reminder that incumbents can be endangered under certain conditions , but presidents ford and carter ultimately prevailed in 1976 and 1980 , respectively , despite strong challenges from governor ronald reagan and senator edward kennedy .

as the conventions have evolved into media events , the traditional format of past years has been replaced by a television - friendly script designed for a prime time audience each night .

as in the past , delegates ratify the choice of nominee in a roll call vote and various party leaders and rising stars give speeches , but the action is targeted to viewers , rather than the delegates inside the convention venue .

finally , the party may have a traditional keynote speaker or multiple keynote speakers address the convention , followed by a vice presidential candidate speech on the second to last night and , on the last night , a speech by the nominee to kick off the general election campaign .

a brokered , or multi - ballot , convention was a phenomenon of the mid - 20 th century and earlier , when the convention delegates were sometimes required to vote multiple times before a candidate could achieve a majority of vote to claim the nomination .

for the past 60 years , the major party nominees have always accumulated a majority of delegate votes before the convention , with one exception ( discussed in the following section ) .

the competitive results of 2012 republican primaries and caucuses through the first three months of the contest and rules changes that were adopted — particularly the requirement until april 1 for the proportional division of delegates based on the results — raised speculation that no candidate would amass a majority of delegates before the convention .

that possibility did not come to pass , as the presumed nominee , governor willard m. romney , claimed a majority of the delegates following the results from the texas primary on may 19 .

one phenomenon that fuels speculation in 2016 about an extended primary season and a brokered republican convention is the fact that the state parties do not have uniform rules for whether the delegations are "bound" to vote a certain way at the national convention , and that the results of some contests have no effect on the selection of delegates .

in several of the primaries and caucuses , the results will not determine which candidates receive delegates or how many they receive , which makes the process somewhat unpredictable .

to win the nomination , a candidate needs1,236 of 2,470 total delegates to secure the republican nomination .

there has been on similar speculation regarding the democratic convention ; a candidate needs 2,382 of 4,763 total delegates to secure the nomination .

in the years since the nominating reforms of the late 1960s were adopted , the party nominees have usually been decided before the conventions .

the principal reason for this phenomenon was the widespread adoption of the primary to choose delegates , allowing one of the candidates to secure a majority publicly , before the convention met .

an exception was the 1976 republican convention , when president gerald ford and governor ronald reagan personally lobbied for support among delegates in the days before the convention began ; president ford eventually won on the first ballot .

the primary was perceived to be more democratic than the previously popular caucus / convention method , in which party leaders and bosses controlled the nomination , occasionally "brokering" the outcome at the convention itself .

rank - and - file voters had little say in choosing the delegates to the conventions .

the reforms sought to democratize the nominating process in the aftermath of the democrats' violent 1968 national convention in chicago .

the democratic party subsequently convened in 1969 the commission on party structure and delegate selection , also known as the mcgovern / fraser commission , which made recommendations to democratize the process .

democrats continued to revise delegate selection rules every four years throughout the 1970s and up to the present , while republicans made few changes to their rules .

the new rules encouraged the use of the primary to achieve compliance and , as a result , the rising number of presidential primaries shifted the setting for selecting the nominees from the national conventions to the primary season itself .

even before the reforms of the 1960s and 1970s , multi - ballot conventions had become somewhat rare .

the last major party convention to require more than one ballot to choose the nominee was in 1952 , when democrats needed three ballots to nominate illinois governor adlai stevenson .

prior to that , the 1948 republican and 1932 democratic conventions took multiple ballots to choose the nominees .

deadlocked conventions were more common in the 19 th and early 20 th centuries and often required multiple votes to choose the nominee .

the longest in history was the 1924 democratic convention that famously took 103 ballots and 17 days to nominate john w. davis of new york .

republicans will meet in cleveland , oh , from july 18-21 , and democrats will meet in philadelphia , pa from july 26-28 .

