the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , formerly called the food stamp program , is designed primarily to increase the food purchasing power of eligible low - income households to a point where they can buy a nutritionally adequate low - cost diet .

this report describes the rules related to eligibility for snap benefits and the rules related to the issuance and use of benefits .

snap is authorized by the food and nutrition act of 2008 .

this law , formerly the food stamp act of 1977 , has since 1973 been reauthorized by the "farm bill," omnibus legislation that also typically includes the reauthorization of other federal agricultural policies and programs .

snap was most recently authorized by the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 ; p.l .

113-79 ) .

see crs report r43332 , snap and related nutrition provisions of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) for further discussion of the nutrition program policy changes .

the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( "2008 farm bill," p.l .

110-246 ) changed the name of the program from the food stamp program to snap and revised the name of the governing law from the food stamp act to the food and nutrition act .

state names for the program may vary ; some states continue to name their programs "food stamps," while others have switched to snap or maintain another name .

the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) administers snap .

although a detailed framework of federal law and regulation exists , a robust framework of state options and waivers exists as well .

in this way , while universal concepts of benefit eligibility and administration exist among the states , there also are many policies that vary among the states .

this report will focus on the federal framework but will at times discuss state options that may cause state and local programs to vary .

snap benefits are available for households that meet federal financial eligibility tests for limited monthly income and liquid assets .

however , these rules can be bypassed through the use of "categorical eligibility" for snap .

categorical eligibility provides states with the ability to modify federal financial eligibility rules .

as of february 2018 , 42 states utilize broad - based categorical eligibility , although several do so with an added limit on liquid assets .

to be eligible for snap , a household must fulfill requirements related to work effort and must meet citizenship and legal permanent residence tests .

in general , the maximum snap benefit is based upon the level of the u.s. department of agriculture's lowest cost food plan ( the thrifty food plan or tfp ) and varies by household size .

monthly snap benefit amounts are calculated as the difference between the household's expected contribution to its food costs and the maximum benefit .

 ( participating households are expected to devote 30% of their "net" monthly cash income to food purchases. ) .

thus , a recipient household with no "net" cash income receives the maximum monthly snap allotment for its size while a household with some counted income receives a lesser allotment , the maximum benefit minus 30% of the net income .

net income is the gross income with certain specified deductions subtracted .

throughout the body of this report , current participation , benefit amount , and spending figures are provided .

for a historical table of such information ( dating back to 1985 ) , see table a - 1 .

snap has financial , work - related , and "categorical" tests for eligibility .

its financial tests require that those eligible have monthly income and liquid assets below limits set by law and adjusted for inflation .

under the work - related tests , certain household members must register for work , accept suitable job offers , and fulfill work or training requirements ( such as looking or training for a job ) established by their state public assistance agency .

under a time limit established in 1996 , snap eligibility for able - bodied adults without dependents ( abawds ) is limited to 3 months in any 36-month period unless the abawd works at least half time or is in a work or training program .

categorical eligibility rules make some automatically eligible for snap assistance ( most who receive a benefit from the temporary assistance for needy families [tanf] block grant or receive supplemental security income [ssi] or state [ga] cash benefits ) .

in addition to categorical eligibility rules , there are also categorical denials of eligibility to specific groups ( eg , strikers , many noncitizens and postsecondary students , people living in institutional settings , many drug felons ) .

however , applications cannot be denied because of the length of a household's residence in a snap agency's jurisdiction , because the household has no fixed mailing address or does not reside in a permanent dwelling , or because the applicant does not provide a driver's license or photograph identification .

snap benefits are 100% federally financed and constitute the vast majority of federal spending for the snap program .

this section discusses how snap benefit amounts are determined , how the benefits are issued , what benefits may and may not be used for , and the redemption of benefits .

the eligibility rules of snap , discussed above , create a framework by which individuals ( constituting a household ) are eligible or ineligible for benefits , but once eligible , the participant is also subject to a benefit calculation process , which determines the household's monthly benefit amount or allotment .

the calculation of snap benefits takes into account the size of the household , the maximum benefit for the fiscal year , and the household's net income .

for one - and two - person households , the minimum benefit may also play a role .

maximum monthly benefit allotments are tied to the cost of purchasing a nutritionally adequate low - cost diet , as measured by the usda - created and - calculated thrifty food plan ( tfp ) .

the tfp is the cheapest of four diet plans meeting minimal nutrition requirements devised by usda , specifically usda's center for nutrition policy and promotion ( cnpp ) .

maximum allotments are set at the monthly cost of the tfp for a four - person family consisting of a couple between ages 20 and 50 and two school - age children , adjusted for family size ( using a formula reflecting economies of scale developed by the human nutrition information service ) , and rounded down to the nearest whole dollar .

allotments are adjusted for food price inflation annually , each october , to reflect the cost of the tfp in the immediately previous june .

although usda calculates the cost of the tfp each year to account for food price inflation , the contents of the tfp — often thought of as its own market basket of goods — were last revised in 2006 .

maximum allotments are standard across the 48 contiguous states and the district of columbia , but they are higher , reflecting substantially different food costs , in alaska , hawaii , guam , and the virgin islands .

snap benefits are a function of a household's size , its net ( counted ) monthly income , and inflation - indexed maximum monthly benefit levels ( in some cases , adjusted for geographic location ) .

an eligible household's net income is determined ( i.e. , the deductions noted earlier for judging eligibility are subtracted from gross income ) , its maximum benefit level is established , and a benefit is calculated by subtracting its expected contribution ( by law , 30% of its net income ) from its maximum allotment .

this equation is illustrated in the first row of figure 1 .

thus , ( as illustrated in the second row of figure 1 ) a three - person household in one of the 48 states with $400 in counted net income ( after deductions ) would receive a monthly allotment of $384 in fy2018 .

a three - person household with no counted income would receive the maximum monthly benefit .

benefits are not taxable and purchases made with snap benefits may not be charged sales taxes .

receipt of snap benefits does not affect eligibility for , or benefits provided by , other public assistance programs , although some programs use snap participation as a "trigger" for eligibility , and others take into account the general availability of snap benefits in deciding what level of benefits to provide .

eligible one - or two - person households are guaranteed a minimum monthly benefit allotment equal to 8% of the maximum benefit for a one - person household ; effective october 2008 .

this replaces an older rule stipulating a minimum benefit of $10 a month only for one - and two - person households .

for fy2018 , the minimum benefit is $15 a month for a household in the 48 states and dc .

this means that if the benefit calculation for a one - or two - person household yields a result of less than $15 , that household is guaranteed to receive $15 a month .

in fy2016 , over 8% of snap households received the minimum benefit .

benefit issuance is a state agency responsibility , and states contract with private vendors to carry out most of their issuance activities .

benefits are provided through electronic benefit transfer ( ebt ) systems under which recipients are issued a debit - like card that they use to make food purchases .

at the point of sale , retailers automatically debit the recipient's snap account and credit their own account .

ebt cards can include both snap benefits ( usable only to buy food items ) and cash benefits ( eg , tanf payments , unemployment payments , child support payments ) ; only cash benefits can be accessed using the card at atms .

snap benefits normally are issued monthly .

the state snap agency must either deny eligibility or make benefits available within 30 days of initial application and must provide allotments without interruption if an eligible household reapplies and fulfills recertification requirements in a timely manner .

households in immediate need because of little or no income and very limited cash assets , as well as the homeless and those with extraordinarily high shelter expenses , must be given expedited service ( provision of benefits within seven days of initial application ) .

a household's calculated monthly allotment can be prorated ( reduced ) for one month .

on application , a household's first month's benefit is reduced to reflect the date of application .

if a previously participating household does not meet eligibility recertification requirements in a timely fashion , but does become certified for eligibility subsequently , benefits for the first month of its new certification period normally are prorated to reflect the date when recertification requirements were met .

snap benefits are not the same as cash .

although snap benefits have a dollar value , they may only be spent on eligible food at authorized stores equipped with ebt machines .

"trafficking" usually means the direct exchange of snap benefits ( formerly known as food stamps ) for cash , which is illegal , and both retailers and recipients might engage in this form of fraud .

retailer trafficking of snap benefits usually occurs when a snap recipient sells their benefits for cash , often at a loss , to an owner or employee of a store participating in snap .

the food and nutrition act mandates penalties for retailers and participants engaged in trafficking , including fines and imprisonment .

usda - fns detects stores suspected of trafficking snap benefits through data analysis and undercover investigations and penalizes stores found to be engaged in retailer trafficking .

an fns analysis of retailer trafficking during the 2012-2014 period estimated that the retailer trafficking rate is 1.5% , up from 1.3% in the 2009-2011 study .

states are responsible for detecting and penalizing recipients who engage in trafficking , though fns provides states with grants and technical assistance in this effort .

for more information , see crs report r45147 , errors and fraud in the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

typically , participating households use their benefits in approved stores to buy food items for home preparation and consumption .

in general , snap benefits may be redeemed for any foods for home preparation and consumption .

snap benefits may not be redeemed for alcohol , tobacco , or hot foods intended for immediate consumption .

according to the food and nutrition act , snap may also be redeemed for seeds and plants to produce food for personal consumption .

elderly and disabled recipients and their spouses may redeem snap benefits for meals prepared and served through approved communal dining programs or home - delivered meal providers .

snap may also be redeemed for meals prepared and served to residents of drug addiction and alcoholic treatment programs , small group homes for the disabled , shelters for battered women and children , and shelters or other establishments serving the homeless .

in the case of certain remote areas of alaska , benefits may be redeemed for procuring food by hunting and fishing ( eg , nets , hooks , fishing rods , and knives ) .

according to annual benefit redemption data collected by usda - fns , in fy2017 nearly 100% of snap benefits were redeemed in markets and stores , and the remaining share , approximately 0.4% , were redeemed at meal services and delivery routes .

superstores and supermarkets made up less than 12% of stores authorized , but approximately 82% of snap benefits were redeemed at these stores .

convenience stores made up over 45% of stores authorized , but less than 6% of benefits were redeemed at them ( see table 4 for this fy2017 redemption data by retailer type ) .

snap benefits may be redeemed only at authorized retailers .

the list of retailers that are authorized is varied — from supermarkets , to farmers markets , to convenience stores .

table 4 displays the prevalence of each retailer type and the share of benefits redeemed at each type .

in addition to business integrity requirements , authorization is based on the retailers' meeting inventory requirements in snap law and regulation .

whether a retailer is authorized requires two general steps: ( 1 ) an application for authorization and ( 2 ) passing a usda - fns administered inspection .

the inventory requirements are based on the food and nutrition act's definition of staple foods and related inventory or sales requirements .

the four categories of staple foods are meat , poultry , or fish ; bread or cereal ; vegetables or fruits ; and dairy products .

regarding inventory and sales requirements , an eligible retailer must either offer ( 1 ) three varieties of qualifying foods in each of the four staple food categories , and ( 2 ) perishable foods in at least two of the staple food categories ; or , have more than 50% of total sales from the sale of eligible staple foods ( this option is often used for specialty stores that may specialize in certain of the staple food categories , eg , a bakery , produce store , or butcher ) .

for the most part , snap benefits are not redeemable at restaurants , recalling that the benefits are not redeemable for hot , prepared foods .

however , there does exist a state restaurant option .

under this option , states can choose to authorize restaurants to accept snap benefits for homeless , elderly , and disabled individuals — populations that may have difficulty preparing food , in addition to purchasing food .

according to information provided by usda - fns , california , arizona , rhode island , and florida currently operate state - administered restaurant programs serving their elderly , homeless , and disabled populations .

fy2017 redemption data indicate that approximately $63.5 million ( or 0.1% of snap benefits ) were redeemed at "private restaurant / meal delivery. .

farmers' markets may become snap - licensed retailers .

usda reported that 7,377 farmers' markets or individual farmers were authorized to accept snap benefits in fy2017 , and they redeemed a total of over $22.4 million in snap benefits ( significantly less than 0.1% of snap benefits ) .

compared to fy2016 , this is an increase of over 5% in authorizations and an increase of nearly 11% in benefits redeemed .

states , localities , and farmers' market networks have created snap bonus incentive programs to encourage fruit and vegetable purchases at farmers' markets as well as grocery stores .

these allow snap participants to redeem their benefits for more than "money on the dollar. .

for example , a participant might exchange $3 of benefits for a $6 voucher to redeem at the market ; some projects use an electronic currency for the incentives .

in the past , usda - fns required that the bonus funds be non - federal dollars ; however , the 2014 farm bill created a competitive grant program , the food insecurity nutrition incentive ( fini ) grant program , which provides limited funding for bonus incentives .

fini grantees have been testing different methods of incentivizing snap purchases ; a usda - fns evaluation is ongoing .

