provisions of the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( msfcma , p.l .

94-265 , as amended ; 16 u.s.c .

§§1801 et seq. ) .

added during the 1996 reauthorization and amended in 2006 , included specific requirements to end overfishing and to rebuild overfished stocks .

to implement these requirements , the msfcma directed the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) ( also referred to as noaa fisheries ) within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) of the u.s. department of commerce to develop regulations by 2008 to provide guidance for establishing annual catch limits ( acls ) and related biological benchmarks .

by the end of 2011 , a requirement to implement acls and end overfishing in all federally managed fisheries came into effect .

for fish stocks at low levels of abundance , stock rebuilding within a 10-year time frame ( with some exceptions ) is also required .

many commercial fishermen question whether the current provisions of the msfcma and their implementation by nmfs adequately reflect the complexities and related uncertainties associated with the management of fish stocks .

many commercial fishermen believe they are being held to an impossibly high standard because fishing mortality is only one of many factors that affect stock abundance .

other factors , including environmental conditions and fish habitat degradation , are often beyond managers' and fishermen's control .

furthermore , they assert that assessments of fish stocks are often flawed or incomplete because of inadequate data and simplistic population models .

many fishermen explain that rebuilding schedules and population benchmarks are set on a strict timetable and at specific levels , but the outcomes of theses management measures are subject to a high level of uncertainty .

from their perspective , the fishing industry is sometimes left to endure the economic and social consequences of lower revenues and fewer fishing opportunities when harvest restrictions are implemented to satisfy msfcma rebuilding requirements .

environmentalists counter that overfishing and previous management failures illustrate the need to maintain established fish stock rebuilding schedules .

they maintain that the lack of progress preceding the recent changes to the msfcma in 2006 was due to the failure of many fishery management plans to reduce exploitation sufficiently to end overfishing .

they assert that absent stringent limits for rebuilding , managers too often put off the short - term reduction in catch necessary for stocks to recover .

they emphasize that relatively short - term sacrifices associated with rebuilding will result in long - term economic gains to recreational and commercial fishermen .

several different bills related to overfishing and stock rebuilding have been introduced during the 112 th congress .

h.r .

3061 and s. 238 would require preparation of fishery economic impact statements to evaluate whether fishery management plans provide for the sustained participation of fishing communities .

h.r .

1646 , h.r .

3061 , and s. 632 include in part , identical language which would increase management flexibility when rebuilding fish stocks .

h.r .

2304 , h.r .

3061 , and s. 1916 include provisions that would address concerns related to generating and using scientific information .

s. 2184 and h.r .

4208 would amend the saltonstall - kennedy act ( 15 u.s.c .

713c - 3 ) to provide directed funding for fisheries management and research .

h.r .

2304 , h.r .

3061 , and s. 1916 would exclude stocks or fisheries from acl requirements under specific circumstances , and h.r .

1646 would impose certain conditions before fishery closures could be implemented .

several hearings have been held to explore broad concerns related to overfishing , acls , and the related need to reduce uncertainty by improving fisheries data collection and stock assessments .

the most recent was held on december 1 , 2011 , by the house committee on natural resources , which considered a variety of bills and associated issues related to fisheries , including h.r .

1646 , h.r .

2304 , and h.r .

3061 .

no further congressional action has been taken by either the house or the senate .

actions required to stop overfishing and rebuild stocks now take precedence over other management objectives identified in the national standards of msfcma , such as economic efficiency and impacts on fishing - dependent communities .

progress has been made in some fisheries where stock rebuilding has increased yield and the associated economic value of the fishery .

however , often improvements have come at a cost to commercial and recreational fisheries and associated fishing communities , especially in cases where stocks have not responded to management actions as rapidly as managers anticipated .

achieving balance between conservation and sustaining livelihoods is both difficult to determine and contentious .

although science is often looked to for answers , societal values also play an important role when developing policies .

moreover , both elements of the system , nature and human , are evolving and changing due to a variety of factors .

several interrelated issues have emerged from the ongoing debate over requirements to use acls and to rebuild fish populations .

some fishermen , fishery managers , and academics have posed questions related to ( 1 ) the effects of acls on allocation of fisheries benefits ; ( 2 ) the possible social and economic benefits of greater flexibility during stock rebuilding , ( 3 ) the data and models used to determine acls and rebuilding objectives , and ( 4 ) the decision making process , especially in situations with limited data and related uncertainty .

legislation has been introduced during the 112 th congress to amend msfcma provisions related to overfishing and stock rebuilding ( see table 3 ) .

these bills attempt to address the issues identified in the previous paragraph and although these general categories appear to be among the most important , as the debate continues it is likely that related issues will emerge .

it is also important to recognize the interrelated nature of many of these issues .

for example , data , models and uncertainty are closely related to decision making .

several hearings have also been held to explore broad concerns related to overfishing and acls and the related need to reduce uncertainty by improving fisheries data and stock assessments .

during the last three decades , the emphasis of fisheries management in the united states has changed from developing marine fisheries to conserving fisheries resources .

putting an end to overfishing and rebuilding marine fish populations has become the main management goal of many u.s. fisheries .

this objective is not synonymous with the objective of fisheries ( as opposed to stock ) rebuilding or with improving the condition of the fishing industry .

improvements in social or economic conditions maybe , but are not necessarily correlated with stock sizes .

fishermen assert that stock rebuilding timeframes and population benchmarks are set at specific levels , but the outcomes of these management measures are subject to many factors outside of managers' control .

fish populations vary for many reasons that are often beyond the immediate control of fishermen and managers such as the condition of fish habitat , ecosystem shifts , and global climate change .

during the current stock rebuilding transition , many fishermen face an uncertain future and question how the industry will evolve in the coming decades .

some fishing businesses and communities maintain that they are threatened by fishing regulations that have grown more complex and burdensome as well as by waterfront development in fishing ports .

once the number of fishermen and vessels falls below a critical level , they fear the fishing industry may never regain its former role in coastal communities .

they add that if fishing industry - related infrastructure is replaced , it will be difficult to regain areas needed for support of fisheries such as docks , warehouses , and fishhouses .

others counter that without fish , the industry has no future .

the conservation of fish populations is necessary for the future of fisheries , but some question whether conservation alone will be sufficient to sustain fishing businesses and fishery - dependent communities .

