the relationship between the livestock and poultry industries and animal protection groups is an antagonistic one , at best .

the table egg industry , led in the united states by the united egg producers ( uep ) , has been widely criticized for decades for raising laying hens in cages .

many have argued that conventional cage systems widely used in the united states and elsewhere provide little or no welfare for laying hens because hens are not able to express natural behaviors .

the humane society of the united states ( hsus ) is one of many animal protection organizations that have led campaigns advocating cage - free egg production and the elimination of all cages .

given the history between the egg industry and animal protection groups , uep stunned the animal agriculture community in july 2011 with an announcement that it would work jointly with hsus to push for federal legislation to regulate how u.s. table eggs are produced .

the agreement between uep and hsus was signed july 7 , 2011 , and called for legislation that would set cage sizes , establish labeling requirements , and regulate other production practices .

the goal of the agreement is to have federal legislation in place by june 30 , 2012 .

as part of the agreement , hsus agreed to immediately suspend state - level ballot initiative efforts in oregon and washington to end the use of conventional cages .

legislation — the egg products inspection act amendments of 2012 — was introduced in both the senate and house during the 112 th congress to address the uep and hsus agreement and goal to establish federal table - egg cage standards .

no action was taken on these measures .

almost identical bills — the egg products inspection act amendments of 2013 ( s. 820 and h.r .

1731 ) — were introduced in the 113 th congress on april 25 , 2013 .

these bills also reflect the 2011 agreement between uep and hsus and would establish uniform , national cage size requirements for table egg - laying hen housing over a 15- to 16-year phase - in period .

the bills also include labeling requirements to disclose how eggs are produced , and air quality , molting , and euthanasia standards for laying hens .

uep views the bills as being in the long - term survival interest of american egg farmers , and a wide range of groups have expressed support for the legislation .

however , some agricultural and livestock producers , including some egg farmers , strongly oppose the bills , viewing them as an intrusion into their farming practices .

some animal protection groups have also opposed the bills .

this report provides an overview of the u.s. egg industry , the uep - hsus agreement , and the provisions of s. 820 and h.r .

1731 introduced in the 113 th congress .

the report also discusses supporting and opposing views of the bills , and some animal welfare issues for laying hens .

on april 25 , 2013 , the egg products inspection act amendments of 2013 ( s. 820 and h.r .

1731 ) were introduced in the senate and house .

both of the bills would amend the egg products inspection act ( see box below ) by adding cage size and production requirements for shell eggs .

the bills are the result of the negotiations between uep and hsus and reflect their agreement of july 7 , 2011 , to establish uniform national cage size requirements for table - egg - laying hens .

the bills also include labeling requirements , and air quality and treatment standards for egg - laying hens .

the bills are similar to s. 3239 and h.r .

3798 , introduced in the 112 th congress .

the main differences between the bills introduced in the 113 th congress and those from the 112 th congress are the more detailed provisions for california egg producers .

for california , s. 820 and h.r .

1731 set deadlines for adding enrichments and expanding floor space requirements based on whether cages are new or existing ( see " housing requirements ," below ) .

in addition , the legislation includes a four - step phase - in period for california ( see " phase - in conversion requirements ," below ) .

the legislation also requires that any eggs bought or sold in california meet the california requirements in the legislation , no matter where the eggs are produced .

because california law bans the use of conventional cages after january 1 , 2015 ( see " california proposition 2 " below ) , this provision could protect california egg producers from a flood of eggs from egg producers in other states who have not yet converted operations to the new national requirements .

besides the california differences , s. 820 and h.r .

1731 include a new provision that allows for excess ammonia levels because of special circumstances .

also , three exemptions are added to the legislation .

educational and research institutes and cages with one egg - laying hen are exempt , and the legislation explicitly states that the provisions apply only to commercial egg production , and exempt other livestock and poultry production .

the provisions of h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 were endorsed by agricultural , veterinary , consumer , and animal protection groups .

egg farmers and other family farms in more than 30 states also endorsed the bills .

in what some supporters of h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 considered significant backing for the bill , the executive board of the american veterinary medical association ( avma ) voted to support h.r .

3798 in march 2012 .

avma explained , "the decision was not made lightly .

there was extensive deliberation , and the board reasoned that the standards are consistent with avma policy , as well as industry long - term expectations about changes in egg - production practices.' .

supporters of h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 also pointed to consumer support for changes in egg cages .

in a two - part survey commissioned by uep , survey respondents indicated by a 4-to - 1 margin that they would support legislation transitioning from conventional cages to enriched cages .

in the second part of the survey , respondents indicated support for federal legislation by a 2-to - 1 margin .

according to dr. jeffrey armstrong , who has been a member of uep's scientific advisory committee from its beginnings , public perception is turning against conventional cages , and the uep - hsus agreement affords egg producers the chance to regain public trust .

other groups representing agriculture and livestock producers , such as the american farm bureau federation ( afbf ) , the national cattlemen's beef association ( ncba ) , and the national pork producers council ( nppc ) , said that they vigorously opposed h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 .

after the uep - hsus agreement was announced , ncba stated , "cattlemen are rightfully concerned with the recent uep - hsus agreement to seek unprecedented federal legislation to mandate on - farm production standards. .

in its statement , the nppc called such legislation on egg cages a "dangerous precedent," and was "gravely concerned that such a one - size - fits - all approach will take away producers' freedom to operate in a way that's best for their animals. .

in a december 6 , 2011 , letter to the house agriculture committee , eight farm groups expressed their opposition to any proposed legislation resulting from the usp - hsus agreement .

although some animal welfare groups signed on with hsus in endorsing the shift to enriched cages , other related groups remained strongly opposed to h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 because of their view that an enriched cage is still a cage that harms laying - hen welfare .

the humane farming association ( hfa ) is leading a campaign to "stop the rotten egg bill" emphasizing that h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 could nullify already enacted state law , take away citizens' right to vote on cages , and prevent state legislatures from passing laws to protect laying hens .

animal welfare has become an increasingly salient public issue over the past decade .

more recently , social media publication of graphic videos of the treatment of laboratory animals ( eg , apes , cats , dogs ) , commercial pet breeding operations ( eg , "puppy mills" ) , and farm animals ( eg , slaughter houses , swine and poultry farms ) has contributed to rising public awareness of how humans use animals , and how these animals are treated .

some of this awareness has been expressed in appeals for more vigorous enforcement of state and local animal abuse and cruelty laws .

other individuals and groups , citing animal welfare issues , environmental issues , and / or social justice issues , have called for significantly reducing or even ending the consumption of meat and animal products .

as the uep - hsus agreement and h.r .

3798 and s. 3239 suggest , animal agricultural producers likely will face more animal welfare campaigns and growing public interest in farm animal welfare .

the following sections discuss recent animal welfare issues as they pertain to hens .

proposition 2 , or the standards for confining farm animals , was a 2008 ballot initiative in california .

the proposition , sponsored by hsus , was approved by nearly 64% of the voters .

proposition 2 requires that all farm animals , "for all or the majority of any day," not be confined or tethered in a manner that prevents them from lying or sitting down , standing up , turning around or fully extending their limbs without touching another animal or an enclosure such as a cage or stall .

the law will go into effect on january 1 , 2015 .

in july 2010 , california bill a.b .

1437 was enacted , requiring that all shelled ( whole ) eggs sold in california come from cage - free hens .

the intent of the law is to "protect california consumers from the deleterious health , safety , and welfare effects of the sale and consumption of eggs derived from egg - laying hens that are exposed to significant stress and may result in increased exposure to disease pathogens including salmonella. .

this law will also go into effect on january 1 , 2015 .

while proposition 2 applies only to laying hens in california , the effect of the 2010 law will require that egg farms in other states abide by california's law regarding layers if they wish to sell eggs in the state .

on may 6 , 2013 , the california office of administrative law approved california department of food and agriculture regulations setting standards for cage sizes .

under the approved regulation , enclosures with nine or more table - egg - laying hens must have a minimum of 116 square inches of floor space per bird .

the regulation also includes a formula for calculating floor space requirements for enclosures with fewer than nine laying hens .

proposition 2 has been challenged in state courts by california egg producers three times since the law was enacted , primarily due to the vagueness of the law .

these lawsuits were dismissed .

challenges to california's shell egg laws moved to federal court in february 2014 when missouri challenged the 2010 law in u.s. district court .

in december 2010 , a commercial egg producer in california , js west and companies , filed suit against hsus and the state of california to clarify what type of housing for hens was acceptable under proposition 2 , claiming that the statute did not define how much space is required for the specified animal behaviors .

the egg company opened an "enriched colony" system in 2010 that provided 116 square inches of space per hen , significantly larger than the egg industry standard of 67-87 inches .

the hsus , in response , stated that proposition 2 requires "cage - free environments. .

while proposition 2 does not specifically state cage sizes , the living conditions required by proposition 2 would effectively require cage - free environments .

the association of california egg farmers ( acef ) , representing 70% of california's egg farmers , joined the suit in march 2011 .

in july 2011 , the california superior court ruled that js west could not challenge california at the time because the state had not yet established a position on what types of housing would meet proposition 2 requirements .

in april 2012 , william cramer , a california egg farmer in riverside county , filed suit in the u.s. district court , central district of california , claiming that proposition 2 is unconstitutionally vague and violates the u.s. constitution's commerce clause .

according to cramer's complaint , california egg farmers cannot know if they are violating the law because of the vagueness of proposition 2 , and farmers will exit the egg business because it creates an uncertain investment environment .

in addition , cramer stated that california consumers will be harmed because egg prices will rise .

the lawsuit also contended that the california law on egg production violates the commerce clause because it will interfere with the interstate sales of eggs .

in september 2012 , the district court rejected cramer's claims that proposition 2 is vague and violated the commerce clause .

in november 2012 , the acef filed another suit asking the fresno county superior court to find that the language of proposition 2 was unconstitutionally vague according to california's constitution .

the acef claimed that the lack of size and density requirements in proposition 2 make it impossible for california egg producers to alter cage sizes to comply with the january 1 , 2015 , deadline .

on august 22 , 2013 , the court ruled against the plaintiffs , stating that "[t]he fact that the statute defines confinement limitations in terms of animal behaviors rather than in square inches or other precise measurements does not render the statute facially vague. .

on february 3 , 2014 , the missouri attorney general filed a lawsuit in the u.s. district court in fresno , ca , to challenge the 2010 california egg law .

missouri claims that california's law violates the interstate commerce clause of the u.s. constitution by imposing production requirements on out - of - state egg farmers .

according to the lawsuit , missouri ships about one - third of its 1.7 billion annual egg production to california , and missouri egg producers would have to spend $120 million to meet the california cage requirements .

in september 2009 , michigan became the second state to enact legislation ( hb 1527 ) to restrict the use of conventional cages for laying hens .

similar to the california law , the michigan law prohibits gestating sows , calves raised for veal , and egg - laying hens from being confined in a manner that prevents them from lying down , standing up , fully extending limbs , and turning around freely .

the provisions of the michigan legislation were the result of negotiations between the michigan pork producers association , the michigan allied poultry industries , the michigan agri - business association , and the hsus .

the legislation stopped the hsus from pursuing a ballot initiative campaign in michigan on animal confinement during 2010 .

the michigan provisions for egg - laying hens go into force in 2019 .

article 13 of the treaty on the functioning of the european union recognizes animals as sentient beings and requires that full regard be given to the welfare of animals when formulating and implementing eu policy .

a 1964 book — animal machines — significantly increased awareness of animal welfare in the eu , particularly the welfare of farm animals .

the book also helped create public pressure in the eu to end the use of battery cages , the production method most in use in oecd countries .

subsequent research on non - cage systems led to an eu directive that first specified a minimum size for battery cages in 1986 .

the farm animal welfare council , established by the uk government in 1979 , issued an analysis of hen welfare and egg production systems in 1986 , followed by two additional reports in 1991 and 1997 on the welfare of laying hens .

on june 17 , 1999 , the european union announced passage of a new directive that would , over 13 years , phase out the use of battery cages for laying hens .

the ban , effective january 1 , 2012 , and relying on advice from the eu's scientific veterinary committee , prohibits the use of conventional battery cages for hens .

egg production in the eu now allows only enriched caging systems or non - cage systems .

enriched cages ( sometimes referred to as colony cages ) have a small perch , a litter area for scratching , and a nesting box .

the enriched cage is somewhat higher than the conventional battery cage and has slightly more space per hen .

the european commission announced plans in january 2012 to take legal action against 13 member states who are in breach of the new rules — belgium , bulgaria , cyprus , greece , hungary , italy , latvia , the netherlands , poland , portugal , romania , slovakia , and spain .

the eu commission sent formal notices asking each of the 13 noncompliant member states for information about how it would correct deficiencies in implementing the ban on battery cages .

the eu commission noted that noncompliance had animal welfare consequences , and also distorted the egg market .

by november 2012 , only cyprus , greece , and italy were not in compliance with the eu hen cage rules .

some eu countries transitioned to enriched cages ahead of the 2012 deadline for compliance .

sweden banned the use of conventional cages by the end of 2002 ; austria banned their use by the end of 2008 ; and germany followed by the end of 2009 .

austria and belgium also plan to ban enriched cages by 2020 and 2024 , respectively .

outside the eu , switzerland banned battery cages in 1992 .

battery cages are still legal in non - eu countries , and there is no current ban on the import into the eu of eggs produced in non - eu countries in battery cages .

such eggs will require a country - of - origin label and must indicate that the farming method used to produce the eggs is "non - ec standard. .

implementation of the ban has imposed increased costs for eggs in the eu .

according to the eu commission , egg supplies fell and egg prices "surged considerably" in the weeks following the implementation of the january 2012 ban .

data released by the commission showed that table egg prices increased 44% by march 2012 from the end of 2011 .

prices for eggs used by the food industry — normally as much as 50% less expensive than supermarket eggs — also increased 10% - 20% in price .

the eu wholesale prices for whole pasteurized liquid egg increased 102% year - over - year .

based on the experience of germany , which banned conventional cages in 2007 , the commission noted that they expected egg prices to stabilize by early may , even as they expect total egg production to fall by 2.5% in 2012 .

indeed , eu egg prices peaked in march , remained relatively high in april , but moved lower throughout the rest of the year .

although 2012 eu egg prices were higher than a year earlier because of high input costs , the november 2012 price was 16% lower than the march peak .

on february 15 , 2012 , the european commission issued its general strategy for the protection and welfare of animals .

the eu already had directives on various aspects of animal welfare including transportation ; slaughtering ; and specific requirements for housing calves , pigs , laying hens , and broilers .

eu rules on organic production also include high animal welfare standards for cattle , pig , and poultry production .

the new eu strategy will consider introducing a simplified legislative framework with animal welfare principles for all animals .

this framework would use science - based animal welfare indicators to simplify the legal framework , provide more information to consumers on animal welfare , create a common set of requirements for personnel handling animals , and establish a eu network of animal welfare centers .

