figure 1 .

map of haiti source: map resources .

adapted by crs .

haiti shares the island of hispaniola with the dominican republic ; haiti occupies the western third of the island .

since the fall of the duvalier dictatorship in 1986 , haiti has struggled to overcome its centuries - long legacy of authoritarianism , extreme poverty , and underdevelopment .

while significant progress has been made in improving governance , democratic institutions remain weak .

poverty remains massive and deep , and economic disparity is wide .

in proximity to the united states , and with such a chronically unstable political environment and fragile economy , haiti has been a constant policy issue for the united states .

the u.s. congress views the stability of the nation with great concern and has evidenced a commitment to improving conditions there .

the united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) has been in haiti to help restore order for 10 years , since the collapse of former president jean - bertrand aristide's government .

armed rebellion and diminished international support for aristide led him to flee into exile in february 2004 .

an international force authorized by the u.n. arrived shortly after his departure , and was replaced by minustah in june 2004 .

minustah worked closely with the interim government from 2004 to 2006 , when , after several delays , elections were held .

the mission continued to work closely with the préval administration .

although some haitians call for the removal of foreign troops , former president préval supported the mission's presence , saying that he would "not adopt a falsely nationalist position," and that minustah should stay until haiti is ready to assume responsibility for security .

more recently , popular protests have called for minustah's removal because of allegations of its role in introducing cholera to the country , and sexual abuse by some of its forces .

although critical of some aspects of minustah , president martelly nonetheless advocates extending minustah's term to help maintain stability and to assist in the reconstruction effort .

he has called for its eventual replacement with a revived haitian army .

the u.n. security council and international donors call instead for a continued strengthening of the haitian national police .

minustah's mandate includes three basic components: ( 1 ) to help create a secure and stable environment ; ( 2 ) to support the political process by fostering effective democratic governance and institutional development , supporting government efforts to promote national dialogue and reconciliation and to organize elections ; and ( 3 ) to support government and nongovernmental efforts to promote and protect human rights , as well as to monitor and report on the human rights situation .

minustah has played a key role in emergency responses to natural disasters , including facilitating the delivery of emergency humanitarian assistance .

as part of its work , the mission has also conducted campaigns to combat gangs and drug trafficking with the haitian police .

reduction of minustah troops .

minustah's current authorization runs through october 15 , 2015 .

the mission's budget for this year ( july 1 , 2014-june 30 , 2015 ) is about $500 million .

the u.n. has been gradually reducing minustah's number of troops since 2012 .

in october 2014 the security council passed a resolution that will reduce military personnel by more than half , to a maximum of 2,370 military personnel .

the group of friends of haiti ( argentina , brazil , canada , chile , colombia , france , guatemala , peru , the united states , and uruguay ) expressed concern during the u.n.'s debate that reducing the size of the military contingent before elections are held could hinder minustah's ability to respond to a crisis and that decisions regarding withdrawing minustah should be based on conditions on the ground , not just budgetary factors .

the european union stated that while overall security had improved , the number of demonstrations accompanied by violence had doubled .

in addition to emphasizing the importance of holding elections , speakers also stressed the role economic disparity plays in instability .

the european union stated that demonstrations with a socioeconomic angle had increased by 30% , and that "there continue to be grave social and economic inequalities that represent a real threat to haiti's stability and security. .

the group of friends stated that: security , respect for human rights and the rule of law , and development are interdependent and reinforce stability .

we therefore underscore the importance of systematically addressing the issues of unemployment , education and the delivery of basic social services , and of ensuring the economic and political empowerment of women .

the security council agreed that it could change the force level at any time if warranted .

the united states supports the drawdown of military forces .

haiti supported the resolution at the time , but has since asked the security council to delay the plan until after elections are held because of security concerns .

when the 2014 resolution was passed , the council said it would maintain u.n. police in haiti at about the same level .

however , figures show that the number of police is falling as well as the number of military officers .

minustah had 2,449 police in december 2014 and 2,378 in june 2015 ; the resolution allows for up to 2,601 u.n. police officers .

according to the state department , the u.n. has promised to try to bring the police component to its authorized level before elections , but its deployment process is lengthy and no date has been given for doing so .

minustah and c holera .

minustah and the u.n. have been widely criticized for not responding strongly enough to an outbreak of cholera in october 2010 , the first such outbreak in at least a century in haiti .

a team of researchers from france and haiti conducted an investigation at the request of the haitian government .

they reported that their findings "strongly suggest that contamination of the artibonite [river in haiti] and 1[sic] of its tributaries downstream from a [minustah] military camp triggered the epidemic," noting that there was "an exact correlation in time and places between the arrival of a nepalese battalion from an area experiencing a cholera outbreak and the appearance of the first cases in [the nearby town of] meille a few days after. .

other studies have come to the same conclusion .

while the authors of the study caution that the findings are not definitive , they and others have suggested that "to avoid actual contamination or suspicion happening again , it will be important to rigorously ensure that the sewage of military camps is handled properly. .

the u.n. has been under increasing pressure to take full responsibility for introduction of the disease .

over 5,000 cholera victims or relatives of victims have filed legal claims against the u.n. , demanding reparations , a public apology , and a nationwide response including "medical treatment for current and future victims , and clean water and sanitation infrastructure. .

the u.n. announced in early 2013 , however , that it would not compensate cholera victims , claiming diplomatic immunity .

the boston - based institute for justice and democracy in haiti filed a class action suit against the u.n. on behalf of victims in a u.s. federal court in october 2013 , seeking establishment by the u.n. of a standing claims commission to address claims for harm , and compensation for victims , including remediation of haiti's waterways , provision of adequate sanitation , and "$2.2 billion that the haitian government requires to eradicate cholera. .

in january 2015 , a u.s. federal judge dismissed that class action suit , determining the u.n. to be immune because of treaties .

two other lawsuits by cholera victims are still pending in u.s. courts .

many haitians' mistrust of the u.n. has manifested itself in protests and strained relations between minustah and the population for which it is there to help provide protection and stability .

minustah and charges of sexual abuse .

charges of sexual abuse by minustah personnel have also fueled anti - minustah sentiment .

the u.n. has a zero - tolerance policy toward sexual abuse and exploitation .

in the case of peacekeepers , the u.n. is responsible for investigating charges against police personnel , but the sending country is responsible for investigating charges against its military personnel .

the u.n. returns alleged perpetrators to their home country for punishment .

five minustah peacekeepers from uruguay were sent home in 2011 , to be tried on charges of sexually abusing an 18-year - old man at a u.n. base while filming it on a cellphone .

according to the u.n. , among 11 substantiated cases in 2012 were at least two cases of sexual exploitation of children by u.n. police .

the investigations led to three members of a pakistani police unit being convicted of raping a 14-year - old boy in one of the cases .

the trial took place in march 2012 in haiti but was conducted by a pakistani military tribunal , which dismissed the men from the military and sentenced them to one year in prison .

the unit had five cases pending as of june 1 , 2015 .

a major u.n. review of peacekeeping missions recommended that countries that disregard children's rights in armed conflict should be barred from u.n. peacekeeping missions ; that disciplinary action , or lack thereof , against sexual exploitation and abuse by u.n. personnel should be made public ; and that investigations should be required to be completed in six months , rather than the average 16 months it currently takes .

long before the earthquake struck , haiti was a country socially and ecologically at risk , possessing some of the lowest socioeconomic indicators in the world , and in an acute environmental crisis .

following several hurricanes that hit haiti in 2008 , the president of the inter - american development bank ( idb ) , luis moreno , called haiti the most fragile of idb's member countries , saying that no other nation in latin america and the caribbean is as vulnerable to economic shocks and natural disasters as is haiti .

plagued by chronic political instability and frequent natural disasters , haiti is the poorest country in the western hemisphere .

haiti's poverty is massive and deep .

there is extreme economic disparity between a small privileged class and the majority of the population .

over half the population ( 54% ) of 10 million people lives in extreme poverty , living on less than $1 a day ; about 80% live on $2 or less a day , according to the world bank .

poverty among the rural population is even more widespread: 69% of rural dwellers live on less than $1 a day , and 86% live on less than $2 a day .

hunger is also widespread: 81% of the national population and 87% of the rural population do not get the minimum daily ration of food defined by the world health organization .

in remote parts of haiti , children have been dying of malnutrition .

food security worsened throughout haiti following hurricanes isaac and sandy in 2012 , which destroyed about 70% of haiti's crops .

some 1.5 million people live in severe food insecurity in rural areas affected by the storms .

as many as 450,000 people were at risk of severe acute malnutrition , including at least 4,000 children less than five years of age .

over 40 years , from the late 1960s until the early 2000s , haiti's per capita real gdp declined by 30% .

by around 2007 , haiti began making some macroeconomic progress: the haitian economy was growing for three years prior to the earthquake , and the government had improved management of its resources .

in order to reach its millennium development goal of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015 , haiti's gross domestic product ( gdp ) would have to grow 3.5% per year , a goal the imf says haiti is not considered likely to achieve .

therefore , economic growth , even if it is greater than population growth , is not expected to be enough to reduce poverty ; programs specifically targeted at poverty reduction are needed as well .

the global economic crisis led to a drop of about 10% in remittances from haitians abroad , which amounted to about $1.65 billion in 2008 , more than a fourth of haiti's annual income .

damage and losses caused by the 2010 earthquake were estimated to be $7.8 billion , an amount greater than haiti's gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2009 .

haiti's gdp contracted by slightly more than 5% in 2010 , but grew by 5.6% in 2011 .

growth fell again , to 2.8% in 2012 , slowed by hurricanes , drought , and "delays in implementing key public investment projects. .

according to the economist intelligence unit , haiti's gdp ( gross domestic product ) growth rate was 4.3% in 2013 ; estimated at 2.7% in 2014 , dropping slightly due to the effect of drought on the agricultural sector and the underperformance of government projects ; and expected to rise to 4.2 % by 2016 .

compared to developing countries in latin america and the caribbean , however , haiti's socioeconomic indicators continue to rate extremely low .

the gni ( gross national income ) per capita in the region's developing countries has climbed steadily since 2000 , from $4,415 to $9,536 in 2013 .

during the same period , haiti's gni per capita has remained stubbornly low , rising only from $410 to $810 .

the likelihood that economic growth will contribute to the reduction of poverty in haiti is further reduced by its enormous income distribution gap .

haiti has the second - largest income disparity in the world .

over 68% of the total national income accrues to the wealthiest 20% of the population , while less than 1.5% of haiti's national income is accumulated by the poorest 20% of the population .

when the level of inequality is as high as haiti's , according to the world bank , the capacity of economic growth to reduce poverty "approaches zero. .

in 2009 , haiti passed a minimum wage law .

the law mandated increases in wages in two phases .

in 2010 , the minimum wage rose from about $1.75 per day to $3.75 per day , and in october 2012 , it increased to $5.00 per day .

the average daily wage for textile assembly workers is $5.25 , above the new minimum wage , so some manufacturers said that they would have to raise wages proportionally .

despite the wage increase , the fundamental inequality of haitian society remains basically unchanged .

the haitian government and international donors have focused efforts on manufacturing and agricultural production ; both were initially making a steady recovery .

but agriculture faces significant limitations in haiti , with all but 2% of the forest cover deforested , 85% of the watersheds degraded , little or no rural infrastructure , and limited access to credit .

hurricane sandy caused further loss of agricultural land ; the u.n. estimated that an addition $40 million would be needed to address the new needs arising from that storm .

high rates of unemployment , income inequality , and poverty continue to be serious roadblocks to overall economic development .

nonetheless , u.s .

ambassador pamela white said last year that haiti had made much progress , including: "tens of thousands of haitian farmers have higher incomes , ... exports to the united states are up 41 percent since 2010 thanks to job creation in the manufacturing sector ... [c]rime rates are down , and security is improved. .

she said that "haiti has made the transition to a period of building and long - term development. .

obama administration officials have said that haiti is a key foreign policy priority and the administration's top priority in the latin america and caribbean region in terms of bilateral foreign assistance .

in its fy2016 budget request , the administration stated that haiti had made progress by taking steps to improve the business climate , attract investments , and create jobs ; and by supporting judicial sector reforms , which have contributed to the increased capability of haitian officials to deliver better services .

it also said the haitian government had "reinforced its commitment to improving and strengthening the health system," and was working to enhance school standards and increase student enrollment "drastically" by 2016 .

the administration noted that "despite these positive developments , however , the pace of much needed progress is still hindered by weak public institutions , conflicts between the executive and legislative branches , lack of accountability , and weak state capacity to provide basic services. .

the administration says that current u.s. assistance programs are emphasizing country leadership and ownership , and strengthening local institutions , so that haiti can "further chart its own development and promote sustainability. .

to spur greater progress , the administration says haiti "needs to enact key laws to improve its investment climate , enact the new criminal code ... and enact an anti - corruption law. .

other concerns for u.s. policy regarding haiti include the cost and effectiveness of u.s. aid ; protecting human rights ; combating narcotics , arms , and human trafficking ; addressing haitian migration ; and alleviating poverty .

the united states and other members of the international community continue to support efforts to hold free and fair elections in haiti in the belief that in the long run they will contribute to improved governance and , eventually , improved services to haitian citizens and greater stability , which will allow for increased development .

congress has given bipartisan support to this policy approach .

there has been bipartisan support in congress to assist haiti both before and since the earthquake .

in the years preceding the earthquake , congress passed several bills , in addition to appropriations bills , to support haiti .

this included a series of trade preferences for haiti , which are described in more detail below .

another issue of concern to congress has been efforts to ensure that free , fair , and safe elections are held in haiti .

as mentioned above ( see " overdue elections process: delays and disputes …" ) , one - third of the haitian senate seats expired on may 8 , 2012 .

elections for those seats and for municipal councils , town delegates , and other posts , which are also long overdue , have yet to be held , although they have finally been scheduled for later this year .

at a house foreign affairs committee ( hfac ) hearing on haiti on october 9 , 2013 , members on both sides of the aisle suggested that the failure to hold legislative elections already two years overdue could affect u.s. assistance to haiti .

other congressional concerns include post - earthquake reconstruction ; transparency and accountability of the haitian government ; respect for human rights , particularly for women ; security issues , including martelly's proposal to reconstitute the haitian army ; and counternarcotics efforts .

another concern is the consequences for haiti of a september 2013 court ruling in the dominican republic that could retroactively strip some 200,000 dominicans , mostly of haitian descent , of citizenship .

the end of the registration period in june 2015 raises concerns that there will be mass deportations to haiti .

congress passed the assessing progress in haiti act of 2013 ; it was signed into law in august 2014 .

it directs the secretary of state to report to congress within 120 days , and every six months thereafter through september 30 , 2016 , on the status of specific aspects of post - earthquake recovery and development efforts in haiti .

as it considered fy2016 funding for haiti , the house appropriations committee said it "remains concerned about the lack of progress in self - reliance and governance in haiti more than five years after the earthquake," and that it expects the department of state to provide regular updates on progress in haiti .

the committee also notes "the significant unobligated balances for assistance for haiti from prior years and , given the continued high level of need in the country , directs the department of state and usaid to review and prioritize programs and take steps to execute these funds in a responsible manner. .

see " legislation in the 114th congress " below .

p.l .

113-76 / h.r .

3547 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , prohibits assistance to the central government of haiti until the secretary of state certifies that haiti has held free and fair parliamentary elections , is respecting judicial independence , and is taking effective steps to combat corruption and improve governance .

the bill also prohibits the obligation or expenditure of funds for haiti except as provided through the regular notification procedures of the committees on appropriations , but allows haiti to purchase defense articles and services under the arms export control act for its coast guard .

signed into law january 17 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-162 / h.r .

1749 / s. 1104 .

the assessing progress in haiti act would measure the progress of recovery and development efforts in haiti following the earthquake of january 12 , 2010 .

it directs the secretary of state to coordinate and transmit to congress a three - year strategy for haiti that identifies constraints to economic growth and to consolidation of democratic government institutions ; includes an action plan that outlines policy tools , technical assistance , and resources for addressing the highest priority constraints ; and identifies specific steps and benchmarks for providing direct assistance to the haitian government .

the act also requires the secretary of state to report to congress annually through december 31 , 2017 , on the status of specific aspects of post - earthquake recovery and development efforts in haiti .

signed into law august 8 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-235 / h.r .

83 .

the fy2015 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act conditions aid to haiti .

it prohibits assistance to the central government of haiti until the secretary of state certifies that haiti "is taking steps" to hold free and fair parliamentary elections , respecting judicial independence , selecting judges in a transparent manner , combating corruption , and improving governance and financial transparency .

h.r .

52 .

the save america comprehensive immigration act of 2015 would authorize adjustments of status for certain nationals or citizens of haiti and would amend the haitian refugee immigration fairness act of 1998 to ( 1 ) waive document fraud as a ground of inadmissibility and ( 2 ) address determinations with respect to children .

introduced january 6 , 2015 , referred to the house judiciary committee , committees on homeland security and oversight and government reform january 23 , 2015 .

h.r .

1295 .

the trade preferences extension act of 2015 would extend preferential duty treatment program for haiti .

introduced march 4 , 2015 ; house passed on april 15 ; senate passed amended version may 14 ; resolving differences as of june 11 , 2015 .

h.r .

1891 .

agoa extension and enhancement act of 2015 would extend the african growth and opportunity act , the generalized system of preferences , and the preferential duty treatment program for haiti , and for other purposes .

introduced april 17 , 2015 , referred to the house committee on ways and means .

referred to the union calendar , calendar no .

70 , may 1 , 2015 .

h.res .

25 .

would recognize the anniversary of the tragic earthquake in haiti on january 12 , 2010 , honoring those who lost their lives , and expressing continued solidarity with the haitian people .

introduced january 9 , 2015 , referred to the house foreign affairs subcommittee on the western hemisphere on february 11 , 2015 .

s. 503 .

haitian partnership renewal act would amend the caribbean basin economic recovery act to extend ( 1 ) the 60% applicable percentage requirement for duty - free entry apparel articles assembled in haiti and import from haiti or the dominican republic to the united states , and ( 2 ) duty - free entry for such articles through december 19 , 2030 .

introduced , referred to the senate finance committee , read twice , and referred to the committee on finance on february 12 , 2015 .

s. 1009 .

agoa extension and enhancement act of 2015 would extend the african growth and opportunity act , the generalized system of preferences , the preferential duty treatment program for haiti , and for other purposes .

introduced , referred to the senate finance committee , read twice and referred to the committee on finance on april 20 , 2015 .

s. 1267 .

the trade preferences extension act of 2015 would amend the caribbean basin economic recovery act to extend through december 19 , 2025 , the duty - free entry of apparel articles , including woven articles and certain knit articles , assembled in haiti and imported from haiti or other dominican republic to the united states ; the special duty - free rules for haiti shall now extend through september 30 , 2025 .

introduced may 11 , 2015 , referred to senate finance committee .

by senator hatch from committee on finance filed written report , s.rept .

114-43 , on may 12 , 2015 .

