since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , domestic terrorists — people who commit crimes within the homeland and draw inspiration from u.s. - based extremist ideologies and movements — have not received as much attention from federal law enforcement as their foreign counterparts inspired by al qaeda .

this was not necessarily always the case .

the fbi reported in 1999 that "[d]uring the past 30 years , the vast majority — but not all — of the deadly terrorist attacks occurring in the united states have been perpetrated by domestic extremists. .

the u.s. government reacted to 9 / 11 by greatly enhancing its counterterrorism efforts .

this report discusses how domestic terrorists broadly fit into this new counterterrorism landscape , a terrain that in the last 10 years has been largely shaped in response to terrorists inspired by foreign ideologies .

this report focuses especially on how domestic terrorism is conceptualized by the federal government and issues involved in assessing this threat's significance .

today ( perhaps in part because of the government's focus on international terrorist ideologies ) , it is difficult to evaluate the scope of domestic terrorist activity .

for example , federal agencies employ varying terminology and definitions to describe it .

also , domestic terrorism - related intelligence collection efforts have not necessarily received the same attention as similar efforts to counter foreign threats .

beyond these issues , the obama administration's community outreach - driven strategy to quell terrorism - related radicalization in the united states focuses on individuals inspired by al qaeda .

how domestic terrorism fits into this strategy is unclear .

congress may opt to examine these and other issues related to domestic terrorism .

domestic terrorists may not be the top federal counterterrorism priority , but they feature prominently among the concerns of some law enforcement officers .

for example , in 2011 , los angeles deputy police chief michael p. downing included "black separatists , white supremacist / sovereign citizen extremists , and animal rights terrorists" among his chief counterterrorism concerns .

also possibly contributing to domestic terrorism's secondary status as a threat , a large number of those labeled as domestic terrorists do not necessarily use traditional terrorist tactics such as bombings or airplane hijackings .

additionally , many domestic terrorists do not intend to physically harm people but rather rely on alternative tactics such as theft , trespassing , destruction of property , and burdening u.s. courts with retaliatory legal filings .

while plots and attacks by foreign - inspired homegrown violent jihadists have certainly earned more media attention , domestic terrorists have been busy as well .

it is worth noting that in terms of casualties on u.s. soil , an act of domestic terrorism is second only to the events of 9 / 11 .

timothy mcveigh's bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city on april 19 , 1995 , claimed 168 lives and injured more than 500 others .

some estimates suggest that domestic terrorists are responsible for carrying out dozens of incidents since 9 / 11 , and there appears to be growth in anti - government extremist activity as measured by watchdog groups in the last several years .

much like their jihadist counterparts , domestic terrorists are often internet savvy and use the medium as a resource for their operations .

prison has been highlighted as an arena that can foster terrorist radicalization , and white supremacy — a set of beliefs held by white supremacist extremists — has long played a role in the activities of several u.s. prison gangs .

sovereign citizen anti - government ideas ( that have inspired some domestic terrorists ) have also circulated in u.s. prisons .

terrorists are typically driven by particular ideologies .

in this respect , domestic terrorists are a widely divergent lot , drawing from a broad array of philosophies and worldviews .

these individuals can be motivated to commit crimes in the name of ideas such as animal rights , white supremacy , and opposition to abortion , for example .

however , the expression of these worldviews ( minus the commission of crimes ) involves constitutionally protected activity .

aware of the lines between constitutionally protected speech and criminality , domestic terrorists often rope themselves off from ideological ( above - ground ) elements that openly and often legally espouse similar beliefs .

in essence , the practitioners who commit violent acts are distinct from the propagandists who theorize and craft worldviews that could be interpreted to support these acts .

thus , terrorist lone actors ( lone wolves ) or isolated small groups ( cells ) generally operate autonomously and in secret , all the while drawing ideological sustenance — not direction — from propagandists operating in the free market of ideas .

this report provides background regarding domestic terrorists — detailing what constitutes the domestic terrorism threat as suggested by publicly available u.s. government sources .

it illustrates some of the key factors involved in assessing this threat and concludes by examining potential issues for congress .

this report does not discuss in detail either violent jihadist - inspired terrorism or the federal government's role in counterterrorism investigations .

it is meant to be read in conjunction with crs report r41780 , the federal bureau of investigation and terrorism investigations ; crs report r42553 , countering violent extremism in the united states ; and crs report r41416 , american jihadist terrorism: combating a complex threat , which provide greater context in these areas .

two basic questions are key to understanding domestic terrorism .

first , what exactly constitutes "domestic terrorism ? .

answering this question is more complicated than it may appear .

some consider all terrorist plots occurring within the homeland as acts of domestic terrorism .

according to this perspective , a bombing plot involving u.s. citizens motivated by a foreign terrorist group such as al qaeda constitutes domestic terrorism .

while this conceptualization may be true at some level , a practical definition of domestic terrorism distilled from federal sources is much narrower .

it suggests that domestic terrorists are americans who commit ideologically driven crimes in the united states but lack foreign direction or influence — whether tactical or philosophical .

this conceptualization excludes homegrown individuals directed or motivated by groups such as al qaeda .

second , what particular groups are considered domestic terrorist organizations ? .

the u.s. government does not provide a precise , comprehensive , and public answer to this question .

rather , in broad terms , the department of justice ( doj ) has identified a number of general threats that embody this issue .

domestic terrorist attacks have come nowhere near the devastation of 9 / 11 .

however , it is worth noting that ( as mentioned above ) timothy mcveigh's bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city on april 19 , 1995 , claimed 168 lives and injured more than 500 others .

it ranks as the second - deadliest terrorist attack on u.s. soil , behind only the devastation wrought by al qaeda on 9 / 11 .

domestic terrorists feature prominently among the concerns of some law enforcement officers .

for example , los angeles deputy police chief michael p. downing recently described violent islamists such as al qaeda , hezbollah , and hamas as los angeles's main terrorist threats "along with three other terrorist categories: black separatists , white supremacist / sovereign citizen extremists , and animal rights terrorists. .

in one 2008 study , state police agencies "overwhelmingly reported" dangerous domestic extremist groups present in their jurisdictions .

of course , as one expert reminds us , most followers of extremist viewpoints pose no threat: "most of them are not going to do anything but bore their relatives and friends with ridiculous papers and treatises. .

five themes speak to the possible threat posed by domestic terrorists .

first , domestic terrorists likely have been responsible numerous incidents since 9 / 11 , and there appears to be growth in anti - government extremist activity as measured by watchdog groups in the last several years .

second , a large number of those labeled as domestic terrorists do not necessarily use major terrorist tactics such as bombings or airplane hijackings .

third , domestic terrorists — much like their violent jihadist analogues — are often internet savvy and use the medium as a resource for their operations .

fourth , domestic terrorism can be seen as a somewhat decentralized threat often involving lone wolves and movements operating under the model of leaderless resistance .

finally , prison has been highlighted as an arena in which terrorist radicalization can occur , and wse plays a role in the activities of several u.s. prison gangs .

sovereign citizen theories have also taken root in u.s. prisons .

congress may choose to consider issues in three areas regarding the federal role in combating domestic terrorism: ( 1 ) assessing this threat's scope , ( 2 ) the adequacy of domestic terrorism intelligence collection efforts , and ( 3 ) how domestic terrorism fits into the obama administration's efforts to counter radicalization that may lead to terrorism .

as this report suggests , at least three factors may make it hard for policy makers to form a baseline evaluation of the domestic terrorism threat from publicly available information .

first , federal agencies employ varying terminology to describe the threat .

second , the federal government lacks a public and official method for either designating specific domestic groups as terrorists or formally and openly describing particular extremist movements as threats .

finally , there is no clear sense of how many domestic terrorism plots and attacks the government has investigated in recent years .

the federal government has used broad conceptualizations to describe domestic terrorism .

doj discusses the issue in terms of a handful of general "threats" such as animal rights extremists , eco - terrorists , anarchists , and anti - government extremists — not specific groups .

additionally , terms such as "terrorism" and "extremism" appear to be used interchangeably .

presumably , using the term "extremist" allows lawyers , policy makers , and investigators the flexibility to discuss terrorist - like activity without actually labeling it as "terrorism" and then having to prosecute it as such .

however , this may lead to inconsistencies in the development and application of the law in the domestic terrorism arena .

for example , policy makers may ponder why a specific terrorism statute covers ideologically motivated attacks against businesses that involve animals , while there are no other domestic terrorism statutes as narrow in their purview covering a particular type of target and crime .

the federal government lacks a process for publicly designating domestic terrorist organizations .

in other words , there is no official open - source roster of domestic groups that the fbi or other federal agencies target as terrorist organizations .

the lack of such a designation may spring partly from first amendment concerns .

such a list might discourage speech and expression related to the ideologies underpinning the activities of named groups .

regardless , this stands in stark contrast to the world of international counterterrorism , where the united states maintains a well - established — legally and procedurally proscribed — regimen regarding the identification of foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) .

official fto designation benefits counterterrorism efforts in a number of ways .

most importantly , it facilitates the prosecution of those who provide material support to listed foreign terrorist groups .

arguably , because there is no domestic terrorism equivalent of fto designation , it is more difficult to press material support charges against domestic terrorists .

in 2010 , one scholar was unable to identify any material support cases involving "a domestic terrorist group or its supporters. .

according to the department of state , fto designation has other effects .

it 1 .

supports [u.s.] efforts to curb terrorism financing and to encourage other nations to do the same .

2 .

stigmatizes and isolates designated terrorist organizations internationally .

3 .

deters donations or contributions to and economic transactions with named organizations .

4 .

heightens public awareness and knowledge of terrorist organizations .

5 .

signals to other governments our concern about named organizations .

this description suggests that the absence of a designation regimen for domestic terrorist groups makes it harder for the federal government to discredit such groups and simultaneously strengthen public understanding of the domestic terrorist threat .

likewise , the lack of a list might make it more difficult for the federal government to communicate exactly what the threat is to its own agencies , let alone local or state entities .

while there is no official designation process for domestic terrorist organizations , as it stands , doj and the fbi have publicly named and discussed domestic terrorism threats — such as animal rights extremism or anarchist extremism — without illuminating exactly how they arrive at these categories .

federal lawmakers may opt to consider the feasibility of officially formalizing this process and / or opening it up to greater oversight .

ideally , an attempt to render this process less bureaucratically opaque would simultaneously ( 1 ) enhance federal efforts to combat domestic terrorism while ( 2 ) protecting civil rights and civil liberties .

for example , such a list may potentially offer agencies outside of doj — including relevant players at the state and local level — formal opportunities to provide input into ranking domestic terrorism threats while enshrining mechanisms by which individuals who believe in the philosophies undergirding a designated threat could petition to have that threat "de - listed. .

on the other hand , making this process more open may take away the fbi's flexibility to rapidly adapt its domestic terrorism priorities , especially if threats quickly mutate .

a publicly available official accounting of domestic terrorist plots and incidents may help policy makers understand the scope of the threat in lieu of a regimen designed to name domestic terrorism organizations .

however , the federal government does not produce such a document .

the national counterterrorism center's ( nctc ) worldwide incidents tracking system ( wits ) had provided an official record of terrorism incidents around the globe , including the united states .

this was a publicly accessible database active from 2004 to early 2012 .

it included basic information regarding terrorist incidents .

prior to the advent of wits , the fbi used to publish regular reports on terrorist activity in the united states .

the lack of a publicly available federal accounting of domestic terrorism plots and attacks makes it especially difficult to determine the scope of this diverse threat , which , for example , can be investigated and prosecuted at the state or local , let alone federal , level .

also , the lines between domestic terrorism and other forms of criminality such as tax fraud or hate crimes can be blurry .

a fuller accounting of domestic terrorism plots and attacks may call such prosecutorial flexibility into question .

such an accounting may reveal the instances in which fbi investigated individuals as domestic terrorists but doj did not prosecute them as such .

regardless , a better sense of domestic terrorism's scope publicly proffered by the federal government may assist policy makers .

it may be of policymaking value for executive branch agencies to release annual statistics on domestic terrorism prosecutions , naming individuals and movements involved .

congress may also consider requesting an even more detailed annual public report that counts and describes the domestic terrorist plots dismantled ; the number of attacks investigated ; and the federal , state , and local agencies involved .

the lack of such an accounting makes it difficult for policy makers to exercise oversight by comparing the levels of domestic terrorist activity against items such as homegrown violent jihadist activity and other threats to the homeland .

a regular public accounting could also help policy makers assess the effectiveness of the government's response to the domestic terrorist threat .

it may also assist policy makers who wish to compare one domestic terrorist threat against another .

finally , without a clear , publicly available understanding of the domestic terrorist threat , it may be difficult to measure how much federal funding is allocated to this issue .

intelligence collection efforts against foreign terrorist groups have received much scrutiny since 9 / 11 .

u.s. efforts to gather information versus domestic terrorism actors have not .

domestic terrorism does not feature in the director of national intelligence's national intelligence priorities framework ( nipf ) , described as the "means to capture issues of critical interest to senior intelligence community ( ic ) customers and communicating those issues to the ic for action. .

importantly , for intelligence gathering and program prioritization purposes , "there is no ... standard across federal agencies that can be applied to [domestic terrorism] cases. .

also , there likely is no established standard for the collection of intelligence from state and local investigators .

congress may choose to examine these issues as well as the scope of intelligence collection efforts focused on domestic terrorism .

by law , "nctc serves as the primary organization in the united states government ... for integrating and analyzing all intelligence pertaining to counterterrorism ( except for information pertaining exclusively to domestic terrorism ) . .

because of its lead status for counterterrorism investigations in the homeland , the fbi arguably serves the parallel role for the domestic terrorist threat .

the development of any interagency regimen for the collection and analysis of domestic terrorism information might start with the bureau's capacities in this regard .

congress may wish to consider whether the fbi has allocated appropriate resources and expended enough effort in collection and analysis of domestic terrorism - related intelligence as well as the safeguarding of civil rights .

in august 2011 , the obama administration released a strategy for countering the radicalization of terrorists , also described as combating violent extremism ( cve ) .

this document was fleshed out to a degree by the administration's release in december 2011 of its "strategic implementation plan for empowering local partners to prevent violent extremism in the united states. .

the administration's cve strategy and plan revolve around countering the radicalization of all types of potential terrorists , but the radicalization of violent jihadists is its key focus .

regardless , domestic terrorism falls under the strategy's purview .

federal cve efforts often depend on government agencies cooperating with local groups .

in fact , the obama administration's national cve strategy highlights a "community - based approach" for the federal government .

to this end , the strategy states that the federal government most effectively acts as a "facilitator , convener , and source of information. .

as all of this may suggest , to date the bulk of federal - level cve work has revolved around community engagement .

congress may opt to ask the administration which domestic terrorists it will focus on under the strategy and which communities it intends to engage regarding issues surrounding non - jihadist terrorism .

