immigration policy has been an ongoing subject of congressional attention in recent years and a topic of concern for the u.s. public at large .

mexicans are by far the largest group of u.s. migrants , and about 1 in 10 mexicans now live ( legally or illegally ) in the united states .

indeed , mexico - u.s. migration represents the largest binational migration flow in the world .

what does mexico's prominence in the u.s. migration system mean for u.s. immigration policy ? .

on one hand , it means that u.s. immigration policy , to varying degrees , primarily affects mexicans and mexico .

today's mexico - u.s. migration flows and the mexico - born population in the united states are the product of previous immigration policy decisions , as well as of the long and complex history of the u.s. and mexican economies , labor markets , and demographics .

on the other hand , it also means that mexico remains at the center of today's immigration debate , even if sometimes only implicitly .

recognizing mexico's status within the u.s. migration system focuses attention on how the u.s. immigration debate affects mexico , and on how mexico may affect certain migration outcomes .

this report begins with an overview of mexico - u.s. migration flows , and reviews the history of migration policies in both countries .

the report then describes current demographics of mexico - born persons in the united states and their recent dispersion to new u.s. destinations — factors that have helped shape the politics of u.s. immigration policy in recent years .

the last section of the report discusses four major issues in the u.s. immigration debate: migration control and border security , the lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) visa system , temporary worker programs , and potential legalization programs for certain unauthorized aliens .

for each of these issues , the report describes the impact of proposed reforms on mexicans and raises questions about how mexico may affect policy outcomes .

does mexico support u.s. immigration policy goals ? .

should the united states and mexico pursue more collaborative approaches to certain immigration issues ? .

the report also examines a fifth , related policy issue: efforts to reduce emigration pressures within mexico .

migration to the united states consists of three main groups of migrants: lprs , temporary nonimmigrants , and unauthorized aliens .

within each of these categories , mexicans represent the largest group of foreign born in the united states .

this section describes how social , economic , and demographic factors in mexico and the united states along with migration - related policies in both countries have produced four phases in the regional migration system: limited seasonal flows prior to world war ii , the bracero temporary worker program from 1942 to 1964 , the emergence of a predominantly illegal system from 1965 through the 1980s , and the consolidation of that system along with increased family - based immigration since the 1990s .

while seasonal migration by mexican agricultural workers dates back to the 19 th century — and while most of california , arizona , new mexico , texas , nevada , colorado , and utah once belonged to spain and later mexico — large - scale permanent immigration from mexico to the united states is a recent phenomenon , as figure 3 illustrates .

mexican lpr immigrants exceeded 1 million in a decade for the first time in the 1980s ( the darker bars in figure 3 ) and mexicans accounted for more than 15% of total lpr inflows for the first time in the 1990s ( the line in figure 3 ) .

the lighter bars in figure 3 depict u.s. census data on the total mexican - born population living in the united states , which include legal immigrants , temporary nonimmigrants , and unauthorized migrants .

as the figure illustrates , fewer than 1 million mexicans lived in the united states as recently as 1970 .

all of these mexican migration and population trends increased markedly beginning around the 1970s , however , with legal immigration ( lpr inflows ) and the total mexico - born population living in the united states both roughly doubling during each decade beginning in 1970 .

even as growth rates slowed after 2000 , the mexico - born population in the united states climbed to 11.5 million people by 2009 .

in contrast with earlier periods , in which the migration system was dominated by short - term , seasonal , migration for agricultural work in the u.s. southwest , mexican migrants in the united states today are equally divided by gender ; most live permanently in the united states ; they work overwhelmingly in non - agricultural occupations ( see table 3 ) ; and they are dispersed throughout the entire country ( see figure 6 ) .

what explains the shift from relatively low immigration levels for the first two - thirds of the 20 th century to the rapid growth of mexican migration since 1970 ? .

international migration is primarily a function of structural demographic , economic , and social forces .

high birth rates and limited economic opportunities have been "push factors" that encouraged emigration from mexico for most of this period ; and plentiful employment opportunities , connections to family networks , and an aging population have been "pulls factors" within the united states — though all of these push and pull factors are in flux .

how these structural forces translate into migration outcomes also depends on migration - related policies in both countries that encourage or discourage international migration and that afford aliens different legal statuses .

the mexico - born population in the united states accounted for about 29% of the total u.s. foreign - born population of 39.9 million in 2010 .

recent foreign - born population growth has occurred as native - born population fertility levels have declined and the median age of the u.s. population has increased .

thus , while the foreign born represented 12.9% of the total u.s. population in 2010 , they accounted for roughly 32% of total u.s. population growth since 2000 , and almost all growth in the 25- to 54-year - old population .

partly for this reason , the foreign born are disproportionately likely to be in the labor force: 25.5 million foreign - born workers represented 16.3% of the civilian labor force in 2010 ; and 7.8 million mexico - born workers represented 29% of the foreign - born labor force and 5% of the total u.s. labor force .

mexican migration to the united states has attracted the attention of congress and the public not only because of its scale , but also because the mexico - born population in the united states possess a different socioeconomic profile from most other foreign - born groups .

on average , the mexican born in the united states are more likely than other foreign born to be unauthorized ; and compared to other foreign - born and native - born populations in the united states , mexicans are younger , have lower education levels , are more likely to work in lower - skilled occupations , and have lower measures of economic well - being .

recent changes in the geography of mexican migration to the united states have directed additional attention to these issues ( see " geographic dispersion " ) .

immigration policy has been a subject of congressional concern over many decades .

since 2001 , congress has considered a range of measures to strengthen border security and migration control , changes to the lpr and nonimmigrant visa systems , and proposals to legalize certain unauthorized aliens , among other issues .

mexico's status as the largest source of u.s. migrants and as a continental neighbor means that many u.s. policies primarily affect mexicans .

viewing the immigration debate from a u.s. - mexico perspective raises a number of questions about each of these issues , including about mexico's role in shaping u.s. migration flows and steps mexico has taken and could take to reduce unauthorized migration .

the united states and mexico have several common interests in a well - functioning migration system .

first and foremost , both countries benefit from a secure border that permits safe and orderly migration and commerce , limits illegal flows , protects public safety and human rights , and disrupts criminal enterprises .

second , with mexico being the united states' third - largest trading partner in 2012 and migrant remittances being among mexico's largest sources of foreign exchange earnings , regional migration issues are inextricably linked to both countries' economic well - being .

third , both countries have benefitted from demographic complementarities , with mexico's post - 1960 baby boom helping to sustain u.s. population growth in recent decades as the u.s. population has aged .

these common interests have , at times , led the united states and mexico to approach migration from a bilateral perspective , as they did through the bracero program ( see " 1942-1964: the bracero program " ) .

more recently , president george w. bush and mexican president vicente fox reached a framework agreement to pursue a major bilateral migration deal .

under the agreement , announced on september 6 , 2001 , the two presidents outlined a bilateral approach to migration reform that would combine a new mexico - u.s. guest worker program , legalization for most unauthorized mexican migrants in the united states , enhanced border enforcement including steps by mexico to discourage illegal outflows , and increased u.s. investment to create alternatives to emigration in mexican migrant - sending communities .

although the migration talks fell off the bilateral agenda after the 9 / 11 attacks , the pillars of the framework agreement remained at the center of the u.s. immigration debate .

at the same time , migration has also been a source of bilateral tension .

some people are concerned about the impact of low - skilled immigration on the u.s. economy and about illegal migration , and many mexican migrants fall into these categories ( see " mexicans in the united states " ) .

conversely , while mexico recognizes u.s. authority to make and enforce immigration laws — just as mexico enforces its own migration laws — mexico also seeks to protect the rights of its nationals abroad .

this perspective has led to episodic disagreements over u.s. immigration policy and policy enforcement .

history and geography guarantee that mexico and the united states have a unique migration relationship — a point driven home by mexico's ranking as the number one source of u.s. immigrants , both legal and unauthorized .

the size of the mexican population in the united states , its demographic characteristics , and its increasing dispersion to new u.s. destinations all place mexico at the center of the u.s. immigration debate ; and the proportion of mexicans who migrate to the united states also places migration issues at the center of the bilateral relationship .

as described above , these flows are a function of economic push and pull factors and of previous policy decisions .

this history directs attention to policy choices being made today .

many of the core issues in the u.s. immigration debate — including efforts to strengthen migration control and border security , possible reforms to the lawful permanent resident and nonimmigrant visa systems , and proposals to legalize certain unauthorized migrants — have important implications for both countries .

the united states and mexico also may share common interests around some of these issues , such as combating smuggling and other transnational crime , encouraging circularity among temporary workers , promoting the orderly repatriation of unauthorized mexicans and criminal aliens , and generally reducing unauthorized migration .

thus , as in the past , some people in the united states may see reasons to treat mexico as a "special case" on certain immigration questions .

from this perspective , previous mexico - u.s. migration policies not only help explain the scope of contemporary flows , but also set a precedent for those who may favor taking a bilateral approach .

these factors also get at the practical argument for mexico - specific policies: the sheer size of the bilateral flow and mexico's status as america's continental neighbor mean that bilateral policies may offer promising opportunities for more effective migration enforcement and more efficient management of flows .

these potential advantages underlay the 2001 framework agreement between george w. bush and vicente fox that would have included a mexico - specific temporary worker program , collaborative border enforcement , legalization for certain unauthorized mexicans in the united states , and new investments in mexican communities of origin aimed at reducing illegal outflows .

the united states and mexico may continue to see opportunities to better manage migration flows and control unauthorized migration through collaborative approaches to these issues , as discussed above .

on the other hand , a truly collaborative approach to bilateral migration issues along these lines would require a high level of mutual trust .

some people may question whether mexico would be a reliable partner in a bilateral visa program , border enforcement , or port security — nor is it clear that mexico would be willing to take on such a role in all of these cases .

at a minimum , any major changes in the u.s. - mexican migration relationship likely would require that the countries first achieve greater success in combating illicit drugs and reducing the violence associated with the drug trade .

in the long run , the future of the u.s. - mexican migration relationship depends in great part on economic and demographic trends in both countries , and their impact on regional migration flows .

what will be the shape of the u.s. economic recovery , and will u.s. employers continue to demand high levels of low - skilled migration ? .

will emigration from mexico pick back up with the u.s. economic recovery , perhaps including more higher - skilled migrants , or have economic and demographic changes in both countries ushered in a new period of lower regional flows ? .

as in the past , it will be a combination of these structural factors and of policy decisions in both countries that influences mexico - u.s. migration flows .

appendix a .

total and mexico - born population , by state , 1990 , 2000 , and 2010 appendix b .

immigrant visas , fy2000 – fy2009 appendix c. nonimmigrant visas issued , selected types , fy2000-fy200 .

