major developments affecting the domestic photovoltaic ( pv ) manufacturing sector include technological advances , improved production methods , dramatically lower prices for pv modules , and trade frictions , particularly with china .

these volatile industry trends have adversely affected the operations of many solar companies , forcing some to reassess their business models and others to close factories or declare bankruptcy .

in addition , the rapid growth in shale gas production has the potential to affect the competitiveness of solar power , as cheap natural gas possibly may provide an alternative source of energy at a lower price .

if oil and gas prices stay low , demand for renewable energy , including solar , might be hurt .

these trends affect the ability of the united states to build a sustained domestic production base for pv equipment .

u.s. solar manufacturing makes up a small part of the u.s. manufacturing base .

in 2014 , the nation's solar manufacturing industry directly employed about 32,000 workers , according to the solar energy industries association ( seia ) , a trade group .

the u.s. cell and module market , measured by domestic shipment revenues , has grown in size from $3.3 billion in 2008 to $7.1 billion in 2012 , reports the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) .

following an unprecedented period of growth , the number of pv systems in the united states reached more than 445,000 by the end of 2013 , more than twice the total at the end of 2011 .

government support has been instrumental in sustaining the solar industry worldwide .

in the united states , tax incentives and stimulus funding have helped to spur new pv installations .

in its 2013 annual report , seia wrote that "more solar has been installed in the united states in the last eighteen months than in the 30 years prior. .

nevertheless , even with direct government involvement , solar energy merely accounts for 0.5% of overall u.s. electricity generation .

the obama administration actively supports greater deployment of solar energy and sees it as one way to encourage advanced manufacturing in the united states , create skilled manufacturing jobs , and increase the role of renewable energy technology in energy production , among other objectives .

in its solar progress report: advancing toward a clean energy future , the obama administration argues that "the administration's investments have helped expand u.s. manufacturing capabilities , including new facilities to produce cost - effective , high quality solar panels as well as startup operations to commercialize novel pv and concentrating solar power ( csp ) technologies. .

this report looks at the solar photovoltaic manufacturing industry and its supply chain ; employment trends ; international trade flows ; and federal policy efforts aimed at supporting the industry .

it does not cover other methods of solar - power generation , such as concentrating solar power plants .

concentrating solar technologies , largely dormant prior to 2006 , are suitable mainly for utility - scale generation , whereas solar photovoltaics can be arranged in small - scale installations to produce power for individual buildings and in large installations to supply power to utilities .

even with decreasing pv prices , producing equipment that generates solar power at prices competitive with electricity generated from fossil fuels remains a challenge .

this is particularly true for utility - scale installations , as wholesale purchasers of electricity will compare the cost per megawatt hour of solar power directly with the cost of power from other sources .

the cost - competitiveness of solar power is better in the residential and business markets , as the relevant comparison is with the delivered cost of electricity rather than with the generating cost .

but even if the popularity of solar systems grows , falling equipment prices are likely to undermine efforts to sustain a solar manufacturing base in the united states .

solar pv manufacturing , previously undertaken by numerous small firms , is rapidly maturing into a global industry dominated by a smaller number of producers .

cell manufacturers typically have proprietary designs that seek to convert sunlight into electricity at the lowest total cost per kilowatt hour .

vertical integration , whereby manufacturers produce their own components from wafers to modules , is becoming more common , but many pv manufacturers still rely on extensive supply chains for components such as wafers , glass , wires , and racks .

worldwide , the market for solar pv ( including modules , system components , and installations ) expanded from $2.5 billion in 2000 to $91.3 billion in 2013 , according to one estimate .

the creation of incentives for solar installations in several countries around 2004 led many companies to enter the pv industry .

more recently , the industry has entered a phase of rapid consolidation on a global basis .

according to an estimate by seia , the number of module manufacturing facilities in the united states shrank from 51 in 2011 to 38 in 2013 .

chinese cell production has been relatively flat because demand in some countries has declined and prices have weakened ( see figure 5 ) .

according to the international energy agency , there are now fewer than 100 chinese pv module and cell manufacturers , compared with more than 300 companies in 2011 .

by the end of 2017 , china aims to reduce the number to 10 major producers that would supply 70% - 80% of domestic demand .

price pressures have driven a number of manufacturers , including the u.s. firms evergreen solar and solyndra and the german companies solon and q - cells , into bankruptcy , and have led others to lay off workers .

according to iea - pvps , china produced approximately two - thirds of the world's solar modules in 2013 , and it ships the lion's share of all the pv modules that it produces to markets worldwide .

in 2013 , china's exports of modules totaled about 16.7 gw , worth about $10 billion .

its domestic market for solar pv installations was small , at 19 gw in total installed pv capacity in 2013 , but an increase from less than 1 gw in 2010 .

driving this growth are policies to expand domestic solar pv demand , including direct grants for solar pv installations .

more recently , china implemented a nationwide feed - in tariff .

india aims to boost its domestic solar market to 20 gw of grid - connected electricity by 2022 using government programs like its national solar mission .

ten firms now control nearly half of global solar module production .

of these , six are based in china , two in japan , one in south korea , and one in the united states ( see table 3 ) .

as part of their global business strategies , u.s. solar panel manufacturers source a significant share of components outside the united states .

imports of solar cells and panels nearly tripled from 2009 , reaching $3.6 billion in 2013 .

since 2009 , imports of solar equipment rose every year , except for 2013 , when pv imports shrank 29% from a year earlier ( see table 4 ) .

the import decline may be related to the imposition of u.s. antidumping and countervailing duties on chinese - manufactured solar cells in 2012 , which resulted in double - and triple - digit tariffs on imports of pv products from china .

most solar cells and modules imported into the united states come from asia ( see table 4 ) .

mexico is a relatively small exporter of pv modules to the united states , and its exports have been declining as manufacturers have closed some mexican plants .

although u.s. imports of pv products from south korea rose through 2012 , south korean manufacturers such as hyundai heavy industry , lg solar , and samsung are reevaluating their business plans for the solar pv sector , contributing to a sharp drop in exports to the united states in 2013 .

south korea's stated goal of capturing 10% of the global pv market by 2020 may no longer be realistic .

federal policies favoring development of a domestic solar power sector include support for the u.s. solar pv manufacturing industry as well as incentives for solar generation of electricity .

three of the five programs listed below have expired .

an advanced energy manufacturing tax credit ( mtc ) was aimed at supporting renewable energy manufacturers .

it reached its funding cap in 2010 .

the section 1705 loan guarantee program directed funds to manufacturing facilities that employ "new or significantly improved" technologies .

the program expired in 2011 .

the investment tax credit ( itc ) provides financial incentives for solar power at a rate of 30% .

without legislative action , the itc is due to end on december 31 , 2016 , after which it will revert to a permanent rate of 10% for commercial investments and expire for residential investments .

the section 1603 treasury cash grant program requires solar projects to have commenced construction by december 31 , 2011 , and to complete construction by december 31 , 2016 .

the sunshot initiative is one of several doe programs to support the solar industry and increase domestic pv manufacturing .

solar manufacturing continues to go through a shakeout , with manufacturers closing u.s. plants because of difficult global business conditions , stiff competition particularly from chinese companies , and falling prices for solar panels .

beyond that , the extraction of large quantities of shale gas seems likely to lower the cost of generating electricity from natural gas , potentially reducing demand for solar panels .

while state - level renewable fuels standards , which require utilities to obtain a certain proportion of their electricity from renewable sources , may provide continuing demand for utility - scale pv installations in some states , the lower cost of gas - fired generation may limit interest .

in some parts of the united states , residential and commercial pv systems produce electricity at prices competitive with conventional grid electricity , once subsidies are taken into account .

however , although the per - watt cost of solar pv systems has declined significantly , in most areas of the country solar power is still not competitive with power generated from fossil fuels .

the cost disadvantage could widen if subsidies are unavailable or if retail electricity prices decline due to the lower price of natural gas .

in the absence of continued government support for solar installations or for the production of solar equipment , the prospects for expansion of domestic pv solar manufacturing may be limited .

modern photovoltaic technology traces its roots back to 19 th - century breakthroughs by scientists from europe and the united states .

in 1839 , a french physicist , alexandre edmond becquerel , discovered the photovoltaic effect , and in 1883 , an american inventor , charles fritts , made the first primitive solar cell .

progress in modern solar cell manufacturing began in the 1940s and 1950s when russell ohl discovered that a rod of silicon with impurities created an electric voltage when illuminated and three scientists at bell laboratories in new jersey ( daryl chapin , calvin fuller , and gerald pearson ) developed the first commercial photovoltaic cell .

further advancing pv cell manufacturing was the space race of the 1960s , with the competition between the united states and the former soviet union driving demand for solar cells , which were , and still are , used to power some spacecraft and satellites .

the first generation of photovoltaic manufacturing firms included such names as hoffman electronics , heliotek , rca , international rectifier , and texas instruments .

the technology , however , remained too expensive for other uses , and the market remained very small .

the japanese manufacturer sharp pioneered the use of photovoltaics on earth , using them to power hundreds of lighthouses along the japanese coast , but it could not identify other applications for which photovoltaics were cost - competitive .

the oil crises of the 1970s hastened the development of modern solar panels by a second generation of pv firms , which focused on ground applications .

major oil and gas companies entered the field .

exxon underwrote the solar power corporation .

atlantic richfield company ( arco ) purchased solar technology international and renamed it arco solar in 1977 ; its corporate descendant is now part of solarworld , presently the largest cell manufacturer in the united states .

first solar , one of the biggest manufacturers of pv thin - film cells , can trace its roots to toledo , oh , where it was established in 1984 as glasstech solar .

the first direct federal support for solar manufacturing was during the carter administration .

the energy tax act ( eta ) of 1978 provided tax credits for homeowners who invested in solar and certain other technologies .

additionally , the federal government through the public utility regulatory policies act required utilities to purchase power produced by qualified renewable power facilities .

notwithstanding this support , production of solar pv power in the united states remained small .

by the mid - 1980s , domestic photovoltaic manufacturers were selling products at a loss , and many were struggling .

president reagan's tax reform act of 1986 reduced the investment tax credit ( itc ) to 10% in 1988 , where it remained until 2005 .

because of these policy changes , combined with the sustained drop in petroleum prices , solar manufacturing slumped until 2005 , when president george w. bush signed the energy policy act ( epact ) .

that law included a 30% itc for property owners who installed commercial and residential solar energy systems .

