conventional hydropower accounted for more than 6% ( 258,749 gigawatt hours ) of total net u.s. electricity generation in 2014 .

the united states has considerable hydropower potential beyond what is already developed .

although there is some interest in increasing the current level of hydropower investment , such investment remains limited , in part because of federal and nonfederal financial constraints , high uncertainty in electricity generation policies and markets ( which may dissuade capital investment ) , and the environmental operating requirements required for hydropower projects .

some hydropower proponents are pursuing policies to reduce what they view as impediments to hydropower development .

other stakeholders prefer that hydropower investments only proceed when they are protective of other interests , including other water users and the aquatic environment and its species .

at issue for the 114 th congress is whether , and if so how , to change federal support for hydropower and what priority to give hydropower vis - à - vis other energy investments , and social and environmental concerns .

these issues are ongoing and are shaped by the introduction and consideration of hydropower - related bills from past congresses .

for example , more than 25 bills dealing with various aspects of hydropower were introduced in the 112 th congress , a quarter of which were state - or site - specific legislation .

and more than 30 hydropower - related bills were introduced in the 113 th congress .

for example , congress passed p.l .

113-20 ( bonneville unit clean hydropower facilitation act ) , p.l .

113-23 ( hydropower regulatory efficiency act of 2013 ) p.l .

113-24 ( bureau of reclamation small conduit hydropower development and rural jobs act ) , and p.l .

113-121 ( water resources reform and development act of 2014 ) .

so far , four hydropower - related bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress: s. 1236 ( hydropower improvement act of 2015 ) , s. 1264 ( renewable electricity standard act ) , s. 1338 ( small hydropower dependable regulatory order act of 2015 ) , and s. 1270 ( reliable investment in vital energy resources [river] act ) .

over time , there has been a variety of hydropower legislative proposals and stakeholder opinions , which stem partly from differing views of the benefits and costs of hydropower development .

many have pointed out advantages and drawbacks of conventional hydropower .

cited advantages include its possible renewable energy status , zero to minimal greenhouse gas emissions during operation , and high operational efficiency .

supporters also note its ability to generally serve as a reliable and flexible domestic energy source .

generally speaking , hydropower generation can be dispatched on relatively short notice , and can supplement shortfalls in generation .

however , others note that conventional large hydropower has relatively high initial capital costs , can be detrimental to surrounding ecosystems ( eg , fish and wildlife ) , may not be reliable during low water years and seasons , and may disrupt recreational or scenic values .

the legislative environment for hydropower can be complicated .

whether the hydropower project investor is a federal or nonfederal entity dictates which laws apply and thus may affect which committees are involved in oversight or changes to such laws .

several federal government agencies own and operate large hydropower projects , while other agencies administer the process by which nonfederal hydropower projects are built , maintained , and operated .

large federal hydropower projects are managed primarily by the u.s. department of the interior's bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) .

the power from these projects is generally marketed by the department of energy's power marketing administrations ( pmas ) .

ferc regulates investigation , construction , and operations of nonfederal hydropower projects as well as overseeing dam safety for nonfederal projects .

this report explains how the federal government is involved directly in hydropower generation at federal facilities and in the regulation of nonfederal hydropower generation ; the focus is on current roles and processes and common concerns and questions about changing those roles .

most of u.s. hydropower capacity is from conventional hydropower .

conventional hydropower plants take three general forms: storage ( or impoundment ) , run - of - river ( or diversion ) , and pumped storage .

a storage plant uses a dam to store enough water in a reservoir so that , when released , it flows through a penstock to a turbine , spinning it , which in turn activates a generator to produce electricity .

a run - of - river plant directs a portion of a river through a canal or penstock to generate electricity without the need for a reservoir .

a pumped storage facility stores energy and generates electricity by pumping water from a lower reservoir to an upper reservoir during off - peak hours , releasing the stored water from the upper reservoir to the lower reservoir during periods of higher electricity demand .

conventional hydropower is a significant contributor to the national electric power portfolio .

hydroelectric facilities produced 6% - 9% of u.s. electric generation between 1998 and 2014 .

when considered a renewable power source , hydropower was the largest contributor to renewable electric power generation in 2014 , followed by wind and by wood and wood - derived fuels .

the western states produced the most hydropower in 2014 , but the top individual hydropower - producing states were washington , oregon , and new york .

as the west continues to experience drought , hydropower generation may decline .

for example , in 2014 , hydropower in california ( the fourth - largest producer of hydropower among the states ) contributed half ( 10% ) of its average generation ( 20% ) to california's energy portfolio .

generally , reductions in hydroelectric generation are addressed by increasing the use of natural gas , which some argue is more expensive and produces more greenhouse gas emissions than hydropower .

facilities in western states , such as the hoover dam , are producing significantly less power than average due to drought conditions .

there is an ongoing debate about whether hydropower should be characterized as "renewable. .

it has historically been characterized as renewable because it is a replenishable resource .

more recently , others have asserted that it is not renewable because of its size ( eg , in the case of large - scale projects ) and environmental impact , particularly on ecosystems , and in some cases induced evaporation ( particularly at reservoirs at low elevations in dry climates ) and greenhouse gas emissions during construction .

however , for purposes of this report , hydropower is discussed as renewable because it does not originate from a fossil fuel ( i.e. , its source is not finite ) .

the precise number of hydropower projects in the united states is unknown .

different databases yield different results based on selected criteria .

as of 2015 , 90 nonfederal hydropower projects are licensed to operate at corps dams and 28 are licensed to operate at bureau of reclamation sites .

the public sector ( federal , states , cooperatives , and municipalities ) owns the majority of hydropower capacity because it owns mostly large ( > 30 megawatt [mw] ) hydropower plants ( see figure 1 ) .

the private sector ( eg , private utility , private nonutility , and industrial entities ) owns the majority of hydropower projects , and many are small hydro ( 1 mw - 30 mw ) and low - power ( < 1 mw ) plants ( see figure 2 ) .

small hydro and low - power plants make up of 83% of total plants but constitute approximately 10% of total hydropower production capacity in the united states .

in contrast , large hydropower plants are responsible for approximately 90% of total hydropower capacity though they make up 16% of total plants .

without considering economics , current hydropower capacity represents a fraction of u.s. hydropower resources that technically could be developed at non - powered dams in addition to accessing new stream - reaches .

the national inventory of dams identifies that of the more than 80,000 dams in the united states , 2.5% are used for hydropower .

according to a 2012 department of energy ( doe ) study , there are more than 54,000 non - powered dams with a total potential capacity of 12 gw , which would increase hydropower capacity by 15% ( see figure 3 ) .

the majority of this capacity ( 8 gw ) is concentrated at 100 non - powered dams , 81 of which are operated by the corps .

some have argued that many of the monetary costs and environmental impacts of construction already have occurred at non - powered dams , so using non - powered dams for hydropower is an option for increasing the u.s. renewable energy portfolio .

however , the actual cost and economic feasibility of powering these dams is unknown , and additional costs for site - specific studies may be required before hydropower capacity could be added .

the federal government owns and operates approximately half of all u.s. hydroelectric generating capacity .

this capacity is principally at large multi - purpose dams owned and operated by the corps or reclamation .

combined , the corps and reclamation operate almost all federal hydroelectric dam capacity ( 90% of federal capacity ) .

other federal entities operating hydroelectric generation facilities include the tennessee valley authority , the bureau of indian affairs , and the international boundary and water commission .

other entities also own facilities that generate hydroelectric power , but they are relatively small .

while the electricity generated by these facilities is owned by these federal agencies , the power marketing administrations ( pmas ) , which are part of the u.s. department of energy , are generally responsible for selling and distributing this power .

federal hydropower capacity varies substantially by state and region .

for instance , 90% of all federal capacity is found in 13 states , and the majority of this capacity is in the west .

washington and california contain the greatest federal hydroelectric capacity , while oregon , arizona , montana , and idaho also have significant federal hydropower capacity .

in the east , new york , georgia , south carolina , and north carolina have the most federal capacity .

nonfederal hydropower projects can be privately owned or publicly owned , and may or may not be located at a federal site .

they differ from federal projects primarily in that they are subject to regulation stemming from their licensing by ferc .

according to u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) data , roughly 1,261 nonfederal hydropower plants generated 142,340 gwh of net electricity in 2013 .

the amount generated constitutes roughly 53% of total electricity generated from hydropower and roughly 3.5% of total u.s. electricity in 2013 .

in addition to the general advantages and disadvantages of hydropower discussed earlier in this report , nonfederal projects have unique benefits .

for example , some argue that nonfederal projects are more likely to receive regular maintenance and major upgrades than federal projects , since the plant owner has a financial incentive to generate as much electricity as possible .

on the other hand , drawbacks of nonfederal projects generally mirror those of federal projects ( eg , initial high capital costs , environmental concerns , regulatory requirements ) .

an additional drawback of nonfederal projects is the length of time required to obtain state and federal approval .

still , some surmise that any increase in hydropower generation is most likely to come from nonfederal projects because , as described earlier , federal projects face hurdles that could prevent them from adding substantial generation capacity quickly , with the major barrier being federal financing for major upgrades and expansions .

several bills related to the expansion of hydropower development and modifying the regulatory process have been introduced in the 114 th congress .

these bills are discussed below: s. 1236 , the hydropower improvement act of 2015 , proposes to amend the fpa with regard to ferc's authority on hydropower projects , as well as other issues .

the bill would designate ferc as the lead agency for coordinating all federal authorization of hydropower projects , as which it would establish and comply with a schedule for granting licenses and permits , collect all required information from federal and state agencies , and make determinations on projects .

ferc would examine and compile existing data and methodologies to form a comprehensive environmental impact statement framework for license studies .

under s. 1236 , both ferc and resource agencies would submit to congress annual reports on the changes in the quantity and capacity of energy as well as an assessment of the economic , climatic , air quality , and environmental costs and benefits of all licensed , exempt , and proposed hydropower projects .

the bill would extend the preliminary permit term for up to eight years and would allow the possibility of additional permits under special circumstances .

s. 1236 would modify the administrative hearing process to allow license applicants to contest disputes related to the licensing process in trial - type hearings conducted by ferc's office of administrative law judges .

the bill states that hydropower would be a renewable resource for the purposes of all federal programs .

s. 1236 also would modify the operation and maintenance of fishways near projects on the condition that ferc determines that there is a direct link in which fishways are necessary for the mitigation of project effects on fish populations .

s. 1264 , the renewable electricity standard act , proposes to amend the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 to establish a federal renewable energy standard and a federal renewable energy credit program .

the bill would require retail electric suppliers who sell 1,000 gwh or more of electric energy to meet an annual standard in which a percentage of the base quantity of electricity must be generated from renewable energy resources .

 ( the annual percentage requirement ranges from 7.5% in calendar year 2015 to 20.0% in 2025 and 30.0% in years 2030 through 2039. ) .

retail electric suppliers may submit an application to be issued credits and may submit credits to the secretary of energy , who would manage the program .

under s. 1264 , incremental hydropower , in the form of efficiency improvements or capacity additions to hydropower facilities , constructed from the date that the bill is enacted , would qualify for renewable energy credits .

s. 1338 , the small hydropower dependable regulatory order act of 2015 , proposes to amend the fpa by adding that covered projects with a capacity of 5 mw or less would receive licensing decisions from ferc within 180 days of the submission of an application .

licenses for covered projects would be modified to 10-year terms .

s. 1270 , the reliable investment in vital energy resources ( river ) act , proposes to amend section 242 of the energy policy act of 2005 to reauthorize incentives for the production and efficiency improvement of hydropower .

the 113 th congress authorized appropriations payments for fy2014 .

s. 1270 would extend this incentive program from fy2016 to fy2025 .

in addition to these bills , the 114 th congress may consider conducting oversight on policies or programs authorized by laws passed in previous congresses .

the 113 th congress enacted legislation that made changes to hydropower development and related processes: p.l .

113-23 ( hydropower regulatory efficiency act of 2013 ) and p.l .

113-24 ( bureau of reclamation small conduit hydropower development and rural jobs act ) .

each of these laws is discussed below .

p.l .

113-23 , the hydropower regulatory efficiency act of 2013 , contains a number of provisions that are intended to promote the development of additional select hydropower projects .

section 3 amended the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) to redefine small hydropower as 10 mw or less .

previously , purpa defined small hydropower as 5 mw or less .

p.l .

113-23 permits ferc to grant an exemption for small hydropower projects .

section 4 amended section 30 of the fpa by not requiring qualifying conduit hydropower projects to be licensed and by expediting the approval process .

the law gives ferc 15 days to make an initial determination on the project's notice of intent , and it gives the public 45 days to contest the notice .

previously , there was no explicit time limit by which ferc had to make a determination .

the law allows ferc to grant an exemption for conduit projects with certain stipulations and for those projects with an installed capacity of 40 mw or less .

previously , the fpa allowed ferc to issue an exemption only for generating capacities of 15 mw or less for nonmunicipal and 40 mw or less for municipal projects .

section 5 of p.l .

113-23 amended section 5 of the fpa to allow preliminary permits to be extended once for two years .

previously , the fpa allowed for the issuance of preliminary permits for three years with no extension .

section 6 requires ferc to study the feasibility of issuing a license within a two - year period for projects at nonpowered dams and closed - loop pumped storage facilities .

section 7 requires the secretary of energy to study various aspects of pumped storage facilities and to submit to congress a report with study results and any recommendations .

p.l .

113-24 , the bureau of reclamation small conduit hydropower development and rural jobs act , made changes to the process by which reclamation permits nonfederal hydropower development at its projects ( see " nonfederal development at reclamation facilities ," above ) .

lease of power privilege previously was possible only at reclamation facilities specifically authorized for hydropower development .

p.l .

113-24 authorized this development for all reclamation projects ( eg , irrigation projects ) .

it also clarified that reclamation's power resources office shall be the lead office to set policy and procedures for this type of hydropower development ( i.e. , not ferc ) , that local project operators shall be the first entities offered the chance to develop conduit hydropower , and that these projects shall receive categorical exclusions under the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( 42 u.s.c .

§4321 et seq ) .

p.l .

113-121 , the water resources reform and development act of 2014 , states that the approval and construction of nonfederal hydropower at corps facilities should be expedited .

it required the secretary of the army to submit a biennial report describing the initiatives to encourage nonfederal hydropower development at corps facilities as well as the status , costs , and environmental impact of nonfederal hydropower projects associated with the corps .

p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , appropriated funds to doe to carry out a hydropower development program under section 242 of the energy policy act of 2005 .

this program directs the secretary of energy to provide incentive payments to owners or operators of nonfederal hydropower facilities for electricity generated from hydropower over a 10-year period .

to be eligible , the hydropower facility must have been built before 2005 and the facility owner must sign and file a formal application .

the guideline given for potential incentive payment is 1.8 cents / kwh , adjusted for inflation .

it is unclear whether financing to construct , operate , and maintain hydropower projects will be a congressional priority .

federal operators of hydroelectric facilities have noted the need for infrastructure improvements .

the private sector has a sizeable presence in the small hydropower market .

depending on the economics of the power market , the private sector could expand power capacity and production .

however , it is unlikely that there will be public or private sector investment in large hydropower projects in the near term owing to economic and geographic constraints , environmental concerns , changes in climate , and public perception .

it is possible that other forms of water power ( eg , hydrokinetics , ocean thermal ) may one day contribute to the u.s. energy portfolio , but small hydropower is a more likely near - term option .

if congress determines that increasing hydropower capacity is a priority , then congress could pursue several policy options to add additional hydropower generation in the public or private sectors or both .

as congress considers whether to alter support for future hydropower development , it is also dealing with current hydropower infrastructure issues .

these include aging infrastructure , delayed maintenance , the permitting process , and water availability .

many of the hydropower issues congress is likely to address in the near term are the same issues it has addressed for some time: operation of federal projects , the permitting process for nonfederal projects , and environmental impacts .

the federal government has been responsible for ownership and operation of the bulk of the larger projects .

regular maintenance and upkeep of federal projects has not kept a pace that some would prefer .

also , developers of nonfederal projects would like an easier way to obtain permits and financing for their projects .

the nonfederal project permit process has been revised over time in an effort to streamline the process , but still is unacceptable to some .

hydropower has a long tenure in the electricity market , and its advantages and disadvantages are well documented .

however , there are questions for congress about whether hydropower capacity could or should be increased , and whether that increase should occur at existing projects or by building new projects ( including small and low - head hydropower ) , or both .

other issues affecting conventional hydropower involve the development of nonconventional hydropower technologies , competition from other energy sources ( eg , wind ) that are perceived to be more environmentally friendly , and competition from fossil fuel energy sources that may be significantly cheaper ( eg , natural gas ) .

ferc's integrated licensing process the integrated licensing process ( ilp ) was implemented in 2005 to offer a more efficient licensing process .

the ilp incorporates elements of the traditional licensing process ( tlp ) created in 1985 ( e.g .

 , deadlines for multiple steps ) , and the alternative licensing process ( alp ) created in 1997 ( eg , focus on early stakeholder involvement ) .

additionally , the ilp includes a new process for resolving study disputes and requires ferc to participate earlier in the licensing process .

ferc indicates that these changes are intended to make the process shorter and more efficient without altering agencies' authorities under the fpa or the clean water act ( 33 u.s.c .

§1341 ) to develop license conditions that protect fish , federal reservations ( e.g .

 , national forests , indian reservations ) , or rivers' state - designated uses .

the ilp differs from the tlp and the alp in that it is more collaborative than the tlp and more structured than the alp .

also , the ilp moves ferc's national environmental policy act ( nepa ) scoping process from the post - application phase to the pre - application phase in an effort to resolve study disputes early in the licensing process .

some entities that might be consulted during the licensing process include national marine fisheries service ( noaa fisheries ) ; u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) ; national park service ( nps ) ; u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; the federal agency administering any united states lands or facilities to be used or occupied by the project ( eg , u.s. forest service , bureau of land management , etc .

 ) ; any state agency with responsibility for fish , wildlife , and botanical resources , water quality , coastal zone management plan consistency certification , shoreline management , and water resources ; the state historic preservation officer ( shpo ) and tribal historic preservation officer ( thpo — if applicable ) ; local , state , and regional recreation agencies and planning commissions ; local and state zoning agencies ; any indian tribe that may be affected by the project ; and any potentially affected landowners ; applicable laws that might have to be complied with throughout the licensing process include section 401 of the clean water act ( cwa ) ; endangered species act ( esa ) ; magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ; coastal zone management act ( czma ) ; national historic preservation act ( nhpa ) ; pacific northwest power planning and conservation act ; wild and scenic rivers and wilderness act ; and national environmental policy act .

