following a major disaster , the financial capacity of a local government may be severely undermined by a decrease in local revenues .

the reduction in tax or other revenue can limit the local government's ability to maintain public services or afford many extraordinary but necessary expenditures .

revenue shortfalls can also impact the size of a local government and the jobs of government employees , as exemplified by the decrease in the size of new orleans city government since hurricane katrina .

revenue loss frequently occurs when significant portions of the population are displaced for extended periods of time , or key sources of economic activity , like tourism , are heavily disrupted by a disaster .

in addition , many local governments are restricted by state or local laws , constitutions , or codes of practice from borrowing to fund operational expenses .

often with few options available to make up for lost revenue , local governments may need to reappropriate funds from other portions of their budget or scale back their operations .

the shortage of revenues , and the resulting limitation on financial capacity , has been cited as one of the most significant and consistent hurdles to long - term disaster recovery .

the community disaster loan ( cdl ) program , managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , provides loan assistance to local governments to help them overcome a loss in revenues .

though there are many disaster assistance programs available to communities , the cdl program is the only program that specifically provides assistance to local governments to help compensate for revenue shortfalls .

the core purpose of these community disasters loans , as detailed in the original senate committee report authorizing the program , is "to permit the local governments to continue to provide municipal services , such as the protection of public health and safety and the operation of the public school system. .

consistent with this stated purpose , the local governments that are eligible for loans include entities such as special districts and school boards that provide a wide array of local government services .

the cdl program was first authorized by the disaster relief act of 1974 , which was later renamed the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) .

as codified in section 417 of the stafford act , the program allows the president to make loans to any local government which may suffer a substantial loss of tax and other revenues as a result of a major disaster , and has demonstrated a need for financial assistance in order to perform its governmental functions .

as with most other authorities in the stafford act , this authority has been delegated from the president to the administrator of fema .

after severe disasters , the revenue base of a local government may take years to fully recover , if ever .

some key sources of revenue may never return to pre - disaster levels , such as property taxes from areas severely damaged by a disaster .

to account for the local government's continuing need for financial assistance in these circumstances , fema also has the authority to cancel the repayment on all or part of the loan .

fema may cancel a loan up to the amount that the local government's tax and other revenues are insufficient to meet its cumulative operating budget over a period of three full fiscal years following a major disaster , in addition to any unreimbursed disaster - related expenses made in that time period .

the fundamental purpose of the program has been relatively unchanged since inception .

however , some statutory and regulatory provisions have varied through the history of the program , notably those that govern elements such as loan eligibility and the size of the loans .

the loan program that began in 1974 was essentially unaltered in statute until 2000 , when the 106 th congress revised the core polices of the program for the first time by placing a $5 million cap on the size of the loans .

loans administered before 2005 , and recent loans not governed by the exemptions discussed immediately below , are known as "traditional" community disaster loans ( tcdls ) .

following hurricane katrina and the 2005 hurricane season , the 109 th and 110 th congresses created unique statutory guidelines for the loan program applicable exclusively to local governments impacted by those disasters .

collectively , these loans are referred to as "special" community disaster loans ( scdls ) .

fema promulgated regulations to govern the implementation of scdls that were very similar to those for the tcdls , but with several notable distinctions .

these new statutory and regulatory guidelines altered some of the eligibility , size , and forgiveness criteria applicable to the scdls .

a similar pattern of special legislation was again passed in the 110 th and 111 th congresses for community disaster loans applicable to local governments impacted by disasters in the calendar year 2008 .

these loans also had some different provisions for eligibility and size , as will be discussed , and will be referred to as the 2008 cdls for the purposes of distinguishing them in this report .

the majority of the statutory and regulatory provisions of the community disaster loan program are consistent across each set of loans .

while this report will explain the consistent provisions of the loan program , it is intended also to highlight the unique provisions through a comparative analysis of traditional cdls , special cdls , and 2008 cdls .

in particular , since the issue of loan forgiveness has been a flash point of policy debate throughout the program's history , this report also highlights the statutory and regulatory provisions for loan forgiveness and discusses some of the debate on the issue .

in doing so , the report offers some empirical analysis of data from each set of loans to identify the distribution and forgiveness of cdls by the types of governments receiving a loan .

it is important to note that this report is not intended to comprehensively audit fema's administration or forgiveness of any particular loan or set of loans .

the cdl program may be of interest to congress because of the ongoing debate over the cost and amount of disaster assistance provided to communities .

moreover , as will be discussed in this report , recent program management decisions by fema have drawn the attention and criticism of some in the general public and of members of congress .

congress may be interested in expanding , eliminating , or amending the cdl program before additional loans are issued .

this section of the report describes the law and regulations that governed all traditional community disaster loans ( tcdls ) issued from april 1988 to october 2005 , and all loans since 2005 not covered by the unique provisions of the scdls or the 2008 loans discussed later .

it also describes important statutory and regulatory elements that are applicable for all categories of loans in the program .

by default , these traditional rules will continue to govern all future community disaster loans unless otherwise mandated by congress or until fema revises the regulations .

for the purposes of calculations and categorization , however , this report classifies all loans made through the cdl program from inception to 2005 as "traditional," since the loans were guided by relatively the same regulations .

of note , there were 64 traditional loans issued between 1976 and 1998 , with no loans issued between 1998 and 2005 .

four loans governed by the traditional regulations were issued in response to the severe tornadoes that struck greensburg , ks , and surrounding areas in 2007 .

in addition to the heavy loss of lives and the dislocation of hundreds of thousands of families , hurricanes katrina and rita caused devastating damage to property and seriously disrupted the economic activity that normally provided the tax and revenue base of the affected areas , especially in louisiana and mississippi .

as the full scale of the devastation was revealed , the 109 th congress passed a series of emergency supplemental appropriations to provide financial assistance to the region .

within two weeks , congress had passed two separate emergency supplemental appropriations to meet the needs arising from hurricane katrina ( p.l .

109-61 and p.l .

109-62 ) .

these appropriations focused on funding more commonly used disaster assistance programs and accounts , such as the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , and did not initially include any appropriation for the disaster assistance direct loan program ( daldp ) account for the cdl program .

however , on october 7 , 2005 , the 109 th congress passed and president bush signed into law the community disaster loan act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-88 , henceforth cdl act of 2005 ) .

the act transferred up to $750 million to the daldp account from the $50 billion previously appropriated for disaster assistance following hurricane katrina in p.l .

109-62 .

the $750 million was available to support up to $1 billion in special loans to local governments until expended .

the cdl act of 2005 also allowed for an additional $1 million of the disaster relief funds provided by p.l .

109-62 to be transferred to the daldp account for the administrative expenses of the program .

loans totaling the full $1 billion were approved by fema under the cdl act of 2005 .

since the first obligation was quickly exhausted , the 109 th congress passed the emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and hurricane recovery , 2006 ( p.l .

109-234 , henceforth emergency supplemental of 2006 ) on june 15 , 2006 .

the emergency supplemental of 2006 transferred another $278.8 million to the dadlp to support an additional $371.733 million in direct loans to communities affected by hurricane katrina or other hurricanes in the 2005 season ( such as hurricane rita ) .

an additional $1 million was appropriated for administrative expenses .

the numerical relationship between the appropriated amounts in each act ( $750 million and $278.8 million ) and the allowable amount of loans ( $1 billion and $371.733 million ) was based on the assumption of a 75% credit subsidy rate for the loans .

from the possible $371.733 million available under the emergency supplemental of 2006 , fema approved loans totaling $271 million for all eligible applicants , leaving $101 million of the loan authorization unused .

though collectively the loans from both laws are called special community disaster loans ( scdls ) , each law had slightly different statutory provisions for how the loans could be issued and administered by fema .

part of the controversy surrounding the scdls is a general perception that the overall cancellation rates for traditional loans and special community disaster loans have differed , and specifically that scdl cancellation rates were lower than those of tcdls .

without conducting a full audit of the program and loan cancellation decisions , it is difficult to precisely evaluate this perception .

by some statistical measures , tcdl rates for cancellation are lower than scdl rates .

by other measures , scdls have been forgiven at lower rates than tcdls .

table 8 and table 9 provide several measures for comparing the cancellation rates of tcdls to scdls .

in summary , tcdls had a lower percentage of loans fully cancelled or with some level of cancellation than scdls ( 33.9% and 46.4% versus 50.0% and 59.7% , respectively ) .

on average , tcdls also had lower dollar amounts of principal forgiven per loan than scdls ( 38.9% versus 54.1% ) .

however , as a function of total dollar amount of principal cancelled in each loan category , tcdls had a much higher cancellation rate than scdls ( 97.2% versus 68.9% ) .

regardless of the data presented , the overall cancellation rates of each set of loans are not definitive evidence that the regulations and procedures used by fema were fairly or consistently applied , or that local governments in either set of loans received their "appropriate" amount of cancellation under the law .

the disaster and financial circumstances surrounding each loan issued through the program are unique , and therefore aggregate assessments of the loan categories only provide a broad indication of how the program was managed .

as a reminder , these tables only evaluate loans that had some amount of principal borrowed by the local governments , excluding a total of 39 loans that local governments did not borrow any amount from the approved principal .

the 2008 calendar year was marred by numerous major disasters , notably hurricanes ike and gustav that impacted parts of texas and louisiana and historic flooding that impacted wide swaths of iowa .

in response to the disasters , the 110 th congress passed the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , which included the disaster relief and recovery supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-329 , henceforth disaster supplemental of 2008 ) .

through the disaster supplemental of 2008 , the dadlp account was appropriated $98.15 million for the cdl program , to subsidize gross obligations for the principal amount of direct loans not to exceed $100 million .

the original appropriation in the disaster supplemental of 2008 did not create unique provisions for the administration of the loans , and the funds were available until expended .

however , two subsequent laws passed in the 111 th congress established unique conditions for eligibility and loan size specific to disasters in the 2008 calendar year .

the first law to create unique provisions for the 2008 cdls was the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 , henceforth arra ) .

the second revision came in the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 , henceforth supplemental of 2009 ) .

neither arra nor the supplemental of 2009 included any additional funds for the dadlp account .

fema has not issued new regulations in response to the unique provisions of the 2008 loans .

as discussed in the " frequency of program use " section of the report , the community disaster loan program is rarely used by local governments relative to other common disaster assistance programs .

however , when the program has been used , it has provoked controversies — especially surrounding the authority to cancel the repayment of loans .

in future appropriations and authorizations of the cdl program , congress may consider some of the policy issues and options discussed succinctly below .

some of the options presented , if considered more thoroughly and enacted by congress , may increase or decrease the disaster assistance provided through the program , and thus the overall use of the program by local governments .

it is beyond the scope of this report to fully discuss or evaluate the policy issues and options provided here .

however , crs is available to confidentially assist committees and members of congress and their staff as they analyze the potential policy implications of various proposals .

congress could consider changing some of the core components of the program discussed throughout the report , namely the eligibility , use , size , and cancellation of the loans .

some of the many options for doing so are discussed briefly here .

as discussed in " eligibility criteria ," there are only three eligibility conditions provided in the law authorizing the cdl program .

first , local governments must have suffered losses "as a result of a major disaster. .

second , a local government should have "suffer[ed] a substantial loss of tax and other revenues. .

third , there "has to be a demonstrated need for financial assistance" for the loan to be issued .

fema has developed these three statutory conditions into a full set of regulations on eligibility , outlined in 44 c.f.r .

§206.363 .

congress could alter these legal and regulatory conditions to change the scope , use , and efficiency of the program .

currently , program eligibility is restricted to local governments in declared disaster areas .

as discussed in the report , the regulatory definition of local government allows a broad group of government entities to apply for loans .

from an implementation standpoint , it may be too difficult to craft a one - size - fits - all regulation for these local government types , especially when considering the different types of operating budgets , revenues , and expenditures encompassed by these governments .

additionally , though some standard methods exist for government accounting ( namely those established by the government accounting standards board ) , each jurisdiction does not necessarily interpret these standards in the same way .

in response to this implementation challenge , congress could consider restricting loans only to a higher level of government jurisdiction .

for instance , instead of all local governments being eligible for loans , loans could be offered exclusively to states that have been impacted by a disaster .

the state could then disburse the loan proceeds to local governments as it deems appropriate with its own requirements and procedures .

or , loans could be made at the county or parish level , which is the level of distinction used to declare disasters through the stafford act .

allowing loans to be offered to states has been proposed in legislation before , though local governments were also eligible in that proposal .

in conjunction with this change , the size of loans may need to be increased to adjust to the larger jurisdiction level .

existing methods for assessing loan size ( expected revenue loss calculations ) could still be done at the higher jurisdiction level .

conversely , congress could consider restricting the type of local government that is eligible for a loan to a more specified set of government entities , such as only general purpose municipal governments .

this would reduce some of the complexity from the program by eliminating special districts , school boards , and other types of local governments that often have unique revenue streams and budget requirements .

however , these types of local governments often also provide essential government services not provided by general purpose municipal governments .

therefore , eliminating their program eligibility could reduce the potential benefits of the disaster assistance for the whole community .

altering the jurisdiction level , or restricting the type of local governments , eligible for disaster loans could potentially improve the efficiency and transparency of the program .

it may allow fema to establish a uniform set of regulations and procedures that are easier to implement , and easier for potential recipients to understand , in complex disaster situations .

this could lead to less controversy and confusion regarding program use and its requirements , as well as reducing the administrative costs of the program .

however , from the perspective of local governments currently eligible for the program , shifting the program to a higher level jurisdiction may lead to new challenges in that their county or state governments could set administrative guidelines for the loans that are more stringent or cumbersome than fema's existing procedures .

additionally , the federal government may lose some level of transparency on how the disaster assistance is spent beyond the county or state level , whereas the current program has a level of oversight at the local government jurisdiction .

congress could also consider changing the eligibility criteria related to the statutory requirement that governments must have experienced a "substantial loss of tax and other revenues" to receive a loan .

fema's major regulatory interpretation of this provision is that a government must indicate an expected 5% loss in revenue in order to receive a loan .

there are also special provisions for loan size in the law that use expected revenue loss as a method for determining what loan size a local government is eligible to receive .

congress could increase or decrease the amount of expected revenue loss required as a means of increasing or decreasing the use of the program in the future , respectively .

further , congress could make permanent the provisions of the emergency supplemental of 2006 that restricted loans of a certain size to governments that had experienced a 25% loss or more in exclusively tax revenues , but not all types of revenues .

by restricting eligibility to only governments that experience a significant loss of tax revenues , eligibility would also essentially be restricted to the types of local governments with tax revenue streams .

it may be too difficult to develop and administer an objective set of eligibility requirements that adequately address when a local government has "lost" enough revenue to "need" disaster assistance .

for instance , depending on the financial situation of a particular government and the amount of disaster impact , a local government may truly "need" assistance after only losing 2% - 3% of their tourism revenue , while in other instances , a local government may only "need" assistance after losing 8% - 9% of their total revenue stream .

given this issue , congress could consider changing the program to eliminate all eligibility requirements related to the local government having a "substantial loss" in revenue and a "demonstrated need" for assistance .

instead , congress could allow loans to be offered to any local government in a declared disaster area .

this would allow local governments to self - select for the loan program , making their own determination if they need or want a loan from the federal government to cover any amount of "loss" in revenues .

in this situation , loan size could still be restricted to some formula determination made by the federal government , or the local government could be allowed to determine the size of the loan ( likely within reasonable boundaries , or up to the amount they would be willing to provide in collateral ) .

it is immediately unclear what the new level for demand would be for loans if these eligibility requirements were eliminated .

however , this proposal could be combined with legislative revisions that either increase or decrease the interest rate or standards for loan cancellation to make the loans more or less attractive to local governments , respectively .

as discussed in the " use of funds " and " purpose of the special loans " sections of the report , there has been only one major policy change to how funds could be used in the history of the program .

this occurred when scdls were restricted for "essential services" instead of a broader "government functions. .

fema has interpreted that neither "essential services" nor "government functions" include capital expenses or matches for other assistance programs .

as a means of increasing or decreasing the scope and use of the program , congress may wish to consider amending the ways in which loan funds can be used by local governments .

to expand the scope , congress could authorize the use of loan funds on capital projects that are not otherwise eligible for disaster assistance , namely through major disaster assistance programs under the stafford act .

these loans could help a local government more rapidly rebuild damaged infrastructure or build new facilities as a means of stimulating the disaster recovery process .

as a result , these capital projects may , arguably , help restore the government's impacted sources of tax revenues from businesses and properties .

however , allowing loan proceeds to be used for capital projects may expand the original intention of the program of being exclusively focused on government "services" or "functions. .

because of the high cost of many capital projects , it is possible that the demand for loans , and their overall size , would increase in this proposal .

conversely , congress may wish to restrict the use of loan funds to only certain types of government functions — such as law enforcement , education , or public health — as a means of ensuring that federal assistance is only spent on the certain local government functions .

however , many individualized programs already exist that target specific government functions , such as relief funds for transportation infrastructure damage , and the loan program may become redundant to these programs depending on the functional area .

currently , loan size is capped by both law and regulatory provisions , as discussed in the different "loan size" sections of the report .

in various iterations of the program , loan sizes have been capped in law by a strict dollar amount ( $5 million ) and by a percentage of the operating budget of the recipient local government ( 25% and 50% in different eligible conditions ) .

additionally , in regulations , fema has restricted the size of loans to a formula used to determine the "need" of the local government , essentially the sum of the projected revenue loss and projected unreimbursed disaster - related expenses of the recipient local government .

as a means of controlling the overall cost of the program and the amount of assistance offered to the local government , congress could consider revising any one of these methods of determining loan size .

strict dollar caps per local government can be useful because the maximum cost of a loan is predictable , regardless of disaster or local government factors .

however , congress may view a total dollar limit as relatively inequitable to local governments of a larger size , because the relative amount of assistance they receive is less than smaller governments as a percentage of their budgets or revenue streams .

another alternative would be to formally establish a version of fema's formula for calculating "need" in program statute , and remove all other caps on the size of the loans .

congress could alter the existing need calculation in various ways , including specifically defining what constitutes an "unreimbursed disaster - related expense" or restricting the formula only to projected revenue losses of some kind .

congress could also consider setting the loan size to the sum of itemized predicted expenditures by the local government .

instead of using a specific numeric formula to determine need , congress could replace the need formula with the independent assessment of expert accountants that could determine the "need" of the local government through some objective analysis of their financial condition .

an independent analysis may capture factors such as the scope of disaster devastation specific to the event more readily than existing methods .

however , any independent analysis , though theoretically impartial , may be critiqued for being inequitably applied in some disaster scenarios .

historic cancellation rates for the program are provided in table 8 and table 9 .

congress may wish to evaluate different proposals either increasing or decreasing the likelihood of loans being cancelled , as a means of increasing or decreasing the assistance provided to local governments .

any proposal increasing the likelihood of a loan being forgiven , or of making forgiveness automatic ( and thereby converting the loan program to a grant program ) , is likely to increase the federal cost and use of the program .

congress may wish to eliminate the possibility of loans being cancelled in whole or in part , as was done under the initial legislation appropriating for the scdls .

there are several potential benefits to eliminating the loan cancellation provision .

first , not allowing cancellation could reduce , or potentially eliminate altogether , the cost of the program to the taxpayer .

depending on the interest and default rates on the loans , the program could be close to if not completely budget neutral ( or even provide revenue for the federal government if interest rates were high ) .

second , not allowing cancellation could reduce the administrative costs of the program for both the federal and local government , as it would rid the need for costly reviews and appeals on old loans .

finally , structuring it as a loan program without cancellation could reduce the hypothetical use of local governments who apply for and receive the loans without a true "need" for the assistance after a disaster .

of course , this also means that the program provides less true "assistance" to the local governments following a disaster .

communities that are struggling with continued revenue shortfalls may be unduly burdened by the loan repayment .

instead of completely restricting cancellation , congress may wish to only allow loans to be cancelled up to a certain percentage of the initial principal ( for instance , 50% of the principal ) .

this option could still provide some benefit to the local governments that are financially struggling years after a disaster , while constraining the overall costs of the program to federal taxpayers .

instead of eliminating the cancellation of loans altogether , congress could consider changing the metrics used to determine whether or not a loan should be forgiven by fema .

in theory , the current statutory standard for cancellation — whether revenues of a local government are "insufficient" to meet their operating budget after three fiscal years — is intended to serve as proxy measure for the "need" or fiscal "health" of local government as it continues its disaster recovery .

following a disaster , local governments can be faced with a difficult choice of either continuing their pre - disaster spending levels in order to stimulate recovery in hopes of returning their community "back to normal," or cutting their budgets in response to a continued shortfall in revenues .

some have criticized the program for "penalizing" those local governments that attempt to restrain their operating costs following a disaster in a fiscally prudent manner in response to this dilemma .

one alternative metric congress could consider is to only evaluate actual loss of revenue of a local government during the three - year fiscal period based on pre - disaster standards , regardless of whether or not revenues were sufficient to meet the operating budget of the local government post - disaster .

this metric could be simpler to implement , as it would remove fema from the position of evaluating the budgetary decisions and conditions of the local government post - disaster .

however , such a process opens the possibility that a local government that truly did not "need" ( by some subjective measure ) the loan funds to provide government services following a disaster could receive the superfluous assistance from the federal government .

another alternative would be to create a process that does not rely exclusively on objective accounting calculations of revenue , budgets , and expenditures , and instead allows an independent panel of experts to evaluate the disaster recovery progress of the local government through some objective and subjective analysis .

if the expert panel determined a local government was still struggling to provide government services due to the disaster , the panel could recommend forgiveness of the loan to fema .

of course , any subjective decision - making process for cancellation is prone to criticisms of being inequitably applied , of lacking transparency , or of being motivated and manipulated by political considerations .

instead of not allowing any cancellation , congress may wish to fully cancel all "loans" by creating a grant program instead of a loan program .

when the cdl program was first established in 1974 , it actually replaced a grant program created in 1970 with similar eligibility requirements .

the grant program was authorized in section 261 of the disaster relief act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-606 , 84 stat .

1744 ) , and allowed the president to make grants to any local government which , as the result of a major disaster , had suffered a substantial loss of property tax revenue .

similar to the structure of the 1970 grant program , congress may wish to replace the loan program with grants that have a set size based on lost revenue .

one option would be to replicate the procedures that fema follows now to determine loan size and use them to determine grant size instead .

with a grant program , immediate revenue relief could be provided to local jurisdictions in a disaster area without saddling them with additional debt .

with no possibility of interest or principal repayments , a grant program could cost more per dollar of aid delivered than a loan program .

in addition , a grant program is likely be used by more jurisdictions than a loan program and could therefore be considerably more expensive for federal taxpayers .

conversion to a grant program could also allow more local governments to receive assistance .

some local governments are barred from the current loan program because they legally cannot incur debt to fund government operations , or they are not allowed to borrow directly from the federal government .

similarly , many local governments are required to maintain a balanced budget , and therefore would not have a cumulative operating deficit after the three fiscal year period .

fema has noted in rulemakings that balanced budget procedures prevent these governments from having their loans cancelled .

congress could also consider transforming the program into a hybrid grant and loan program .

in this circumstance , a grant could be offered between certain thresholds of revenue loss ( for instance , between 5% and 10% of expected revenue loss ) , and a loan could be issued for the remainder of the need of the local government .

the loan could be offered with or without the possibility of being cancelled in conjunction with the grant .

a hybrid program that can offer both grants and loans has some precedent .

for instance , the rural communities facilities program managed by usda offers both grants and loans for the same purpose .

however , the various complexities of managing a hybrid program , as well as financing it through appropriations , are certainly worth considering when evaluating this proposal .

converting the disaster loan program into either a full or hybrid grant program may also involve modifying the current appropriation account , the disaster assistance direct loan program account .

if the disaster loan program became a full grant program , congress could consider funding the program through the disaster relief fund , as is practice for most other stafford act programs .

the core purpose of the cdl program is to provide financial assistance to local governments that are having difficulty providing government services because of a loss in tax or other revenue .

in the future , congress may reevaluate this core purpose , irrespective of the method and means of providing the assistance .

congress may no longer consider it in the interest of the federal government to aid local governments experiencing revenue loss after a disaster , especially since there are a wide array of more targeted disaster assistance programs available to local governments .

or , congress may conclude that supporting the maintenance of local government operating budgets through the loan program violates the principles of federalism upon which most disaster assistance programs are based .

if congress wishes to end the cdl program , it could do so by ending appropriations to the daldp account for the purposes of the program , or by eliminating its authorization in the stafford act .

as an alternative to direct loan assistance through the cdl program , congress could consider alternative programs designed to restore certain types of local government revenues following a disaster .

for instance , some local government financial stress related to revenue loss could be alleviated by programs that promote the return of businesses or tourism to the region .

existing programs , such as the small business administration's disaster loan program , could be reviewed by congress to ensure they adequately address the needs of private businesses in this regard .

