article v of the u.s. constitution provides two methods of amendment for the nation's fundamental charter .

in the first , congress , by a two - thirds vote of both chambers , proposes amendments to the states , which then consider the proposal ; if three - fourths ( 38 at present ) approve the amendment , it is ratified , and becomes part of the constitution .

beginning with the bill of rights in 1789 , this method has been used to propose 33 amendments , 27 of which have been ratified .

article v also offers an alternative method in which a convention to consider amendments is called by congress on the application of the legislatures of two - thirds of the states ( 34 at present ) .

the second constitutional amendment option , generally known as the "article v convention," has never been successfully used to propose an amendment to the constitution .

this report offers perspectives for congress on the article v convention , opening with an overview of the provisions in article v that established the convention procedure .

the report further examines its origins at the constitutional convention of 1787 ; the history of the convention alternative , focusing on three major 20 th century campaigns to convene a constitutional convention ; and the role of the states in the article v convention process .

a companion report , crs report r42589 , the article v convention to propose constitutional amendments: contemporary issues for congress , provides a comprehensive analysis of congressional issues , including information on the contemporary resurgence of interest in the convention alternative and the authority of congress to call a convention ; provide a framework and procedures for an article v convention ; and submit proposed amendments to the states for ratification .

it also identifies other elements in the process , including the president's role ; the operation of checks and balances in the convention alternative ; questions concerning a convention's composition and method of voting ; and the function of the district of columbia and u.s. territories .

congress is daily confronted with many competing demands for its time and energy ; in light of these , what compelling interest should congress have in the article v convention alternative in the 21 st century ? .

first , article v vests important and exclusive responsibilities over the amendment process in congress .

as noted previously , these include the right to propose amendments directly to the states for their consideration , and the responsibility to call a convention for proposing amendments on application of the legislatures of two - thirds of the states .

second , while the constitution is silent on the mechanics of an article v convention , congress has historically laid claim to broad responsibilities in connection with a convention , including receiving , judging , and recording state applications ; establishing procedures to summon a convention ; setting the amount of time allotted to its deliberations , determining the number and selection process of its delegates ; setting internal convention procedures , and providing arrangement for the formal transmission of any proposed amendments to the states .

these issues are addressed in detail in the companion to this report , crs report r42589 , the article v convention to propose constitutional amendments: contemporary issues for congress .

it may be argued that there is no pressing need for congress to examine its article v options and responsibilities .

historical precedent suggests that attaining petitions from two - thirds of the states necessary for an article v convention in a timely manner is a difficult obstacle , as demonstrated by several unsuccessful convention drives in the latter part of the 20 th century .

these fell short of the two - thirds mark , despite the vigorous efforts of organized support groups over a period of several years ; moreover , until recently , there has been little apparent interest in the article v convention mechanism in the states since the 1980s .

judging by the historical record , the process might arguably be described as a footnote to constitutional history .

the measured pace of the legislative process in the states has also traditionally served as an additional check to haste in calling such a convention .

for instance , in the case of the balanced budget amendment convention drive of the 1970s and 1980s , it took seven years for an organized campaign to gain convention applications from 32 states , two short of the two - thirds required in article v. although the article v convention device is not widely known or understood at present , it could provide a vehicle for issue organizations and coalitions seeking amendments to the constitution .

given the extraordinary speed and flexibility of contemporary social media and communications technology , interested organizations could conceivably launch an article v convention campaign for a specific amendment or amendments , or perhaps for a general constitutional convention , within a shortened time frame .

in the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s , it took time for "grass roots" efforts to emerge , form organizations to promote their cause , communicate with like - minded groups , undertake campaigns in state legislatures , and generally to learn and perfect the ancillary skills necessary for nationwide issue advocacy .

by comparison , the contemporary availability of instant interpersonal electronic communication , email , and other social network media can facilitate remarkably rapid growth in awareness of a political phenomenon .

for instance , moveon.org emerged in 1998 as an ad hoc on - line coalition opposed to the impeachment of president bill clinton and grew quickly to a membership of 5 million .

more recently , the tea party movement originated in late 2008 with online discussions in conservative - oriented social networking sites and frequent conference calls among organizers .

on february 19 , 2009 , a cable network business commentator made an on - air call for rallies to oppose government spending ; his emotionally charged remarks were picked up by cable news networks and various websites , and went "viral. .

in just two months the newly named "tea party" movement was able to convene over 600,000 supporters in more than 600 demonstrations around the nation .

in a related development , over the past few years , interest has grown in several new constitutional amendment proposals , such as the "repeal amendment," which would provide for the repeal of any federal legislation by a vote of disapproval in the legislatures of two - thirds of the states .

another recent proposal would repeal the 17 th amendment , and restore the election of u.s .

senators to state legislatures .

given the advances in communications technology cited above , groups supporting these measures or others might find the article v convention to be an attractive vehicle for the promotion of their proposed amendments .

under these circumstances , congress might be called on to revisit the article v convention issue for the first time since the 1980s .

the obstacles , however , remain daunting , even in the face of rapid change: the constitution sets a considerable hurdle for the article v convention process by requiring that applications for a convention be made by the legislatures of at least two - thirds of the several states .

further , any amendments proposed would face the same task of securing approval of three - fourths of the states before they were ratified .

article v of the u.s. constitution provides two methods for amending the nation's fundamental charter .

the first method , and to date the only one used successfully , authorizes proposal of amendments by congress: the congress , whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary , shall propose amendments to this constitution , ... which ... shall be valid to all intents and purposes , as part of this constitution , when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states , or by conventions in three fourths thereof , as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the congress ; .... as noted in article v , amendments ratified by the states under either procedure are indistinguishable and have equal force ; they are both "valid to all intents and purposes , as part of this constitution .... .

the idea that constitutional amendments might be drafted and forwarded directly to the states appeared early in the constitutional convention of 1787 , when the "virginia plan" proposed amendment of the national charter , "whensoever it shall seem necessary , and that the assent of the national legislature ought not to be required thereto. .

during the course of convention proceedings , the amendment clause evolved ; initially the states were to have sole authority to call a convention ; congress was then similarly empowered .

the debate reveals that the delegates were concerned that the amending process should not be lodged exclusively with congress , but that the states should also have the opportunity to propose amendments , either directly , or via convention , although alexander hamilton asserted that the national legislature ( congress ) "will be the first to perceive and will be the most sensible to the necessity of amendments...." on september 10 , article v began to assume its final form when james madison offered the following version , which rearranged the various elements that had been debated up to that point: the legislature of the u.s. whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem necessary , or on the application of two thirds of the legislatures of the several states , shall propose amendments to this constitution , which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part thereof , when the same shall have been ratified by three fourths at least of the legislatures of the several states , or by conventions in three fourths thereof , as one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the legislature of the u.s. .... two amendments to the article were added in the convention's final sessions .

the first , which prohibited any interference with the slave trade before 1808 , was included at the insistence of the slave - holding states , while the second , which guaranteed that no state could be deprived of equal suffrage in the senate without its consent , was inserted to reassure the less populous states that the formula providing for equal state representation in the senate would not be altered at some future time: "[t]his motion being dictated by the circulating murmurs of the small states was agreed to without debate , no one opposing it , or on the question , saying no. .

the federalist confirms the convention's intent that the process of proposing amendments should be entrusted to both congress and the state legislatures .

as james madison wrote in federalist 43 , "powers delegated to the general government: iii," the mode [of amendment] preferred by the convention seems to be stamped with every mark of propriety .

it guards equally against that extreme facility which would render the constitution too mutable ; and that extreme difficulty which might perpetuate its discovered faults .

it moreover equally enables the general and the state governments to originate the amendment of errors as they may be pointed out by the experience on one side or on the other ( emphasis added ) .

alexander hamilton commented more specifically on the state petition process as a potential remedy to congressional inaction in federalist 85 , "conclusion:" in opposition to the probability of subsequent amendments , it has been urged that the persons delegated to the administration of the national government will always be disinclined to yield up any portion of the authority of which they were once possessed.... .

the intrinsic difficulty of governing thirteen states ... will , in my opinion , constantly impose on the national rulers the necessity of a spirit of accommodation to the reasonable expectations of their constituents .

but there is yet a further consideration.... [i]t is this , that the national rulers , whenever nine states concur , will have no option on the subject .

by the fifth article of the plan , the congress will be obliged ... to call a convention for proposing amendments... .

the words of this article are peremptory .

the congress "shall call a convention. .

nothing in this particular is left to the discretion of that body .

constitutional scholar and commentator st. george tucker , a friend and contemporary of the virginia delegates to the philadelphia convention , noted that ... the fifth article of the constitution provides the mode by which future amendments to the [c]onstitution may be proposed , discussed , and carried into effect.... and this be effected in two different modes: the first on recommendation from [c]ongress , whenever two thirds of both houses shall concur in the expediency of any amendment .

the second , which secures to the states an influence in case [c]ongress should neglect to recommend such amendments , provides , that [c]ongress shall , on application from the legislatures of two thirds of the states , call a convention for proposing amendments... .

both of these provisions appear excellent .

of the utility and practicability of the former , we have already had most satisfactory experience .

the latter will probably never be resorted to , unless the federal government should betray symptoms of corruption , which may render it expedient for the states to exert themselves in order to the application of some radical and effectual remedy .

on balance , the historical record indicates that the founders established the article v state application process as a complement to the congressional process proposal , to ensure that a convention could be called even if congress refused to consider an amendment or amendments , so long as the proposal enjoyed the supermajority support of two - thirds of the states .

reviewing the convention record , one contemporary observer suggests that , notwithstanding the fact that all 27 current amendments were proposed by congress , the founders had no intention that this should be the predominant or even preferred method of amending the constitution: there is nothing to suggest that the framers intended the congressional procedure to be the predominant amendment process .

to the contrary , they felt that they had struck a proper balance in distributing the power to propose amendments , intending to express a preference for neither method .

to sum up the available record indicating the founders' original intent , it appears that they crafted article v very much in the spirit of checks and balances , and separation of powers , that permeates the constitution .

during the convention , they agreed that a second mode of amendment was needed to balance the grant of amendatory power to congress .

this method , clearly identified in article v as co - equal to congressional proposal , empowers the people , acting through their state legislatures , to summon a convention that would have equal authority to propose an amendment or amendments , which are then proposed to the states for ratification .

in federalist 51 , james madison famously wrote , "if men were angels , no government would be necessary... .

in framing a government which is to be to be administered by men over men the great difficulty is this: you must first enable the government to control the governed ; and in the next place oblige it to control itself. .

it appears that this principle was not far from their minds as they drafted article v , because the convention provided an additional check on both methods of proposing amendments by requiring that all proposed amendments be approved by the legislatures of , or ad hoc conventions in , three - fourths of the several states , and further empowered congress to select which mode of ratification it preferred .

proposals for an article v convention are as old as the republic .

the first of more than 700 was filed in 1789 , the same year government under the u.s. constitution was established , but over the next century , only 23 applications were received by congress .

in fact , the article v convention is sometimes referred to as a 20 th century phenomenon , because 697 of the 743 applications recorded by the friends of the article v convention were filed between 1900 and 1999 .

these have included applications for a general convention , as well as petitions for a convention to consider a particular amendment in an estimated 47 issue areas .

perhaps the first example of what could be considered a "campaign" to promote state applications actually began late in the 19 th century with the movement in favor of an amendment providing direct election of u.s .

senators .

the following section examines this movement and two others , one favoring an amendment concerning apportionment in the state legislatures , and a third advocating a convention to propose an amendment requiring a balanced federal budget .

these "case studies" provide a more detailed look at one campaign that accomplished its ultimate goal , direct election of senators , albeit without an article v convention , and two that came very close to meeting the constitutional threshold of applications from two - thirds of the states .

an article v convention for proposing amendments to the constitution can only be called when the legislatures of two - thirds of the states submit applications .

beyond its simple mandate , the constitution is mute on the details of enabling procedure , which would necessarily involve a broad range of actions within the legislatures , while also posing significant questions of procedure in the states .

the article v convention for proposing amendments was the subject of considerable debate and forethought at the constitutional convention .

the founders clearly intended it as a balance to proposal of amendments by congress , providing the people , through their state legislatures , with an alternative means to consider amendments , particularly if congress was unable or unwilling to act on its own .

since it is one of the few provisions of the constitution that has never been implemented , however , the article v convention presents many questions for congress .

this report has provided relevant historical and external perspectives , intended to assist members and their staff in consideration of this issue .

a companion report , crs report r42589 , the article v convention to propose constitutional amendments: contemporary issues for congress , provides a complementary exposition and analysis of the potential role of congress in the process .

in the event a convention became a serious possibility , members and staff could also draw on a large body of scholarly writing on the subject , and not least , the work and products of two decades of serious congressional consideration of the article v convention process from the 1970s to the 1990s .

