foreign assistance is one of the tools the united states has employed to advance u.s. interests in latin america and the caribbean , with the focus and funding levels of aid programs changing along with broader u.s. policy goals .

current aid programs reflect the diversity of the countries in the region .

some countries receive the full range of u.s. assistance as they continue to struggle with political , socioeconomic , and security challenges .

others , which have made major strides in democratic governance and economic and social development , have largely outgrown u.s. assistance but continue to receive some support for new security challenges , such as strengthening citizen security and combating transnational organized crime .

although u.s. relations with the nations of latin america and the caribbean have increasingly become less defined by the provision of u.s. assistance as a result of this progress , foreign aid continues to play an important role in advancing u.s. policy in the region .

congress authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance to the region and conducts oversight of aid programs and the executive branch agencies charged with managing them .

current efforts to reduce budget deficits in the aftermath of the recent global financial crisis and u.s. recession have triggered closer examination of competing budget priorities .

congress has identified foreign assistance as a potential area for spending cuts , placing greater scrutiny on the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. aid programs .

spending caps and across - the - board cuts that were included in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) could place downward pressure on the aid budget for the foreseeable future .

this report is an overview of u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean .

it briefly examines historical and recent trends in aid to the region .

it then provides a detailed look at the obama administration's fy2013 request for state department and usaid - related assistance to latin america and the caribbean , and describes support provided by other u.s. agencies in order to draw a more complete picture of u.s. assistance to the region .

it also examines key latin america and caribbean funding provisions in the fy2013 foreign aid appropriations bills and potential issues for congressional consideration .

the united states has long been a major contributor of foreign assistance to countries in latin america and the caribbean .

u.s. assistance to the region spiked in the early 1960s following the introduction of president kennedy's alliance for progress , an anti - poverty initiative that sought to counter soviet and cuban influence in the aftermath of fidel castro's 1959 seizure of power in cuba .

after a period of decline , u.s. assistance to the region increased again following the 1979 assumption of power by the leftist sandinistas in nicaragua .

throughout the 1980s , the united states provided considerable support to the contras , who sought to overthrow the sandinista government , as well as to central american governments battling leftist insurgencies .

u.s. aid flows declined in the mid - 1990s following the dissolution of the soviet union , the end of the central american civil conflicts , and the spread of electoral democracy throughout the region .

u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean began to increase once again in the late 1990s and remained on a generally upward trajectory through the past decade .

the higher levels of assistance were partially the result of increased spending on humanitarian and development assistance .

in the aftermath of hurricane mitch in 1998 , the united states provided extensive humanitarian and reconstruction aid to several countries in central america .

the establishment of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) in 2003 and the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) in 2004 provided a number of countries in the region with new sources of u.s. assistance .

more recently , the obama administration has placed greater emphasis on fostering broad - based economic growth in the region and ( initially ) requested higher levels of aid for development efforts .

the united states also provided significant amounts of assistance to haiti in the aftermath of its massive january 2010 earthquake ( see figure 1 ) .

nevertheless , the vast majority of the increase in u.s. aid though 2010 was directed toward counternarcotics and security programs .

beginning with president clinton and the 106 th congress in fy2000 , successive administrations and congresses have provided substantial amounts of foreign aid to colombia and its andean neighbors in support of "plan colombia" — a colombian government initiative to combat drug trafficking , end its long - running internal armed conflict , and foster development .

spending on counternarcotics and security assistance received another boost in fy2008 when president bush joined with his mexican counterpart to announce the mérida initiative , a package of u.s. counterdrug and anticrime assistance for mexico and central america .

in fy2010 , the obama administration split the central america portion of mérida into a separate central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) and created a similar program for the countries of the caribbean known as the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) .

after more than a decade of generally increasing aid levels , u.s. assistance to latin america and the caribbean has again begun to decline .

u.s. aid to the region has decreased each year since fy2010 , and would continue to do so under the obama administration's fy2013 request .

the obama administration's fy2013 foreign aid budget request would continue the recent downward trend in assistance to latin america and the caribbean .

the administration has requested approximately $1.7 billion for the region .

if congress appropriates funding at the requested levels , latin america and the caribbean would receive about 10% less assistance than the region received in fy2012 and about 11% less than the region received in fy2011 .

in comparison , the administration's budget request calls for a 0.1% increase over fy2012 levels for foreign operations worldwide .

the proposed cuts for the region are widespread , with funding for every account — with the exception of development assistance — decreasing as compared to fy2012 .

brazil , venezuela , argentina , and guyana would see some of the largest cuts in percentage terms , while colombia and mexico would see the largest absolute declines in assistance .

el salvador , which was selected by the administration for its "partnership for growth initiative," is the only country in the region that would receive a substantial increase in aid .

even as total aid to the region would decline , the administration's request would continue the gradual shift in emphasis of u.s. aid to the region away from security assistance toward development and humanitarian assistance .

taken together , accounts that provide development or humanitarian assistance would receive over $698 million , or 41% of the total aid request for the region in fy2013 .

nevertheless , the request represents a 4% decrease in total funding for development and humanitarian assistance compared to fy2012 , and a nearly 18% decrease compared to fy2011 .

the obama administration has also requested some $434 million to be provided to the region through the economic support fund ( esf ) account .

this would be a 7% decline from fy2012 , but roughly equal to the amount provided to latin america and the caribbean in fy2011 .

funding for esf represents 26% of the administration's fy2013 request for the region .

if congress fully funds the request , $567 million , or 33% of u.s. aid , would go to accounts that provide security assistance .

u.s. security assistance for latin america and the caribbean would decrease by about 19% compared to fy2012 and 10% compared to fy2011 ( see table 1 above ) .

looking at the distribution of assistance within the western hemisphere , 36% of the administration's request is dedicated to mexico and central america .

this sub - region has become a greater focus of u.s. aid once again as a result of deteriorating security situations in several of the countries and improving conditions elsewhere in the hemisphere .

another 29% of u.s. aid to the region would go to the caribbean , while 27% would go to the andean nations of south america .

brazil and the countries of the southern cone of south america , which are some of the most developed in the hemisphere , would receive just 1% of u.s. assistance for the region .

the final 7% of the request is dedicated to regional programs and accounts that span more than one sub - region ( see figure 4 below ) .

there are a number of u.s. government agencies beyond the state department and usaid that provide foreign assistance to the nations of latin america and the caribbean .

for a variety of reasons , such as differences in appropriations and reporting timelines , these programs are discussed separately from those administered by the state department and usaid .

they include the department of defense , the inter - american foundation , the millennium challenge corporation , and the peace corps .

appropriations committees in both houses of congress marked up fy2013 appropriations bills for the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs in may 2012 .

the house committee on appropriations held a markup of its bill ( h.r .

5857 ) on may 17 , 2012 , and reported it to the full house on may 25 .

it totaled $48.3 billion , including $40.1 billion for the core state department and foreign operations budget and $8.2 billion for overseas contingency operations .

if enacted , total funding levels in fy2013 would have been 9.6% lower than the fy2012 estimate and 11.8% lower than the obama administration's fy2013 request .

the senate committee on appropriations marked up its bill ( s. 3241 ) and reported it favorably to the full senate on may 24 .

it totaled $52.3 billion , including $50 billion for the core state department and foreign operations budget and $2.3 billion for overseas contingency operations .

if enacted , total funding levels in fy2013 would have been 2.3% lower than the fy2012 estimate and 4.7% lower than the administration's request .

the obama administration called the house bill "unworkable," as it went beyond the cuts agreed upon in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

the administration also asserted that the house funding levels would "damage our national security and force america to face higher costs over the long term from unresolved conflicts , transnational crime , poverty , and other cross - border threats. .

it was unclear how much foreign assistance each of the nations of latin america and the caribbean would receive under the two bills since , for the most part , appropriations levels for individual countries and programs were not specified in the legislation or accompanying reports .

nevertheless , both of the reports expressed concerns over conditions in the region and noted the committees' intentions to provide assistance levels above the administration's request to at least some latin american and caribbean nations .

the house report ( h.rept .

112-494 ) stated: additionally , to address the immediate security needs in this hemisphere , the committee recommendation restores reductions proposed in the request for key countries in latin america .

the committee believes it is critical to continue robust support for counternarcotics and law enforcement efforts , as well as assistance for rule of law and judicial reform activities in mexico , colombia , central america , and the caribbean to fight drug trafficking and violent crime before it reaches the borders of the united states .

the security and stability of these neighbors directly affects the united states .

the senate report ( s.rept .

112-172 ) also expressed concerns about the region and called for additional u.s. aid: the committee notes the daunting challenges facing many countries in central and south america due to struggling economies and weak governmental institutions .

in addition to funding levels for specific countries recommended under [the esf heading] , the committee directs additional resources be made available above the budget request to strengthen democratic institutions , including professional and accountable police forces , and to address the causes of poverty in the region .

additional funds should also be provided under the da and incle headings .

the committee reports stipulated specific funding levels under certain foreign aid accounts for some countries and programs .

although they differed in programmatic emphasis , both reports called for assistance above the requested levels for colombia and mexico .

for colombia , the house report recommended esf at the requested level , $10 million above the request in fmf , and $18.6 million above the request in incle to enable colombia to provide training and technical assistance to partners in the region and around the world .

in comparison , the senate report recommended $20 million above the request in esf for alternative development and institution building , the requested level of fmf , and $3 million above the request in incle .

for mexico , the house report recommended $10.35 million above the request in da , the requested levels of esf and fmf , and $49.5 million above the request in incle to support anti - crime and counternarcotics efforts along the u.s. - mexican border .

the senate report recommended incle funding at the requested level and $10 million above the request in esf to support additional economic development activities along the u.s. - mexican border .

the house and senate differed in terms of other priorities .

the house report recommended $5 million in esf for democracy programs in venezuela , which was $2 million above the administration's request .

in contrast , the senate report supported the administration's request for $3 million , but recommended that democracy programs be administered by the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) instead of usaid or the department of state .

for carsi , the house report recommended the requested level of esf and $10 million above the request in incle .

the house report also recommended the requested level of esf and $9 million above the request in incle for cbsi .

the senate report , on the other hand , supported the requested levels for both regional security programs .

while the house bill would have provided $5 million above the request in esf for democracy programs in cuba , the senate bill would have capped funding for such programs at the requested level .

similarly , the senate report recommended $10 million above the request in da for conservation programs in the brazilian amazon while the house report made no reference to such programs .

in addition , the senate bill would have provided $5.4 million above the request for the inter - american foundation , while the house bill would have funded the agency at the requested level .

ultimately congress took no action on h.r .

5857 or s. 3241 .

it delayed floor consideration of fy2013 appropriations bills until after the start of the new fiscal year and the november 2012 elections , instead enacting a six - month continuing resolution that would expire in march 2013 ( p.l .

112-175 ) .

in march 2013 , before the continuing resolution expired , congress approved new legislation ( p.l .

113-6 ) funding federal programs through the end of fy2013 .

under that measure , state department and foreign operations accounts were funded at the same level as in fy2012 with some exceptions .

funding , however , was also subject to the budget sequestration cuts set forth in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) and the american taxpayers relief act ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

while sequestration reduced state department - foreign operations funding by about 5% , those reductions will be applied at the account level , and as a result , country - level allocations for fy2013 are not yet available .

