president jimmy morales , then a relative political newcomer , ran in 2015 on a platform of governing transparently and continuing to root out corruption .

he is now being investigated for corruption himself .

during the election campaign , as mass protests calling for then - president pérez molina's resignation and an end to corruption and impunity grew , so did morales's popular appeal .

morales framed his lack of political experience as an asset .

his campaign slogan was "neither corrupt nor a thief. .

he won guatemala's 2015 presidential election by a landslide with 67% of the vote .

morales initially supported the international commission against impunity in guatemala ( cicig ) , which guatemala asked the united nations ( u.n. ) to form in 2007 to help the government combat corruption , human rights violations , and other crimes .

after he became a target of investigations , he said he would not renew their mandate , which ends in september 2019 .

the president tried to terminate cicig early unilaterally .

many observers are concerned that morales's efforts could undermine ongoing investigations by the guatemalan attorney general's office and judicial proceedings , make political reform more difficult , and heighten instability in guatemala .

the guatemalan congress is also moving legislation that , if passed , would reverse progress made in holding government officials and others accountable for corruption and crimes against humanity .

guatemala faces many political and social challenges in addition to widespread corruption and impunity .

guatemala has some of the highest levels of violence , inequality , and poverty in the region , as well as the largest population .

indigenous people , about half of the population , experience higher rates of economic and social marginalization than nonindigenous citizens , and have for centuries .

almost half of the country's children are chronically malnourished .

guatemala's homicide rate decreased to 26.1 per 100,000 in 2017 , which nonetheless remains one of the highest rates in the region .

guatemala has a long history of internal conflict and violence , including a 36-year civil war ( 1960-1996 ) .

for most of that time , the guatemalan military held power and violently repressed and violated the human rights of its citizens , especially its majority indigenous population .

reports estimate that more than 200,000 people were killed or disappeared during the conflict , with the state bearing responsibility for 93% of human rights violations .

more than 83% of the victims were identified as mayan .

in 1986 , guatemala established a civilian democratic government , but military repression and human rights violations continued .

peace accords signed in 1996 ended the conflict .

the united states maintained close relations with most guatemalan governments , including the military governments , before , during , and after the civil war .

since the late 1980s , guatemala has sought to consolidate its transition from military and autocratic rule to a democracy .

democratically elected civilian governments have governed for over 30 years , but democratic institutions remain fragile due to high levels of corruption , impunity , drug trafficking , and inequitable distribution of resources .

although state institutions have investigated and arrested high - level officials , including a sitting president , for corruption , high levels of impunity in many cases continue due to intimidation of judicial officials , deliberate delays in judicial proceedings , and widespread corruption .

the supreme electoral tribunal ( tse ) investigated multiple political parties for violations of election campaign finance laws in 2014 and 2015 , as part of its auditing process .

as a result , the tse dissolved two major parties , the partido patriota — former president pérez molina's party — and lider .

these investigations are ongoing and may affect the 2019 elections .

president morales presented his general government policy for 2016-2020 in february 2016 .

the five pillars of this plan are zero tolerance for corruption , and modernization of the state ; improvement in food security and nutrition ; improvement in overall health and quality education ; promotion of micro , small , and medium enterprises , and tourism and housing construction ; and protection of the environment and natural resources .

halfway into his four - year term ( 2016-2020 ) , however , morales was being investigated for corruption and criticized for seemingly backing off his pledge of zero tolerance for corruption .

in 2017 , the president's brother and son were arrested on corruption charges .

in august and september 2017 , guatemala's attorney general and cicig announced they were seeking to lift the president's immunity from prosecution as they investigated alleged violations of campaign finance laws and bonuses paid to him by the military .

shortly thereafter , the president tried unsuccessfully to expel the head of cicig , commissioner ivan velásquez .

in 2018 , his third year in office , he prevented velásquez from reentering the country .

in january 2019 morales tried unilaterally to terminate cicig's mandate .

the constitutional court ruled that he lacks the authority to do so .

 ( see " efforts to combat impunity and corruption ," below. ) .

various observers see morales's moves against cicig as part of an effort to impede anticorruption investigations against him , his relatives and associates .

morales will lose his immunity from prosecution when his term ends in january 2020 .

a recent opinion poll found that more than 72% of the population has little or no trust in the police , and about 65% has little to no trust in the government .

conversely , 83% of the population said they supported cicig and the public ministry — which is headed by the attorney general — making them guatemala's most trusted institutions .

so far , the judicial process , protests , and mass mobilizations in the wake of high - level government corruption scandals have remained peaceful .

nonetheless , tensions have heightened as president morales's efforts to impede cicig have escalated , and the guatemalan congress has tried to reduce criminal penalties for corruption and human rights violations .

in january 2019 , thousands of guatemalans joined renewed public protests supporting cicig and calling for the resignations of president morales and members of congress seen as protecting corrupt practices .

 ( see " tension ," below. ) .

continued impunity , coupled with the state's failure to provide basic public services to large parts of the population and limited advances in reducing guatemala's high poverty levels , could prolong tensions .

military - criminal enterprises and other powerful interests that have benefited from corruption and the status quo have fought against anticorruption and anti - impunity work since it began .

they have threatened public prosecutors , the attorney general , and members of the judiciary .

the promote legislation that would protect them from prosecution .

continued prosecution of corruption could provoke increasingly violent responses from those whose wealth or power are threatened .

powerful interests also use more subtle methods to try to weaken cicig , the public ministry , and groups pushing for political reform .

these include tactics such as discrediting the reputations of officials , activists , and their organizations ; delays or cuts in the judicial system's budget ; spurious legal actions that delay trials and drain fiscal and human resources ; and attempts to change cicig's mandate or terms .

a 2016 international commission of jurists report maintains that the guatemalan state has responded passively to defamation campaigns and attacks on judicial independence .

the report suggests that criminal allegations are fabricated against judges , community leaders , human rights defenders , and others to demobilize their anticorruption activities and silence them .

since mid - 2017 , those opposed to anticorruption efforts have escalated many of these tactics .

guatemala enjoyed relatively stable economic growth in recent decades , and the world bank named it a top performer in latin america .

as economic growth rates have slowed in more recent years , however , guatemala has struggled to address its high poverty rates .

the country has the largest economy in central america , with a gross domestic product ( gdp ) of $75.62 billion and a per - capita income of $4,060 in 2017 .

the world bank characterizes guatemala as a lower - middle - income country , and it ranks 127 th out of 189 on the 2018 human development index .

guatemala's stable growth rates have not been enough to decrease some of the highest levels of economic inequality and poverty in the region .

instead , guatemala has backtracked .

after decreasing the overall poverty rate from 56% to 51% between 2000 and 2006 , the rate increased to 59% in 2014 , with a rate just over 79% for indigenous people , according to a national survey .

some elements of guatemalan society and government have tried to bring about equitable development , yet its rural and indigenous populations remain socially and economically marginalized .

for rural municipalities , which constitute 44% of the country , almost 8 out of 10 people live in poverty .

demonstrating the difference in economic and social conditions , literacy rates for the nonindigenous population were 88.9% for men and 83.7% for women , but rates decreased to 77.7% for indigenous men and 57.6% for indigenous women 15 years and older .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) concluded that guatemala lags behind similar countries in terms of development outcomes .

while the government has incorporated global sustainable development goals into their national strategy , the imf reports that the steps necessary to implement those policies "remain largely unaddressed. .

furthermore , extreme poverty increased and school enrollment decreased .

nonindigenous children average twice as many years of schooling as indigenous children .

to improve social conditions , the world bank calls for rapid economic growth coupled with increased public investment and pro - poor policies .

according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) , guatemala's economic growth rate is expected to average out at 2.9% in 2019 .

eiu projects average growth from 2019 to 2023 at 3% but with a dip to 2.4% for 2020 .

the imf concludes that slowed economic growth and rapid population growth will keep per - capita income growth too low to reduce poverty .

a recent major economic analysis found that economic growth in guatemala is "largely a result of the strong inflow of family remittances from abroad. .

factors that impede economic growth and development include corruption , limited government revenues , weak institutions , and weak transportation and energy infrastructure .

a recent economic analysis concluded that corruption has a negative impact on economic activity across central america .

it also concluded that ... anti - corruption measures , such as those launched by the mp and cicig help create a favorable environment for increasing economic growth in guatemala because they reduce the avenue for corruption and strengthen the government's effectiveness as a provider of wellbeing .

guatemala's persistent failure to deliver services and improve the quality of education and health care contribute to a low - skilled workforce , which also limits growth .

according to the u.n. educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) , guatemalan adults had only 3.6 years of education , on average , in 2005 , and "if guatemala had matched the regional average , it could have more than doubled [emphasis in original] its average annual [economic] growth rate between 2005 and 2010. .

current mean years of education is 6.4 for men and for women .

guatemala has the lowest tax - to - gdp ratio in the region at 12.6% , compared to 22.7% for latin america in 2016 .

this is due in part to the high rate of employment in the informal economy — the instituto nacional de estadística found that 71% of the population held informal employment in 2018 .

the percentages were even higher for women , people aged 15-24 , and rural and indigenous segments of the population .

another contributing factor includes the business and elite sectors' historical resistance to paying taxes .

while the tax administration improved tax collection in 2016-2017 ( see " president jimmy morales's administration " ) , an imf report on guatemala cautions that maintaining an improved rate "will require strong and sustained political commitment," which previous efforts have lacked .

tax reforms in 2012 , for example , gave the government tools to increase revenues through taxes , but , the same report notes , weak implementation left guatemala "with virtually unchanged tax - to - gdp ratio [several years] after the reform. .

the imf has called for a tax revenue rate increase to at least 15% of gdp in order to address social , security , and infrastructure needs .

land conflicts , especially those involving mining , are contentious , and often violent , in guatemala and elsewhere throughout the region .

governments often see mines as a source of revenue , potentially for poverty reduction and social programs .

indigenous populations often object to mining under current conditions , however , because they say it violates their ancestral land rights , removes them from and / or damages their source of livelihood , and / or excludes them from the decisionmaking process as to how mine profits should be spent .

guatemala is a signatory to the indigenous and tribal peoples convention , 1989 , also known as the international labour organization's ( ilo's ) convention 169 .

the treaty calls on governments to consult indigenous peoples before permitting exploitation of natural resources on their land .

according to a recent report by the ilo , the guatemalan government granted 367 mining licenses between its ratification of the convention in 1996 and 2014 , and held only 60 community consultations , all of which had expressed opposition to the projects .

the report found that guatemala's constitutional court had found such consultations nonbinding .

guatemala has not developed regulations to govern prior consultations .

ongoing conflicts around land use are likely to continue to delay such projects .

other types of land conflicts and evictions are related to biofuels , dams , ranching , and drug trafficking ; these are also frequently violent .

coffee is one of guatemala's key exports .

yet several obstacles are driving coffee farmers from the market: coffee leaf rust ( a deadly fungus ) , extremely low coffee prices , and a drought , which has triggered increases in food prices .

smallholder farmers , with less than 7.5 acres of land , produce 80% of central america's coffee .

according to a recent npr report , "some 70 percent of the farms have been affected [by the rust] , and over 1.7 million coffee workers have lost their jobs .

many are leaving the coffee lands to find work elsewhere. .

remittances from guatemalans abroad boost the guatemalan economy as they constitute over 10% of the gdp , and this percentage is forecast to grow to an average of 13.8% through 2023 .

private consumption accounts for 85% of gdp .

traditionally , the united states and guatemala have had close relations , with friction at times over human rights and civil / military issues .

according to the state department , current u.s. policy objectives in guatemala include addressing the underlying drivers of illegal migration ; supporting the institutionalization of democracy ; encouraging respect for human rights and rule of law , and the efficient functioning of cicig ; supporting broad - based economic growth and sustainable development and maintaining mutually beneficial trade and commercial relations , including ensuring that benefits of cafta - dr reach all sectors of guatemalan society ; cooperating to fight money laundering , corruption , narcotics trafficking , alien smuggling , trafficking in persons , and other transnational crimes ; supporting central american integration through support for resolution of border and territorial disputes ; reinforcing the government's economic development and political reform plan in the alliance for prosperity to be self - reliant in addressing drivers of migration and illicit trafficking of goods and people ; and improving guatemala's business climate .

in 2017 , the trump administration expressed support for cicig and for commissioner velásquez .

in february , then - homeland security secretary john kelly met with president morales and commissioner velásquez in guatemala , and reiterated u.s. support for the public ministry's and cicig's fight against corruption .

on the same day , a u.s. court indicted former guatemalan vice president roxana baldetti and former interior minister mauricio lopez bonilla on criminal drug trafficking charges .

a guatemalan court approved a u.s. request for baldetti's extradition in june 2017 , but first she will face prosecution on four charges of corruption in guatemalan courts .

she was convicted and is serving time for one case of embezzlement there .

lopez bonilla must first face three counts of corruption in guatemalan courts .

the united states arrested former guatemalan presidential candidate manuél baldizón as he entered the country in january 2018 .

the u.s. embassy in guatemala said the united states would "return mr. baldizón to guatemala to face justice" ; he faces charges of bribery , conspiracy and money - laundering related to helping the odebrecht company win construction contracts in guatemala .

the odebrecht scandal is enveloping politicians across latin america .

baldizón requested asylum in the united states .

u.s. vice president mike pence , then - secretary of state rex tillerson , secretary of commerce wilbur ross , then - secretary of homeland security kelly , and secretary of the treasury steven mnuchin attended meetings with president morales , as well as his honduran counterpart and the salvadoran vice president , in june 2017 at the conference on prosperity and security in central america in florida .

pence said that addressing migration to the united states requires strengthening the sending countries' economies , including through foreign assistance .

nonetheless , the trump administration has proposed significantly cutting aid to the region and emphasizing security over development in its budget requests .

the president has sometimes threatened to cut off aid to guatemala and the other northern triangle counties .

congress has rejected most of the administration's proposed cuts .

president morales followed president trump's lead in december 2017 in announcing his country would move its embassy in israel to jerusalem from tel aviv .

the change has been widely criticized internationally .

a nonbinding u.n. general assembly resolution called for the united states to shelve its recognition of jerusalem .

trump threatened to cut off aid to countries that supported the resolution .

in february 2018 , trump met with morales in washington , thanking him for his support on israel .

according to the white house , trump "also underscored the importance of stopping illegal immigration to the united states from guatemala and addressing guatemala's underlying challenges to security and prosperity. .

in 2018 , the trump administration did not join other commission donor countries in stating support of cicig and the commissioner .

secretary pompeo spoke with president morales on september 6 , 2018 , expressing continued support for "a reformed cicig," but did not report mentioning either the termination of cicig's mandate or the barring of velásquez .

in march 2019 the administration joined other donor countries in speaking out against guatemala's proposed amnesty bill , and suspended military aid to guatemala over the misuse of jeeps that had been provided by the department of defense .

the united states has been providing assistance to guatemala through regional initiatives: the central american regional security initiative ( carsi ) , for combating narcotics trafficking and preventing transnational crime ; the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) ; and food for peace .

currently , u.s. assistance to guatemala is guided by the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america .

the various programs are integrated for a greater impact in the western highlands region of the country , which has the highest rates of poverty , chronic malnutrition , and out - migration in guatemala , and in high - crime areas .

according to the state department , "the overall objective of u.s. assistance efforts is to create effective structures and organizations sustainable by the guatemalan government. .

while some structures , such as the attorney general's office , have greatly improved their effectiveness with u.s. and other support , other institutions remain weak .

u.s. bilateral assistance to guatemala complements carsi programs and the regional alliance for prosperity plan ( see " the alliance for prosperity and other regional initiatives " below ) .

economic support and development assistance aims to expand economic opportunities ; improve governance , accountability , and transparency ; strengthen the juvenile justice system ; and improve living conditions in guatemala .

in 2014 , the obama administration launched the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america ( the strategy ) , a whole - of - government approach aimed at addressing the root causes of illegal immigration from the region by improving prosperity , regional economic integration , security , and governance .

the strategy complements the plan of the alliance for prosperity ( afp ) in the northern triangle proposed by the presidents of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras ( see " the alliance for prosperity and other regional initiatives " below ) .

congress has appropriated $2.1 billion for the strategy for fy2016-fy2018 .

congress placed numerous conditions on aid for guatemala ( and el salvador and honduras ) in each of the foreign aid appropriations measures enacted since fy2016 .

through the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , congress withheld 25% of aid to the three central governments until the secretary of state certified that conditions relating to limiting irregular migration were met .

congress conditioned another 50% of aid until the governments addressed another 12 concerns , including combating corruption ; countering gangs and organized crime ; increasing government revenues ; supporting programs to reduce poverty and promote equitable growth ; and protecting the rights of journalists , political opposition parties , and human rights defenders to operate without interference .

the state department certified that the three northern triangle governments met congress's conditions in fy2016 and fy2017 .

the department certified that the three countries had met the first set of conditions in fy2018 , but not the second set .

the 2019 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

116-6 ) maintained the legislative conditions enacted in prior years but combined them into a single certification requirement for 50% of assistance to the central government .

the trump administration has proposed cutting aid to guatemala by 36% for fy2020 compared to fy2018 and emphasizing security over development .

the budget request for central america would also reduce aid , and tip the balance toward security and away from traditional development goals — such as good governance , economic growth , and social welfare .

the administration's proposed budget would also eliminate traditional food aid ( p.l .

480 , title ii ) , and food aid would be provided only through the international disaster assistance account .

some critics are concerned that reducing nonemergency food aid could increase the already high levels of malnutrition and stunting in guatemala .

in addition , a recent study by several major international organizations found that "there is clearly a link between food insecurity and emigration from [guatemala , el salvador and honduras]. .

the trump administration proposes closing down the inter - american foundation ( iaf ) , an independent u.s. agency that supports grassroots development throughout latin america , including in all three northern triangle countries , and merging it into usaid .

many iaf programs in guatemala are in areas that have high levels of emigration to the united states ; these programs aim to improve agricultural and food production ; improve the livelihoods of youth , women , and indigenous people , and increase their participation in civil society and community development ; and ease the transition of migrants who return to guatemala .

congress rejected most of the cuts for aid to central america proposed by the trump administration in its previous budgets .

the fy2017 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

244 , p.l .

115-31 ) provided just under $126 million for guatemala as part of the $655 million for the continued implementation of the strategy .

the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

1625 , p.l .

115-141 ) provided less than $120 million for guatemala as part of the $615 million for the strategy .

the 116 th congress remains invested in the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america .

in february 2019 , it passed the fy2019 consolidated appropriations act ( h.j.res .

31 , p.l .

116-6 ) , including $528 million for central america .

the act did not provide specific funding amounts for individual countries , but instead gave the department of state the authority to allocate funding among the central american nations .

the act's conference report , however , did specify $13 million in global health program aid for guatemala and $6 million for cicig .

the 116 th congress has introduced other bills that touch on perennial concerns involving guatemala , such as immigration , border security , and governance issues .

for example , h.res .

18 , introduced in january , would express the sense of the house that the president should redirect and target foreign assistance provided to guatemala , el salvador , and honduras in a manner that addresses the driving causes of illegal immigration into the united states .

s. 716 and h.r .

1630 , introduced in march 2019 , would impose targeted sanctions under the global magnitsky human rights accountability act against guatemalan nationals found responsible for , or complicit in , acts of corruption , laundering money , or violating human rights .

in march 2019 the department of defense announced it was suspending military aid to guatemala's ministry of the interior , which it said had repeatedly used armored jeeps provided by the united states "in an incorrect way" since august 2018 , when they were deployed outside cicig and donor embassies when morales announced he was not renewing cicig's mandate .

in response to increased central american immigration in 2014 , the obama administration and some members pressed the northern triangle governments ( guatemala , honduras , and el salvador ) to invest more heavily in their own development and security .

later that year , the guatemalan , salvadoran , and honduran governments proposed the plan of the alliance for prosperity in the northern triangle with the help of the inter - american development bank .

the five - year , $22 billion initiative seeks to ( 1 ) stimulate the productive sector to create economic opportunities ; ( 2 ) develop human capital through improved education , job training , and social protections ( health care , nutrition ) ; ( 3 ) improve public safety and access to the legal system ; and ( 4 ) strengthen institutions and improve transparency to increase public trust in the state .

some observers , including some u.s. officials , criticized the initial plan for not focusing on development and poverty - reduction efforts in the poorest regions , from which the highest numbers of people emigrate .

the guatemalan embassy says that the government has since shifted some of its programs toward those regions .

guatemala , honduras , and el salvador launched a trinational task force to address the region's security issues in november 2016 .

the task force focuses on greater border protection , undertaking operations to dismantle gangs and criminal structures , taking action against human trafficking , cracking down on terrestrial drug trafficking across borders , and stopping the flow of contraband products through the northern triangle .

the initiative includes increased information sharing and cooperation among the three countries' governments , as well as law enforcement and investigative agencies .

the governments of el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and mexico agreed on a comprehensive development plan in december 2018 , and met in january 2019 to begin its design .

they say they intend to be the first region in the world to implement the global compact for migration , which seeks to improve cooperation between countries and regions to facilitate safe , orderly , and regular international migration .

honduran foreign minister maria dolores agüero stated that "[r]especting the dignity of migrant persons will be prioritized in line with international law and with special emphasis on a child's best interest and the protection of human rights , regardless of migratory status. .

mexican secretary of foreign affairs marcelo ebrard said the group wished to demonstrate that addressing the causes of migration is more effective than exclusion and containment measures .

guatemala and the united states have significant trade relations , and are part of the u.s. - central america - dominican republic free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , implemented in 2006 .

supporters of cafta - dr point to reforms it spurred in transparency , customs administration , intellectual property rights , and government regulation .

critics note that the commercial balance between the two countries previously favored guatemala , and that guatemala already had duty - free access under the caribbean basin initiative .

since cafta - dr , the balance has shifted in favor of the united states .

the u.s. goods trade surplus with guatemala reached $2.9 billion in 2017 , a 16% increase from 2016 .

from 2005 ( pre - cafta - dr ) to 2017 , u.s. exports to guatemala increased by 143% , whereas guatemalan exports to the united states increased by only 28% during the same period .

president trump has ordered reviews of u.s. trade agreements .

total u.s. - guatemala trade in goods and services for 2017 reached $13.5 billion , and u.s. exports to guatemala amounted to $8.5 billion .

mineral fuels , articles donated for relief , machinery , electrical machinery , and cereals accounted for the majority of u.s. exports .

u.s. agricultural exports include corn , soybean meal , wheat , poultry , and cotton .

u.s. imports from guatemala amounted to about $4 billion , with bananas , plantains , knit apparel , woven apparel , coffee , silver , and gold accounting for the majority .

guatemala was the united states' 43 rd - largest trading partner in 2017 .

the u.s. labor department initiated a dispute settlement process alleging that the guatemalan government violated its cafta - dr labor commitments , the first labor rights complaint lodged under a u.s. free trade agreement .

in 2011 , the u.s. trade representative officially requested an arbitral panel .

in 2017 , the panel concluded that although it agreed that guatemala had failed to enforce its labor laws effectively in certain cases , the united states had failed to prove that the lack of enforcement negatively affected trade , as required under cafta - dr .

some observers say the finding brings into question the effectiveness of labor regulations in u.s. free trade agreements .

the trump administration may consider renegotiating cafta - dr .

guatemala remains a major transit country for illicit drugs , particularly cocaine , trafficked from south america to the united states .

guatemala's porous borders and lack of law enforcement presence in many areas enables minor poppy and opium production , as well as smuggling of precursor chemicals , narcotrafficking , and trafficking of weapons , people , and other contraband .

unlike former president pérez molina , current president morales opposes legalization of illicit drugs .

according to the state department , in 2017 guatemala recorded record drug seizures and arrested 106 high - profile drug traffickers .

in response to increased drug consumption , guatemala doubled its budget for domestic reduction activities .

the united states provides assistance in the areas of vetted units , and a range of training , with the goal of improving the professional capabilities and integrity of guatemala's police forces and judicial institutions .

the 2018 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) highlighted the above improvements in guatemala's drug control and border security , but noted the following: corruption levels remain high and public confidence in government institutions is low .

limited budget resources hinder the government's effectiveness .

despite guatemala's many successes in 2017 , the government needs to take additional steps to further build sustainable drug control mechanisms , including support for anti - corruption efforts , accelerated judicial processes , improved interagency cooperation , and adequate financial resources for relevant agencies and government ministries .

corruption within the guatemalan government has enabled illicit drug trafficking .

the u.s. department of justice requested the extradition of former interior minister lopez bonilla , who oversaw the guatemalan police and prisons under the perez molina administration .

the justice department reportedly said that lopez bonilla received money from various drug cartels , including the notorious los zetas , in exchange for allowing them to operate freely across guatemala .

a u.s. court also indicted former guatemalan vice president roxana baldetti on criminal drug trafficking charges .

in 2017 a guatemalan court approved their extradition to the united states , but first they must face prosecution on multiple charges of corruption in guatemalan courts .

baldetti was convicted and is serving time for one case in guatemala .

the trump administration suspended military aid to guatemala intended for police counternarcotics and border security operations task forces in march 2019 .

the department of defense announced it was ending the "transfer of equipment and training to the task forces" because the interior ministry , which oversees the police , had repeatedly misused armored jeeps provided by the united states since august 2018 .

 ( see " tensions over president morales's dispute with cicig " above. ) .

approximately 1.5 million u.s. residents claim guatemalan ethnicity , and there were over 950,000 foreign - born persons from guatemala living in the u.s. in 2017 .

the pew research center estimates that in 2016 , 575,000 of the guatemalan foreign - born population were unauthorized ( about 60% ) .

from the 1970s to 1990s , the civil war fueled some migration .

during the 2000s , migration became motivated by socioeconomic opportunities , natural disasters , social violence , and family reunification .

unlike their neighbors in the region , honduras and el salvador , guatemalans have not received temporary protected status ( tps ) , which offers immigration relief from removal under specific circumstances .

some guatemalans benefit from the deferred action for child arrivals ( daca ) program , which allows people without lawful immigration status who came to the united states as children and meet certain requirements to request protection from removal for two years , subject to renewal .

on september 5 , 2017 , the trump administration announced plans to phase out the daca program .

president trump later tweeted that if congress did not pass daca - like legislation by early 2018 , he would "revisit" the issue .

as of the date of this report , no such legislation has been passed .

due to federal court orders , daca renewals are once again being accepted ; new applications for daca , however , are not .

from fy2009 to fy2014 , the number of unaccompanied migrant children ( sometimes referred to as unaccompanied alien children , or uac ) from guatemala apprehended at the u.s. border rose from 1,115 to 17,057 , causing concern among congress and the executive branch .

in the years since , the trend has fluctuated , as the number of unaccompanied guatemalan minors apprehended at the border decreased to 13,589 in 2015 ; rose to 18,913 in fy2016 ; fell to 14,827 in fy2017 ; and rose to 22,327 in fy2018 .

to offer a safer alternative to travelling to the united states to request asylum , the u.s. government launched the central american minors ( cam ) refugee / parole program in december 2014 .

the program allowed children living in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , whose parents reside legally in the united states , to apply for legal entry to the united states .

in july 2016 , the u.s. government expanded the cam program to include additional family members .

according to state department data , 45 guatemalans left for the united states under refugee status and 31 as parolees between the program's start in december 2014 and september 2017 .

the trump administration ended the cam program in november 2017 .

according to the u.n. high commissioner for refugees , 62% of unaccompanied migrant children interviewed in 2013 did not mention serious harm as a reason for leaving guatemala , and 84% cited hopes for family reunification , increased work or study opportunities , or helping their families as motivation for coming to the united states .

two guatemalan children , 7 and 8 years old , died while in u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) custody in december 2018 .

cbp commissioner kevin mcaleenan subsequently issued guidelines for the agency to conduct health inspections on all children in custody , and said he was looking for ways to reduce congestion in government holding facilities , including having nongovernment organizations provide short - term housing for immigrants seeking asylum .

mcaleenan also said that holding facilities had been built for single adult males , not for family groups with children , and that a different approach was needed .

"we need help from congress .

we need to budget for medical care and mental health care for children in our facilities," he said .

the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america and the central american plan of the alliance for prosperity in the northern triangle were developed in large part as a response to the surge in immigration in 2014 .

they represent efforts to spur development and reduce illegal emigration to the united states .

the trump administration's proposed budgets have emphasized security over development , and substantial cuts in assistance to the region .

u.s. laws and policies concerning intercountry adoption are designed to ensure that all children put up for adoption are truly orphans , and have not been bought , kidnapped , or subjected to human trafficking , smuggling , or other illegal activities .

similarly , the goals of the hague convention on protection of children and cooperation in respect of intercountry adoption are to ensure transparency in adoptions to prevent human trafficking , child stealing , or child selling , and to eliminate confusion and delays caused by differences among the laws and practices of different countries .

both the united states and guatemala are party to the convention .

because guatemala has not yet established regulations and procedures that meet convention standards , the convention has not entered into force there .

in fy2007 , u.s. citizens adopted 4,726 children from guatemala , more than from any other country except china ( 5,453 adoptions ) .

when the convention went into effect in the united states in 2008 , adoptions from guatemala were suspended because guatemala was not in compliance with the convention's standards .

since then , the only cases of adoptions by u.s. citizens of guatemalan children that have been permitted are those that were already in - process on december 31 , 2007 .

there were about 3,000 such adoption cases pending at the time .

as of 2016 , all but 3 cases had been resolved .

according to the u.s. state department , the guatemalan government's priority is to continue developing its domestic adoption processes , but it is receptive to ongoing discussions .

the state department says it continues efforts to work with guatemala to establish intercountry adoption procedures .

