the agriculture appropriations bill — formally known as the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — provides funding for the following agencies and departments: all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) except the forest service , which is funded in the interior appropriations bill , the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services , and in the house , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

in the senate , the financial services bill contains cftc appropriations .

jurisdiction is with the house and senate committees on appropriations , and their respective subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies .

the bill includes both mandatory and discretionary spending , although most decision making concerns discretionary spending .

see appendix a for more on scope and terminology .

both the house and the senate reported bills for fy2013 agriculture appropriations ( table 1 ) .

the senate full committee moved first , reporting s. 2375 ( s.rept .

112-163 ) on april 26 , 2012 .

the house subcommittee marked up its bill on june 6 , 2012 , followed by full committee action on h.r .

5973 ( h.rept .

112-542 ) on june 19 , 2012 .

no further action occurred on the bills in the 112 th congress .

fy2013 began under a continuing resolution ( cr ; p.l .

112-175 ) that lasts until march 27 , 2013 .

the cr funds discretionary operations at fy2012 levels plus 0.612% , continues mandatory programs as needed , and continues other terms and conditions that were applicable in fy2012 .

table 2 summarizes the bill totals , as proposed in the 112 th congress , by title .

in the past 14 years , stand - alone agriculture appropriations bills were enacted five times , in fy2000-fy2002 , fy2006 , and fy2010 ( table b - 1 in appendix b ) .

omnibus appropriations were used seven times , in fy1999 , fy2003-fy2005 , fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2012 .

year - long continuing resolutions were used twice , in fy2007 and fy2011 .

figure b - 1 shows the timeline .

amounts in this report are based on h.r .

5973 and s. 2375 in the 112 th congress and not the continuing resolution .

for enacted post - sequestration amounts , see crs report r43110 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2014 and fy2013 ( post - sequestration ) appropriations .

the following tables provide additional detail for selected agencies in the agriculture appropriations bill: table 10 shows proposed appropriations for domestic food assistance programs .

table 11 shows farm loan program amounts for the farm service agency .

table 12 contains appropriations for agricultural research and related programs .

table 13 presents food safety appropriations within the food and drug administration and for the food safety inspection service .

table 14 through table 16 show various rural development appropriations , including rural housing , rural cooperative business development , and rural utilities programs .

appendix a .

background on scope and terms usda activities and relationships to appropriations bills the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) carries out widely varied responsibilities through about 30 separate internal agencies and offices staffed by about 100,000 employees .

usda spending is not synonymous with farm program spending , nor are agriculture appropriations completely correlated with usda spending .

usda divides its activities into "mission areas. .

food and nutrition programs are the largest mission area — with more than three - fourths of usda's budget in fy2012 — supporting the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) ; the women , infants , and children ( wic ) program ; and child nutrition programs .

the second - largest usda mission area — with about one - eighth of usda's budget — is farm and foreign agricultural services .

this broad mission area includes the farm commodity price and income support programs , crop insurance , certain mandatory conservation and trade programs , farm loans , and foreign food aid programs .

five other mission areas share one - eighth of usda's budget , including natural resource and environment , rural development , research and education , marketing and regulatory programs , and food safety .

comparing usda's organization and budget data to the agriculture appropriations bill in congress is not always easy .

usda's "mission areas" do not always correspond to the titles or categories in the agriculture appropriations bill .

foreign agricultural assistance is a separate title in the appropriations bill ( title v , figure a - 1 ) , but is joined with domestic farm support in usda's "farm and foreign agriculture" mission area ( figure a - 2 ) .

title i in the appropriations bill ( title i , figure a - 1 ) covers four of usda's mission areas: agricultural research , marketing and regulatory programs , food safety , and the farm support portion of farm and foreign agriculture .

the forest service is about half of the natural resources mission area ( figure a - 2 ) but is funded in the interior appropriations bill .

it also accounts for about one - third of usda's personnel , with about 34,000 staff years in fy2011 .

the type of funding ( mandatory vs. discretionary ) also is an important difference between how the appropriations bill and usda's mission areas are organized .

conservation in the appropriations bill ( title ii , figure a - 1 ) includes only discretionary programs .

the mandatory funding for conservation programs is included in title i of the appropriation in the commodity credit corporation .

conversely , the non - forest service part of usda's natural resources mission area includes both discretionary programs and some mandatory conservation programs .

related agencies in addition to the usda agencies mentioned above , the agriculture appropriations subcommittees have jurisdiction over appropriations for two related agencies: the food and drug administration ( fda ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc , an independent financial markets regulatory agency ) — in the house only .

the combined share of fda and cftc funding in the overall agriculture and related agencies appropriations bill is about 2% ( title vi ) .

jurisdiction over cftc appropriations is assigned differently in the house and senate .

before fy2008 , the agriculture subcommittees in both the house and senate had jurisdiction over cftc funding .

in fy2008 , senate jurisdiction moved to the financial services appropriations subcommittee .

placement in the enacted version now alternates each year .

in even - numbered fiscal years , cftc has resided in the agriculture appropriation act .

in odd - numbered fiscal years , cftc has resided in the enacted financial services appropriations act .

these agencies are included in the agriculture appropriations bill because of their historical connection to agricultural markets .

however , the number and scope of non - agricultural issues has grown in recent decades .

some may argue that these agencies no longer belong in the agriculture appropriations bill .

but despite the growing importance of non - agricultural issues , agriculture and food issues are still an important component at each agency .

at fda , food safety responsibilities that are shared between usda and fda have been in the media during recent years and are the subject of legislation and hearings .

at cftc , volatility in agricultural commodity markets has been a subject of recent scrutiny at cftc and in congress .

discretionary vs .

mandatory spending discretionary and mandatory spending are treated differently in the budget process .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and consumes most of the attention during the appropriations process .

eligibility for participation in mandatory programs ( sometimes referred to as entitlement programs ) is usually written into authorizing laws ; any individual or entity that meets the eligibility requirements is entitled to the benefits authorized by the law .

in fy2012 , about 15% of the agriculture appropriations bill was for discretionary programs ( about $20 billion ) , and the remaining balance of 85% was classified as mandatory ( about $117 billion ) .

most agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) are financed with discretionary funds .

major discretionary programs include certain conservation programs ; most rural development programs ; research and education programs ; agricultural credit programs ; the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; the food for peace international food aid program ; meat and poultry inspection ; and food marketing and regulatory programs .

the discretionary accounts also include fda and cftc appropriations .

the largest component of usda's mandatory spending is for food and nutrition programs — primarily the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) and child nutrition ( school lunch and related programs ) — along with the farm commodity price and income support programs , the federal crop insurance program , and various agricultural conservation and trade programs .

some mandatory spending , such as the farm commodity programs , is highly variable and driven by program participation rates , economic and price conditions , and weather patterns .

formulas are set in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

in recent years , mandatory spending has tended to rise particularly as nutrition benefits have risen because of the recession ( see " historical trends " ) .

although mandatory programs generally are outside the scope of the appropriations debate , amounts for these programs are included in the annual agriculture appropriations act .

in terms of budget enforcement , though , mandatory spending decisions are governed in the authorizations process via the congressional budget office baseline .

for example , the snap and child nutrition programs are funded by an annual appropriation based on projected spending needs .

in fact , snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement," and requires an annual appropriation .

in contrast , the commodity credit corporation operates on a line of credit with the treasury , but receives an annual appropriation to reimburse the treasury and to maintain its line of credit .

budget authority , obligations , outlays , and program levels in addition to the difference between mandatory and discretionary spending , four other terms are important to understanding differences in discussions about federal spending: budget authority , obligations , outlays , and program levels .

1 .

budget authority = how much money congress allows a federal agency to commit to spend .

it represents a limit on funding and is generally what congress focuses on in making most budgetary decisions .

it is the legal basis to incur obligations .

most of the amounts mentioned in this report are budget authority .

2 .

obligations = how much money agencies commit to spend .

obligations represent activities such as employing personnel , entering into contracts , and submitting purchase orders .

3 .

outlays = how much money actually flows out of an agency's account .

outlays may differ from appropriations ( budget authority ) because , for example , payments on a contract may not flow out until a later year .

for construction or delivery of services , budget authority may be committed ( contracted ) in one fiscal year and outlays may be spread across several fiscal years .

4 .

program level = sum of the activities supported or undertaken by an agency .

a program level may be much higher than its budget authority for several reasons .

user fees support some activities ( eg , food or border inspection ) .

the agency makes loans ; for example , a large loan authority ( program level ) is possible with a small budget authority ( loan subsidy ) that accounts for defaults and interest rate assistance , assuming most loans are repaid .

transfers from other agencies , or funds are carried forward from prior years .

appendix b .

agriculture appropriations timelines key policy staf .

