after over two years of deliberations , spanning the 112 th and 113 th congresses , the agricultural act of 2014 ( the "2014 farm bill" ) was enacted on february 7 , 2014 .

within this omnibus reauthorization of dozens of agricultural and nutrition statutes , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) was reauthorized .

while the reauthorization maintained the vast majority of prior law eligibility and benefit calculation policies , the new law does change the impact of the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) in the calculation of snap monthly benefit amounts .

under prior law , snap recipients who also receive benefits from liheap may have received increased snap benefits , no matter the amount of liheap received .

under the 2014 farm bill , liheap can only impact a household's benefit if a household receives more than $20 a year .

this policy contained in the farm bill conference agreement follows similar changes in the senate - and house - passed bills , with the senate passing a $10 threshold and the house passing a $20 threshold .

because snap benefits are 100% federally funded and because snap is an open - ended entitlement , policy changes to benefit amounts or eligibility can generate substantial changes in spending .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that this liheap - related change included in the 2014 farm bill would reduce snap spending by approximately $8.6 billion over the 10-year budget window of fy2014-fy2023 .

 ( although this change is similar to the house - passed proposal , it is estimated to impact spending slightly less due to the timing of implementation. ) .

throughout the formulation of the new farm bill , reauthorization proposals focused on deficit reduction as well as agricultural program reforms .

at issue throughout the process was whether and / or to what extent a reauthorization of snap should reduce program spending , affect eligibility , or affect benefit amounts .

supporters of the changes to liheap's treatment in snap have framed it as a policy to improve snap integrity , assuring that liheap is treated uniformly across all states and according to congressional intent .

detractors argue that ending the so - called "heat and eat" practice reduces benefits for those in need .

in addition to the significance of this provision for the farm bill's cost estimate , the newly enacted policy is complex , and it can be difficult to untangle how the farm bill change would work and which states and households may be affected .

this report provides prior law background on the benefit amount interactions between snap and liheap , an explanation of the 2014 farm bill change , as well as the potential impact of this change on households and states' administration of snap .

for further information on the farm bill and snap in general , please see crs report r43076 , the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) : summary and side - by - side , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43332 , reauthorization of snap and other nutrition programs in the next farm bill: issues for the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs crs report r42505 , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) : a primer on eligibility and benefit .

at this juncture , much is unknown about the implementation and impact of this change ; much will depend on usda - fns and states' implementation .

however , there are some things that can be said based on snap benefit calculation rules and other available information .

first , this change is expected to affect some households' snap benefit amounts , but it will not affect households' eligibility for snap benefits .

second , this change is expected to affect states that have implemented "heat and eat" policies .

third , within the provisions of the new law , however , states and households may have some options to reduce the impact of this change .

as noted above , subject to usda - fns's implementation of the new law , it is not expected that this change will affect households' eligibility for benefits .

in other words , if nothing else changed in a household's economic profile , but they had received a 10-cent liheap payment , the household's benefit might be reduced when the household reapplies , though the household would not stop receiving snap .

this is the case because the excess shelter deduction — for which liheap plays a role — is calculated after eligibility has been determined .

three aspects of "when" are specified in the text of the legislation ( section 4006 of p.l .

113-79 ) : 1 .

provision takes effect 30 days after enactment: the law says that the amendments in section 4006 take effect 30 days after enactment of the law .

the law was enacted on february 7 , 2014 .

however , this must be read in conjunction with two other aspects of the law .

2 .

provision applies to certification periods after the effective date: snap households are certified to receive benefits for a period of time , and have to follow state rules for reporting changes , such as changes in household income or size of the household .

the period of certification is based on state choices within a federal framework .

the new law indicates that when a new snap household applies for benefits , if that is 30 days after the law's enactment , the benefits will be calculated based on the $20 threshold rule , but for households already receiving snap it will be only when they apply to recertify that their benefit calculation will be subject to the $20 rule .

this recertification scenario , though , is subject to a state's decision to delay implementation .

3 .

states have the option to delay implementation for current recipients: the law gives states the option to delay implementation or reduce its impact for as long as five months after the law takes effect .

the specifics of this state option — how usda - fns will implement it and how the states will implement it — are not known at this time .

taken together , this means that for new snap applicants , the new rules should take effect 30 days after february 7 , 2014 .

however , for current snap recipients , the exact date that they are subject to the new rules ( and possible benefit reduction ) will depend both on ( 1 ) when their current certification period ends , and ( 2 ) whether and how their state delays implementation .

in addition to the option to delay implementation , a state continues to have the option to issue liheap payments greater than $20 .

because of the budgetary constraints associated with liheap funds , it seems unlikely that a state would give more than $20 to every household that had been receiving less than $20 , but it is an option that is open to states .

if a household can document heating or cooling costs in another way , then the higher sua can continue to be included in the household's excess shelter deduction even if the household does not receive more than $20 of liheap assistance .

applicants would have to be aware of the need to present utility bills or other documentation .

in their cost estimate of the conference agreement , cbo did not release estimates of the number of snap - recipient households that would be affected by section 4006 of the agricultural act of 2014 .

in september 2013 , cbo estimated that the house - passed $20-threshold provision in h.r .

3102 would result in 850,000 snap - recipient households receiving benefits reduced by an average of $90 per household per month ; however , due to later implementation timing of the new law it is expected that fewer will be affected than forecasted in h.r .

3102 .

a policy change could result in a reduction of benefits for some households that either currently receive the excess shelter deduction or receive a higher excess shelter deduction due to liheap payments that are lower than the $20 threshold .

the total number will also depend on whether households are able to document their utility costs in other ways .

modifying the treatment of liheap in snap might create changes in the program application process , but it is difficult to know just what these might be .

the "heat and eat" states would appear to no longer have any reason to issue liheap payments below the enacted threshold requirement of $20 to snap participants , since such sums would neither substantially assist with utility costs nor generate larger snap benefits .

in addition , compared to a $1 payment , a payment greater than $20 to multiple recipients could strain state liheap budgets .

further , advocates contend that presenting liheap documentation is an administrative simplification that ensures that eligible households are getting all of the deductions — or at least credit for all the deductions — that such households are due , especially in "heat and eat" states where the liheap payment may be communicated to snap computer systems through a data - matching process .

in the absence of the "heat and eat" practice , states could institute other systems or practices to ensure that households are getting all of the deductions for which they qualify .

