this report provides background information and potential oversight issues for congress on the coast guard's programs for procuring 8 national security cutters ( nscs ) , 25 offshore patrol cutters ( opcs ) , and 58 fast response cutters ( frcs ) .

the coast guard's proposed fy2020 budget requests a total of $657 million in procurement funding for the nsc , opc , and frc programs .

the issue for congress is whether to approve , reject , or modify the coast guard's funding requests and acquisition strategies for the nsc , opc , and frc programs .

congress's decisions on these three programs could substantially affect coast guard capabilities and funding requirements , and the u.s. shipbuilding industrial base .

the nsc , opc , and frc programs have been subjects of congressional oversight for several years , and were previously covered in other crs reports that are now archived .

crs testified on the coast guard's cutter acquisition programs most recently on november 29 .

the coast guard's plans for modernizing its fleet of polar icebreakers are covered in a separate crs report .

 table 2 summarizes appropriations action on the coast guard's request for fy2020 acquisition funding for the nsc , opc , and frc programs .

appendix a .

planned nsc , opc , and frc procurement quantities this appendix provides further discussion on the issue of the coast guard's planned nsc , opc , and frc procurement quantities .

overview the coast guard's program of record for nscs , opcs , and frcs includes only about 61% as many cutters as the coast guard calculated in 2011 would be needed to fully perform its projected future missions .

the coast guard's planned force levels for nscs , opcs , and frcs have remained unchanged since 2004 .

in contrast , the navy since 2004 has adjusted its ship force - level goals eight times in response to changing strategic and budgetary circumstances .

although the coast guard's strategic situation and resulting mission demands may not have changed as much as the navy's have since 2004 , the coast guard's budgetary circumstances may have changed since 2004 .

the 2004 program of record was heavily conditioned by coast guard expectations in 2004 about future funding levels in the pc&i account .

those expectations may now be different , as suggested by the willingness of coast guard officials in 2017 to begin regularly mentioning the need for an pc&i funding level of $2 billion per year ( see appendix b ) .

it can also be noted that continuing to , in effect , use the coast guard's 2004 expectations of future funding levels for the pc&i account as an implicit constraint on planned force levels for nscs , opcs , and frcs can encourage an artificially narrow view of congress's options regarding future coast guard force levels and associated funding levels , depriving congress of agency in the exercise of its constitutional power to provide for the common defense and general welfare of the united states , and to set funding levels and determine the composition of federal spending .

2009 coast guard fleet mix analysis the coast guard estimated in 2009 that with the por's planned force of 91 nscs , opcs , and frcs , the service would have capability or capacity gaps in 6 of its 11 statutory missions — search and rescue ( sar ) ; defense readiness ; counterdrug operations ; ports , waterways , and coastal security ( pwcs ) ; protection of living marine resources ( lmr ) ; and alien migrant interdiction operations ( amio ) .

the coast guard judges that some of these gaps would be "high risk" or "very high risk. .

public discussions of the por frequently mention the substantial improvement that the por force would represent over the legacy force .

only rarely , however , have these discussions explicitly acknowledged the extent to which the por force would nevertheless be smaller in number than the force that would be required , by coast guard estimate , to fully perform the coast guard's statutory missions in coming years .

discussions that focus on the por's improvement over the legacy force while omitting mention of the considerably larger number of cutters that would be required , by coast guard estimate , to fully perform the coast guard's statutory missions in coming years could encourage audiences to conclude , contrary to coast guard estimates , that the por's planned force of 91 cutters would be capable of fully performing the coast guard's statutory missions in coming years .

in a study completed in december 2009 called the fleet mix analysis ( fma ) phase 1 , the coast guard calculated the size of the force that in its view would be needed to fully perform the service's statutory missions in coming years .

the study refers to this larger force as the objective fleet mix .

table a - 1 compares planned numbers of nscs , opcs , and frcs in the por to those in the objective fleet mix .

as can be seen in table a - 1 , the objective fleet mix includes 66 additional cutters , or about 73% more cutters than in the por .

stated the other way around , the por includes about 58% as many cutters as the 2009 fma phase i objective fleet mix .

as intermediate steps between the por force and the objective fleet mix , fma phase 1 calculated three additional forces , called fma - 1 , fma - 2 , and fma - 3 .

 ( the objective fleet mix was then relabeled fma - 4. ) .

table a - 2 compares the por to fmas 1 through 4 .

fma - 1 was calculated to address the mission gaps that the coast guard judged to be "very high risk. .

fma - 2 was calculated to address both those gaps and additional gaps that the coast guard judged to be "high risk. .

fma - 3 was calculated to address all those gaps , plus gaps that the coast guard judged to be "medium risk. .

fma - 4 — the objective fleet mix — was calculated to address all the foregoing gaps , plus the remaining gaps , which the coast guard judge to be "low risk" or "very low risk. .

table a - 3 shows the por and fmas 1 through 4 in terms of their mission performance gaps .

figure a - 1 , taken from fma phase 1 , depicts the overall mission capability / performance gap situation in graphic form .

it appears to be conceptual rather than drawn to precise scale .

the black line descending toward 0 by the year 2027 shows the declining capability and performance of the coast guard's legacy assets as they gradually age out of the force .

the purple line branching up from the black line shows the added capability from ships and aircraft to be procured under the por , including the 91 planned nscs , opcs , and frcs .

the level of capability to be provided when the por force is fully in place is the green line , labeled "2005 mission needs statement. .

as can be seen in the graph , this level of capability is substantially below a projection of coast guard mission demands made after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( the red line , labeled "post - 9 / 11 cg mission demands" ) , and even further below a coast guard projection of future mission demands ( the top dashed line , labeled "future mission demands" ) .

the dashed blue lines show future capability levels that would result from reducing planned procurement quantities in the por or executing the por over a longer time period than originally planned .

fma phase 1 was a fiscally unconstrained study , meaning that the larger force mixes shown in table a - 2 were calculated primarily on the basis of their capability for performing missions , rather than their potential acquisition or life - cycle operation and support ( o&s ) costs .

although the fma phase 1 was completed in december 2009 , the figures shown in table a - 2 were generally not included in public discussions of the coast guard's future force structure needs until april 2011 , when gao presented them in testimony .

gao again presented them in a july 2011 report .

the coast guard completed a follow - on study , called fleet mix analysis ( fma ) phase 2 , in may 2011 .

among other things , fma phase 2 includes a revised and updated objective fleet mix called the refined objective mix .

table a - 4 compares the por to the objective fleet mix from fma phase 1 and the refined objective mix from fma phase 2 .

as can be seen in table a - 4 , compared to the objective fleet mix from fma phase 1 , the refined objective mix from fma phase 2 includes 49 opcs rather than 57 .

the refined objective mix includes 58 additional cutters , or about 64% more cutters than in the por .

stated the other way around , the por includes about 61% as many cutters as the refined objective mix .

compared to the por , the larger force mixes shown in table a - 2 and table a - 4 would be more expensive to procure , operate , and support than the por force .

using the average nsc , opc , and frc procurement cost figures presented earlier ( see " background " ) , procuring the 58 additional cutters in the refined objective mix from fma phase 2 might cost an additional $10.7 billion , of which most ( about $7.8 billion ) would be for the 24 additional frcs .

 ( the actual cost would depend on numerous factors , such as annual procurement rates. ) .

o&s costs for these 58 additional cutters over their life cycles ( including crew costs and periodic ship maintenance costs ) would require billions of additional dollars .

the larger force mixes in the fma phase 1 and 2 studies , moreover , include not only increased numbers of cutters , but also increased numbers of coast guard aircraft .

in the fma phase 1 study , for example , the objective fleet mix included 479 aircraft — 93% more than the 248 aircraft in the por mix .

stated the other way around , the por includes about 52% as many aircraft as the objective fleet mix .

a decision to procure larger numbers of cutters like those shown in table a - 2 and table a - 4 might thus also imply a decision to procure , operate , and support larger numbers of coast guard aircraft , which would require billions of additional dollars .

the fma phase 1 study estimated the procurement cost of the objective fleet mix of 157 cutters and 479 aircraft at $61 billion to $67 billion in constant fy2009 dollars , or about 66% more than the procurement cost of $37 billion to $40 billion in constant fy2009 dollars estimated for the por mix of 91 cutters and 248 aircraft .

the study estimated the total ownership cost ( i.e. , procurement plus life - cycle o&s cost ) of the objective fleet mix of cutters and aircraft at $201 billion to $208 billion in constant fy2009 dollars , or about 53% more than the total ownership cost of $132 billion to $136 billion in constant fy2009 dollars estimated for por mix of cutters and aircraft .

a december 7 , 2015 , press report states the following: the coast guard's no .

2 officer said the small size and advanced age of its fleet is limiting the service's ability to carry out crucial missions in the arctic and drug transit zones or to meet rising calls for presence in the volatile south china sea .

"the lack of surface vessels every day just breaks my heart," vadm charles michel , the coast guard's vice commandant , said dec. 7 .

addressing a forum on american sea power sponsored by the u.s .

naval institute at the newseum , michel detailed the problems the coast guard faces in trying to carry out its missions of national security , law enforcement and maritime safety because of a lack of resources .

"that's why you hear me clamoring for recapitalization," he said .

michel noted that china's coast guard has a lot more ships than the u.s. coast guard has , including many that are larger than the biggest u.s. cutter , the 1,800-ton [sic:4,800-ton] national security cutter .

china is using those white - painted vessels rather than "gray - hull navy" ships to enforce its claims to vast areas of the south china sea , including reefs and shoals claimed by other nations , he said .

that is a statement that the disputed areas are "so much our territory , we don't need the navy .

that's an absolutely masterful use of the coast guard," he said .

the superior numbers of chinese coast guard vessels and its plans to build more is something , "we have to consider when looking at what we can do in the south china sea," michel said .

although they have received requests from the u.s. commanders in the region for u.s. coast guard cutters in the south china sea , "the commandant had to say 'no' .

there's not enough to go around," he said .

potential oversight questions for congress include the following: under the por force mix , how large a performance gap , precisely , would there be in each of the missions shown in table a - 3 ? .

what impact would these performance gaps have on public safety , national security , and protection of living marine resources ? .

how sensitive are these performance gaps to the way in which the coast guard translates its statutory missions into more precise statements of required mission performance ? .

given the performance gaps shown in table a - 3 , should planned numbers of coast guard cutters and aircraft be increased , or should the coast guard's statutory missions be reduced , or both ? .

how much larger would the performance gaps in table a - 3 be if planned numbers of coast guard cutters and aircraft are reduced below the por figures ? .

has the executive branch made sufficiently clear to congress the difference between the number of ships and aircraft in the por force and the number that would be needed to fully perform the coast guard's statutory missions in coming years ? .

why has public discussion of the por focused mostly on the capability improvement it would produce over the legacy force and rarely on the performance gaps it would have in the missions shown in table a - 3 ? .

appendix b .

funding levels in pc&i account this appendix provides background information on funding levels in the coast guard's procurement , construction , and improvements ( pc&i ) account .

overview as shown in table b - 1 , the fy2013 budget submission programmed an average of about $1.5 billion per year in the pc&i account .

as also shown in the table , the fy2014-fy2016 budget submissions reduced that figure to between $1 billion and $1.2 billion per year .

the coast guard has testified that funding the pc&i account at a level of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year would make it difficult to fund various coast guard acquisition projects , including a new polar icebreaker and improvements to coast guard shore installations .

coast guard plans call for procuring opcs at an eventual rate of two per year .

if each opc costs roughly $400 million , procuring two opcs per year in an pc&i account of about $1 billion to $1.2 billion per year , as programmed under the fy2014-fy2016 budget submissions , would leave about $200 million to $400 million per year for all other pc&i - funded programs .

since 2017 , coast guard officials have been stating more regularly what they stated only infrequently in earlier years: that executing the coast guard's various acquisition programs fully and on a timely basis would require the pc&i account to be funded in coming years at a level of about $2 billion per year .

statements from coast guard officials on this issue in past years have sometimes put this figure as high as about $2.5 billion per year .

using past pc&i funding levels as a guide for future pc&i funding levels in assessing future funding levels for executive branch agencies , a common practice is to assume or predict that the figure in coming years will likely be close to where it has been in previous years .

while this method can be of analytical and planning value , for an agency like the coast guard , which goes through periods with less acquisition of major platforms and periods with more acquisition of major platforms , this approach might not always be the best approach , at least for the pc&i account .

more important , in relation to maintaining congress's status as a co - equal branch of government , including the preservation and use of congressional powers and prerogatives , an analysis that assumes or predicts that future funding levels will resemble past funding levels can encourage an artificially narrow view of congressional options regarding future funding levels , depriving congress of agency in the exercise of its constitutional power to set funding levels and determine the composition of federal spending .

past coast guard statements about required pc&i funding level at an october 4 , 2011 , hearing on the coast guard's major acquisition programs before the coast guard and maritime transportation subcommittee of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , the following exchange occurred: represenative frank lobiondo: can you give us your take on what percentage of value must be invested each year to maintain current levels of effort and to allow the coast guard to fully carry out its missions ? .

admiral robert j. papp , commandant of the coast guard: i think i can , mr. chairman .

actually , in discussions and looking at our budget — and i'll give you rough numbers here , what we do now is we have to live within the constraints that we've been averaging about $1.4 billion in acquisition money each year .

if you look at our complete portfolio , the things that we'd like to do , when you look at the shore infrastructure that needs to be taken care of , when you look at renovating our smaller icebreakers and other ships and aircraft that we have , we've done some rough estimates that it would really take close to about $2.5 billion a year , if we were to do all the things that we would like to do to sustain our capital plant .

so i'm just like any other head of any other agency here , as that the end of the day , we're given a top line and we have to make choices and tradeoffs and basically , my tradeoffs boil down to sustaining frontline operations balancing that , we're trying to recapitalize the coast guard and there's where the break is and where we have to define our spending .

an april 18 , 2012 , blog entry stated the following: if the coast guard capital expenditure budget remains unchanged at less than $1.5 billion annually in the coming years , it will result in a service in possession of only 70 percent of the assets it possesses today , said coast guard rear adm. mark butt .

butt , who spoke april 17 [2012] at [a] panel [discussion] during the navy league sea air space conference in national harbor , md. , echoed coast guard commandant robert papp in stating that the service really needs around $2.5 billion annually for procurement .

at a may 9 , 2012 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2013 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the senate appropriations committee , admiral papp testified , "i've gone on record saying that i think the coast guard needs closer to $2 billion dollars a year [in acquisition funding] to recapitalize — [to] do proper recapitalization. .

at a may 14 , 2013 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2014 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the senate appropriations committee , admiral papp stated the following regarding the difference between having about $1.0 billion per year rather than about $1.5 billion per year in the pc&i account: well , madam chairman , $500 million — a half a billion dollars — is real money for the coast guard .

so , clearly , we had $1.5 billion in the [fy]13 budget .

it doesn't get everything i would like , but it — it gave us a good start , and it sustained a number of projects that are very important to us .

when we go down to the $1 billion level this year , it gets my highest priorities in there , but we have to either terminate or reduce to minimum order quantities for all the other projects that we have going .

if we're going to stay with our program of record , things that have been documented that we need for our service , we're going to have to just stretch everything out to the right .

and when we do that , you cannot order in economic order quantities .

it defers the purchase .

ship builders , aircraft companies — they have to figure in their costs , and it inevitably raises the cost when you're ordering them in smaller quantities and pushing it off to the right .

plus , it almost creates a death spiral for the coast guard because we are forced to sustain older assets — older ships and older aircraft — which ultimately cost us more money , so it eats into our operating funds , as well , as we try to sustain these older things .

so , we'll do the best we can within the budget .

and the president and the secretary have addressed my highest priorities , and we'll just continue to go on the — on an annual basis seeing what we can wedge into the budget to keep the other projects going .

at a march 12 , 2014 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2015 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the house appropriations committee , admiral papp stated the following: well , that's what we've been struggling with , as we deal with the five - year plan , the capital investment plan , is showing how we are able to do that .

and it will be a challenge , particularly if it sticks at around $1 billion [per year] .

as i've said publicly , and actually , i said we could probably — i've stated publicly before that we could probably construct comfortably at about 1.5 billion [dollars] a year .

but if we were to take care of all the coast guard's projects that are out there , including shore infrastructure that that fleet that takes care of the yemen [sic: inland] waters is approaching 50 years of age , as well , but i have no replacement plan in sight for them because we simply can't afford it .

plus , we need at some point to build a polar icebreaker .

darn tough to do all that stuff when you're pushing down closer to 1 billion [dollars per year] , instead of 2 billion [dollars per year] .

as i said , we could fit most of that in at about the 1.5 billion [dollars per year] level , but the projections don't call for that .

so we are scrubbing the numbers as best we can .

at a march 24 , 2015 , hearing on the coast guard's proposed fy2016 budget before the homeland security subcommittee of the house appropriations committee , admiral paul zukunft , admiral papp's successor as commandant of the coast guard , stated the following: i look back to better years in our acquisition budget when we had a — an acquisition budget of — of $1.5 billion .

that allows me to move these programs along at a much more rapid pace and , the quicker i can build these at full - rate production , the less cost it is in the long run as well .

but there's an urgent need for me to be able to deliver these platforms in a timely and also in an affordable manner .

but to at least have a reliable and a predictable acquisition budget would make our work in the coast guard much easier .

but when we see variances of — of 30 , 40% over a period of three or four years , and not knowing what the budget control act may have in store for us going on , yes , we are treading water now but any further reductions , and now i am — i am beyond asking for help .

we are taking on water .

an april 13 , 2017 , press report states the following ( emphasis added ) : coast guard commandant adm. paul zukunft on wednesday [april 12] said that for the coast guard to sustain its recapitalization plans and operations the service needs a $2 billion annual acquisition budget that grows modestly overtime to keep pace with inflation .

the coast guard needs a "predictable , reliable" acquisition budget "and within that we need 5 percent annual growth to our operations and maintenance ( o&m ) accounts," zukunft told reporters at a defense writers group breakfast .

inflation will clip 2 to 3 percent from that , but "at 5 percent or so it puts you on a moderate but positive glide slope so you can execute , so you can build the force," he said .

in an interview published on june 1 , 2017 , zukunft said the following ( emphasis added ) : we cannot be more relevant than we are now .

but what we need is predictable funding .

we have been in over 16 continuing resolutions since 2010 .

i need stable and repeatable funding .

an acquisition budget with a floor of $2 billion .

our operating expenses as i said , they've been funded below the budget control act floor for the past five years .

i need 5 percent annualized growth over the next five years and beyond to start growing some of this capability back .

but more importantly , we [need] more predictable , more reliable funding so we can execute what we need to do to carry out the business of the world's best coast guard .

appendix c. additional information on status and execution of nsc , opc , and frc programs from may 2018 gao report this appendix presents additional information on the status and execution of the nsc , opc , and frc programs from a may 2018 gao report reviewing dhs acquisition programs .

nsc program regarding the nsc program , the may 2018 gao report states the following: dhs's under secretary for management ( usm ) directed the uscg to complete follow - on operational test and evaluation ( ot&e ) by march 2019 .

according to uscg officials , the program's ota began follow - on ot&e in october 2017 , which will test unmet key performance parameters ( kpp ) and address deficiencies found during prior testing .

the nsc completed initial operational testing in 2014 , but did not fully demonstrate 7 of its 19 kpps , including those related to unmanned aircraft and cutter - boat deployment in rough seas .

according to uscg officials , operators have since demonstrated these kpps during uscg operations .

for example , uscg officials stated that they successfully demonstrated operations of a prototype unmanned aircraft on an nsc .

however , the uscg will not evaluate the nsc's unmanned aircraft kpp until the unmanned aircraft undergoes initial ot&e , currently planned for june 2019 .

in addition , the nsc will be the first uscg asset to undergo cybersecurity testing .

however , this test has been delayed over a year with the final cyber test event scheduled for august 2018 because of a change in nsc operational schedules , among other things .

the dhs usm also directed the uscg to complete a study to determine the root cause of the nsc's propulsion system issues by december 2017 ; however , as of january 2018 , the study was not yet complete .

gao previously reported on these issues — including high engine temperatures , cracked cylinder heads , and overheating generator bearings that were impacting missions — in january 2016... .

the uscg initially planned to implement a crew rotational concept in which crews would rotate while nscs were underway to achieve a goal of 230 days away from the cutter's homeport .

in february 2018 , uscg officials told gao they abandoned the crew rotational concept because the concept did not provide the uscg with the expected return on investment .

instead , uscg officials said a new plan has been implemented that does not rotate crew and is anticipated to increase the days away from home port from the current capability of 185 days to 200 days .

opc program regarding the opc program , the may 2018 gao report states the following: dhs approved six key performance parameters ( kpp ) for the opc related to the ship's operating range and duration , crew size , interoperability and maneuverability , and ability to support operations in moderate to rough seas .

the first opc has not yet been constructed , so the uscg has not yet demonstrated whether it can meet these kpps .

the uscg plans to use engineering reviews , and developmental and operational tests throughout the acquisition to measure the opc's performance .

uscg officials told gao that the program completed an early operational assessment on the basic ship design in august 2017 , which entailed a review of the current design plans .

the program plans to refine the ship's design as needed based on preliminary test results .

however , as of december 2017 , uscg officials had not received the results of this assessment .

the uscg plans to conduct initial operational test and evaluation ( ot&e ) on the first opc in fiscal year 2023 .

however , the test results from initial ot&e will not be available to inform key decisions .

for example , the results will not be available to inform the decision to build 2 opcs per year — which uscg officials said is scheduled to begin in fiscal year 2021 .

without test results to inform these key decisions , the uscg must make substantial commitments prior to knowing how well the ship will meet its requirements... .

the uscg is in the process of completing the design of the opc before starting construction , which is in - line with gao shipbuilding best practices .

in addition , uscg officials stated that the program is using state - of - the - market technology that has been proven on other ships as opposed to state - of - the - art technology , which lowers the risk of the program .

frc program regarding the frc program , the may 2018 gao report states the following: in february 2017 , dhs's director , office of test and evaluation ( dot&e ) assessed the results from the program's july 2016 follow - on operational test and evaluation ( ot&e ) and determined that • the program met its six key performance parameters , and • the frc was operationally effective and suitable .

during follow - on ot&e , the ota found that several deficiencies from the program's initial ot&e had been corrected .

for example , the ota closed a severe deficiency related to the engines based on modifications to the frc's main diesel engines .

however , five major deficiencies remain .

according to uscg officials , the remaining deficiencies are related to ergonomics ( eg , improving the working environment for operators ) and issues with stowage space .

uscg officials stated that they plan to resolve the remaining deficiencies by fiscal year 2020 .

dot&e noted that these deficiencies do not prevent mission completion or present a danger to personnel , but recommended that they be resolved as soon as possible .

uscg officials indicated that they plan to resolve the remaining deficiencies through engineering or other changes... .

the uscg continues to work with the contractor — bollinger shipyards , llc — to address issues covered by the warranty and acceptance clauses for each ship .

for example , 18 engines — 9 operational engines and 9 spare engines — have been replaced under the program's warranty .

according to uscg documentation , 65 percent of the current issues with the engines have been resolved through retrofits ; however , additional problems with the engines have been identified since our april 2017 review .

for example , issues with water pump shafts are currently being examined through a root cause analysis and will be redesigned and are scheduled to undergo retrofits starting in december 2018 .

we previously found that the frc's warranty resulted in improved cost and quality by requiring the shipbuilder to pay for the repair of defects .

as of september 2017 , uscg officials said the replacements and retrofits completed under the program's warranty allowed the uscg to avoid an estimated $104 million in potential unplanned costs — of which $63 million is related to the engines .

for a discussion of some considerations relating to warranties in shipbuilding and other acquisition programs , see appendix d .

appendix d. some considerations relating to warranties in shipbuilding and other acquisition programs this appendix presents some considerations relating to warranties in shipbuilding and other defense acquisition .

in discussions of navy and coast guard shipbuilding , one question that sometimes arises is whether including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract is preferable to not including one .

including a warranty in a shipbuilding contract ( or a contract for building some other kind of military end item ) , while potentially valuable , might not always be preferable to not including one — it depends on the circumstances of the acquisition , and it is not necessarily a valid criticism of an acquisition program to state that it is using a contract that does not include a warranty ( or a weaker form of a warranty rather than a stronger one ) .

including a warranty generally shifts to the contractor the risk of having to pay for fixing problems with earlier work .

although that in itself could be deemed desirable from the government's standpoint , a contractor negotiating a contract that will have a warranty will incorporate that risk into its price , and depending on how much the contractor might charge for doing that , it is possible that the government could wind up paying more in total for acquiring the item ( including fixing problems with earlier work on that item ) than it would have under a contract without a warranty .

when a warranty is not included in the contract and the government pays later on to fix problems with earlier work , those payments can be very visible , which can invite critical comments from observers .

but that does not mean that including a warranty in the contract somehow frees the government from paying to fix problems with earlier work .

in a contract that includes a warranty , the government will indeed pay something to fix problems with earlier work — but it will make the payment in the less - visible ( but still very real ) form of the up - front charge for including the warranty , and that charge might be more than what it would have cost the government , under a contract without a warranty , to pay later on for fixing those problems .

from a cost standpoint , including a warranty in the contract might or might not be preferable , depending on the risk that there will be problems with earlier work that need fixing , the potential cost of fixing such problems , and the cost of including the warranty in the contract .

the point is that the goal of avoiding highly visible payments for fixing problems with earlier work and the goal of minimizing the cost to the government of fixing problems with earlier work are separate and different goals , and that pursuing the first goal can sometimes work against achieving the second goal .

the department of defense's guide on the use of warranties states the following: federal acquisition regulation ( far ) 46.7 states that "the use of warranties is not mandatory. .

however , if the benefits to be derived from the warranty are commensurate with the cost of the warranty , the co [contracting officer] should consider placing it in the contract .

in determining whether a warranty is appropriate for a specific acquisition , far subpart 46.703 requires the co to consider the nature and use of the supplies and services , the cost , the administration and enforcement , trade practices , and reduced requirements .

the rationale for using a warranty should be documented in the contract file... .

in determining the value of a warranty , a cba [cost - benefit analysis] is used to measure the life cycle costs of the system with and without the warranty .

a cba is required to determine if the warranty will be cost beneficial .

cba is an economic analysis , which basically compares the life cycle costs ( lcc ) of the system with and without the warranty to determine if warranty coverage will improve the lccs .

in general , five key factors will drive the results of the cba: cost of the warranty + cost of warranty administration + compatibility with total program efforts + cost of overlap with contractor support + intangible savings .

effective warranties integrate reliability , maintainability , supportability , availability , and life - cycle costs .

decision factors that must be evaluated include the state of the weapon system technology , the size of the warranted population , the likelihood that field performance requirements can be achieved , and the warranty period of performance .

