the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus .

it provides funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs .

the bill also provides funds for agencies in two other departments — the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service ( ihs ) in the department of health and human services — as well as funds for the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

further , the annual bill includes funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , the national endowment for the arts , and the national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies .

prior to fy2006 , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve .

however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the jurisdiction of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate their jurisdiction over doe .

these programs currently are funded in the annual energy and water development appropriations bill .

at the same time , jurisdiction over the epa and several smaller entities was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies , and they are now funded in the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa .

since fy2006 , appropriations laws for interior , environment , and related agencies have contained three primary titles .

this report is organized along these lines .

the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities .

a fourth section of this report discusses selected cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency .

entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , wildland fire management ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress based on hearings on agency budgets and statements in appropriations committee reports , among other sources .

we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation .

appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report .

for example , budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration .

further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information .

for information on programs funded in the bill but not directly discussed in this report , please contact the key policy staff members listed at the end of the report .

in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes mandatory spending authorities .

the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report .

other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record .

in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not match the precise totals provided due to rounding .

epa's primary responsibilities include the implementation of federal statutes regulating air quality , water quality , pesticides , toxic substances , the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and the cleanup of environmental contamination .

epa also awards grants to assist states and local governments in implementing federal law and in complying with federal requirements to control pollution .

for fy2013 , h.r .

6091 as reported by the house appropriations committee included a total of $7.06 billion for epa , $1.29 billion ( 15.5% ) less than the president's fy2013 request of $8.34 billion , and $1.39 billion ( 16.5% ) less than the fy2012 enacted appropriation of $8.45 billion .

table 12 presents the fy2013 amounts for epa reported by the house appropriations committee compared to the president's fy2013 budget request and appropriations enacted for fy2012 within the eight accounts that fund the agency .

as indicated in table 12 and discussed below , the house appropriations committee approved an overall decrease for epa below the president's fy2013 request and the fy2012 enacted level .

the decrease was due largely to proposed reductions for four of epa's eight accounts: the state and tribal assistance grants ( stag ) , environmental programs and management ( epm ) , science and technology ( s&t ) , and the hazardous substance superfund accounts .

the reduction for grants to aid states to capitalize their clean water state revolving funds ( srfs ) within the stag account constituted the largest single portion of the overall proposed reduction .

the drinking water srf also would have been reduced , although the magnitude of decrease was smaller .

funding in the committee - reported bill for the leaking underground storage tank trust fund ( lust ) account was the same as the fy2012 appropriation and fy2013 request , while the committee - reported amounts for the remaining three epa accounts were below the fy2013 request but roughly the same as the fy2012 levels .

the committee - reported bill included a variety of decreases and increases in funding for many of the individual programs and activities funded within the eight appropriations accounts .

the following sections highlight issues associated with certain accounts and programs that were prominent in the debate on epa's fy2013 appropriations .

 table 19 and figure 1 show appropriations for interior , environment , and related agencies for the five - year period from fy2008 through fy2012 .

table 19 also includes fy2013 funding requested by the administration and contained in h.r .

6091 as reported by the house committee on appropriations .

it shows the appropriations by agency during this period , as well as the total appropriations contained in each title of the appropriations law and the overall total in the law .

the graph depicts the appropriations provided for each of the three main titles of the law: title i , department of the interior ; title ii , environmental protection agency ; and title iii , related agencies .

