the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules ; these benefits include medical care , disability compensation and pensions , education , vocational rehabilitation and employment services , assistance to homeless veterans , home loan guarantees , administration of life insurance as well as traumatic injury protection insurance for servicemembers , and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

the va carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for , among other things , providing compensation , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans' cemeteries ; providing grants to states for establishing , expanding , or improving state veterans' cemeteries ; and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical and prosthetic research programs .

the vha is primarily a direct service provider of primary care , specialized care , and related medical and social support services to veterans through the nation's largest integrated health care system .

the vha is also a provider of health care education and training for physician residents and other health care trainees .

in general , eligibility for va health care is based on previous military service , presence of service - connected disabilities , and / or other factors .

veterans generally must enroll in the va health care system to receive medical care .

once enrolled , veterans are assigned to one of eight categories ( see table a - 1 ) .

it should be noted that in any given year , not all enrolled veterans obtain their health care services from va .

while some veterans may rely solely on va for their care , others may receive the majority of their health care services from other sources , such as medicare , medicaid , private health insurance , and the military health system ( tricare ) .

va - enrolled veterans do not pay premiums or enrollment fees to receive care from the va ; however , they may incur out - of - pocket costs for va care related to conditions that are not service - connected .

this report focuses on appropriations for vha .

it begins with a brief overview of the va's budget as a whole for fy2012 and the president's request for fy2013 .

it then presents a brief overview of vha's budget formulation , a description of the accounts that fund the vha , and a summary of the fy2012 vha budget .

the report ends with a section discussing recent legislative developments pertaining to the fy2013 vha budget .

the va budget includes both mandatory and discretionary funding .

mandatory accounts fund disability compensation , pensions , vocational rehabilitation and employment , education , life insurance , housing , and burial benefits ( such as graveliners , outer burial receptacles , and headstones ) , among other benefits and services .

discretionary accounts fund medical care , medical research , construction programs , information technology , and general operating expenses , among other things .

figure 1 provides a breakdown of fy2012 budget allocations for both mandatory and discretionary programs .

in fy2012 , the total va budget authority was approximately $122.2 billion ; discretionary budget authority accounted for about 48% ( $58.5 billion ) of the total , with about 88% ( $51.2 billion ) of this discretionary funding going toward supporting va health care programs , including medical and prosthetic research .

the va's mandatory budget authority accounted for about 52% ( $63.8 billion ) of the total va budget authority , with about 80% ( $51.2 billion ) of this mandatory funding going toward disability compensation and pension programs .

figure 2 provides a breakdown of the fy2013 president's budget request for both mandatory and discretionary programs ( also see table 3 ) .

for fy2013 , the administration requested approximately $135.6 billion .

this includes approximately $61 billion in discretionary funding and nearly $74.6 billion in mandatory funding .

similar to most federal agencies , the va begins formulating its budget request approximately 10 months before the president submits the budget to congress , generally in early february .

vha's budget request to congress begins with the formulations of the budget based on the enrollee health care projection model ( ehcpm ) .

the model estimates the amount of budgetary resources vha will need to meet the expected demand for most of the health care services it provides .

the ehcpm's estimates are based on three basic components: the projected number of veterans who will be enrolled in va health care , the projected utilization of va's health care services — that is , the quantity of health care services enrollees are expected to use — and the projected unit cost of providing these services .

each component is subject to a number of adjustments to account for the characteristics of va health care and the veterans who access va's health care services .

the ehcpm makes projections three or four years into the future .

each year , vha updates the ehcpm estimates to "incorporate the most recent data on health care utilization rates , actual program experience , and other factors , such as economic trends in unemployment and inflation. .

for instance , in 2011 , vha used data from fy2010 to develop its health care budget estimate for the fy2013 request , including the advance appropriations request for fy2014 .

as noted previously , vha is funded through four appropriations accounts .

these are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

although the appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year , the appropriation accounts used to support the vha traditionally include medical care , medical and prosthetic research , and medical administration .

congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all va facilities .

in fy2004 , "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," congress changed the vha's appropriations structure .

specifically , the department of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 , h.rept .

108-401 ) , funded vha through four accounts: ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration ( currently known as medical support and compliance ) , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

brief descriptions of these accounts are provided below .

on december 7 , 2012 , the president submitted a $235.6 million supplemental request for va for costs associated with hurricane sandy .

on january 29 , 2013 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 , a disaster assistance measure largely focused on responding to hurricane sandy , was signed into law as p.l .

113-2 .

among other provisions , this act provided funding of approximately $236.6 million for the va as a whole .

this included $21 million for the medical services account and $6 million for the medical facilities account .

in total p.l .

113-2 provided $27 million for vha for fy2013 ( see table 4 ) .

this funding is designated for replacing medical equipment , and repairing and reconstructing va medical facilities , which sustained flood damage during the storm .

the 112 th congress did not enact a regular military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations bill for fy2013 ( milcon - va appropriations bill ) prior to the beginning of fy2013 , and funded most of the va ( excluding the three medical care accounts: medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities ) through a six - month government - wide continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-175 ) .

that extended into the start of the 113 th congress .

on march 6 , 2013 , the house passed the department of defense , military construction and veterans affairs , and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( h.r .

933 ) .

the senate passed an amended version of the bill on march 20 , 2013 , and the house agreed to the amended version the next day .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( h.r .

933 ; p.l .

113-6 ) was signed into law by the president on march 26 , 2013 .

division e of p.l .

113-6 contained funding for the va. p.l .

113-6 provides $133.9 billion in budget authority for the va as a whole .

this included approximately $72.9 billion in mandatory funding and $61 billion in discretionary funding .

p.l .

113-6 provides $53.3 billion for vha for fy2013 , which comprises four accounts: medical services , medical support and compliance , medical facilities , and medical and prosthetic research .

the total amount for vha is approximately $2.1 billion above the fy2012-enacted amount and $10 million less than the administration's request ( excluding the hurricane sandy funding needs supplemental request ) .

table 3 and table 4 provide funding levels for fy2013 and advance appropriations for fy2014 .

funding levels for va for fy2013 include funding provided in the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-2 ) and the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) ; they exclude the across - the - board rescissions discussed in the text box .

appendix a. va priority groups and their eligibility criteri .

