pressure is building for passenger train use of freight railroad rights of way .

congress has provided substantial federal funding for new high - speed and intercity passenger rail services , and many state and local governments are interested in expanding both intercity and commuter routes .

in most cases , such proposed services would use trackage controlled by privately owned freight railroads or build new tracks within a freight railroad's right of way .

amtrak , the federally owned rail passenger operator , has eminent domain power over freight railroad facilities and can appeal to a federal adjudicator , the surface transportation board ( stb ) , to determine the terms of its access to freight railroad track .

this is not the case for other current or potential passenger rail operators .

such operators , whether intercity or commuter , can use rail freight corridors only if they reach agreements with the freight railroads that own or lease the rights of way .

those agreements typically involve public funding to add track capacity and upgrade infrastructure for passenger trains , thereby facilitating freight operations as well .

changes in passenger operations , such as an increase in the number of trains or in train speeds , are likely to require additional negotiations .

as passenger operators other than amtrak have no statutory leverage when negotiating with freight railroads , they have little control over the price of access and may have no recourse if freight railroads reject their proposals .

the tension between commuter and freight use of track was highlighted during mark - up of the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-432 ) .

during house committee mark - up , a provision ( §401 ) to require binding arbitration when commuter rail authorities and freight railroads fail to reach agreement over access proved controversial .

the committee chose instead to require non - binding arbitration , leaving the possibility that the public authority might be unable to implement a proposed commuter - rail project .

in the 112 th congress , the senate - passed version of surface transportation reauthorization legislation ( s. 1813 ) calls for the u.s. department of transportation to evaluate the best means to enhance intercity passenger service in shared - use rail corridors and to survey processes for resolving disputes over passenger access .

if interest in passenger rail services continues to grow , congress is likely to hear proposals to grant passenger interests greater bargaining power with freight railroads .

some commuter rail authorities and advocates of intercity passenger trains have suggested granting states or commuter authorities the same access rights amtrak "enjoys. .

some members of congress have urged greater reliance on private companies to provide intercity rail services similar to those offered by amtrak , but such private services may be difficult to develop so long as potential operators lack amtrak's statutory right to compel freight railroads to allow passenger trains to use their tracks .

freight railroads can be expected to object to such initiatives as unfair "takings" of their private property .

recent examples illustrate the range of disputes that can arise in negotiations between freight and would - be passenger rail operators .

union pacific railroad has emphatically stated to the california high speed rail authority that it has no room for proposed passenger trains on , over , or alongside its freight rights of way .

even building high - speed tracks alongside its right of way , union pacific states , would create a barrier to any future rail - served development on that side .

in upstate new york , a project for higher speed intercity service between albany and buffalo has been delayed by disagreement with the host freight railroad over the amount of space needed between freight and passenger tracks for safe operation , as well as disagreement over the speed the passenger trains would be allowed to operate .

the freight railroad's requirements would severely curtail passenger rail operations .

the city of denver at one time was contemplating building a light rail passenger line on city streets because a freight railroad objected , on safety grounds , to mixing lighter passenger rail cars with heavy freight rail cars over the same rail corridor .

more recently , it was announced that the city may have to substitute bus rapid transit for commuter rail service over part of a route due , in part , to higher unanticipated costs associated with acquiring a freight line .

city of boston officials have been frustrated over decade - long negotiations with a freight railroad to purchase tracks to improve commuter rail service into the city .

the city and railroad disagreed over the appropriate methodology for valuing the right of way land .

the city of orlando just recently reached agreement with a freight railroad over the purchase price for track to be used for new commuter rail service .

as part of the agreement , the freight railroad is to invest the proceeds from the sale in freight facilities within florida .

mandating passenger - train access to freight rights of way raises old but recurring arguments about the fundamental nature of privately owned railroads .

a long line of court decisions holds that while railroads are not charities , neither are they completely like other businesses that are free to operate solely for profit maximization .

railroads are not free to leave the business at will or use their property for some other purpose .

in other words , while railroad rights of way are private property , there is substantial case law that has infused them with a public interest or a public duty component .

the remainder of this report provides historical context to the conflict between private and public interests in railroading .

the arguments made over which of these competing interests should be preferred or how far one should be made subservient to the other are relevant , and inform the present policy debate .

the first railroads in the united states were built for the purpose of moving cargo .

in the 1850s , the typical railroad received only a quarter to a third of its total revenue from passenger travel .

some railroads , typically shorter lines , ran "mixed" trains carrying both passengers and freight .

commuter service was first recognized by railroads as a no - cost means of additional revenue for those intercity passenger trains whose schedules happened to coincide with rush hour traffic .

railroads offered "commuted" ( reduced ) fares to these passengers , recognizing that the normal fare was too high for traveling twice a day , six days per week .

in the largest cities , this service became popular and railroads began operating dedicated commuter trains .

commuter trains typically operated at a loss because trips were too short and business was too concentrated at rush hours ; equipment and labor were idle the rest of the day .

they also lacked one source of revenue that was significant for intercity passenger trains , mail delivery .

the economic return for commuter trains came from suburban residential development on land controlled directly or indirectly by the railroads .

an indication of how irrelevant commuter fares were to the railroads' investment in this service was a 1911 survey which found that some railroads had not raised fares for 15 to 30 years , and in a few instances for as long as 40 years .

typically , railroads were chartered by the states , a fact relevant to a later debate about federal versus state control .

a requirement that a railroad provide passenger service was often stated in its charter , or could be stated in the state's constitution , or in state statute .

in order not to compete with the erie canal , the charter for the utica and schenectady railroad co. forbade it from carrying anything but passengers .

other railroads chartered in upstate new york could only carry cargo in the winter when the canal was closed .

unlike other businesses , railroads were under a legal obligation to serve the public and could not discontinue operations without government approval .

they were regarded as "common carriers," a concept originating in english law in the middle ages ( with precursors as far back as the roman commercial code ) that invoked duties of a public nature .

in their charters , the government often gave railroads eminent domain power .

this authority signifies the quasi - public nature of railroads , because eminent domain powers were only granted to achieve a public purpose .

an 1837 new york court ruling upholding a railroad's power of eminent domain described the dual nature of railroads .

a private property owner had challenged a chartered upstate new york railroad's authority to acquire his land since the railroad would be operated for private profit .

the court reasoned that the fact that the railroad was privately owned and was entitled to charge for its services did not alter the public nature of the enterprise .

the court stated , "because the legislature permitted the company to remunerate itself for the expense of constructing the road , from those who should travel upon it , its private character is not established ; it does not destroy the public nature of the road , or convert it from a public to a private use. .

this court also supported the public nature of railroad rights of way by noting that the railroad could be prosecuted if it refused to transport a person or his property without a reasonable excuse and that the legislature had the power to regulate the prices charged by the railroad .

if the surface transportation board were to be empowered as an arbitrator for passenger access to freight facilities , a related question is how the board could balance the needs of the competing interests .

how could the public's need for passenger service be measured ? .

must it be vital or merely convenient ? .

could a freight railroad be forced to forego some amount of freight revenue in order to make room for passenger trains ? .

if so , how much forgone revenue is tolerable ? .

should a prosperous railroad be required to forego more revenue than a financially weak railroad ? .

the interstate commerce commission , the stb , and the courts have usually addressed these questions in the context of permitting railroads to discontinue a service , but their responses may shed light on how the railroads' public service obligations might be weighed in the face of demands for an additional service .

after world war i , passenger rail service went through a period of contraction followed by stagnation .

intercity bus and automobile travel began to attract passengers away from trains .

the great depression made matters much worse ; many major railroads entered bankruptcy .

an icc study conducted in the late 1950s cited 1930 as the first year that the industry ran an operating deficit from passenger service .

this deficit increased year after year , except during world war ii .

beginning with the transportation act of 1920 ( p.l .

66-152 , 41 stat .

456 ) , which returned the railroads to the private sector after nationalization during world war i , congress demonstrated increasing concern with the financial health of the carriers .

congress recognized that the system was too large in scope and operated by too many carriers for optimal performance on a national scale .

the 1920 act included a number of provisions aimed at consolidating the nation's railroads .

one of these provisions allowed the railroads to petition the icc to abandon unprofitable lines .

prior to the 1920 act , states had been an obstacle to abandonment , often requiring railroads to continue providing local services at a loss .

the terms by which the icc was to evaluate abandonments became the basis for it to evaluate proposed passenger service discontinuances after world war ii: the law required the icc to weigh "public convenience and necessity" and the financial health of the railroad .

between 1920 and 1963 , the icc permitted the abandonment of nearly 50,000 miles of railroad , approximately one - fifth of the total mileage that existed in 1920 .

it is not known how much of this mileage , if the right of way was still clear , would be useful today for passenger service .

the transportation act of 1920 addressed only total abandonment of a line , and did not give the icc authority to regulate railroads' attempts to discontinue just the passenger trains over a line while continuing freight train service .

this shortcoming was highlighted by a case in which a railroad appealed to the wisconsin public service commission to cancel passenger train service on a 27-mile line only during the winter months due to light traffic .

the wisconsin commission refused , and later denied the railroad's petition to replace rail service with bus service during the winter months .

the railroad then filed an abandonment petition with the icc .

the icc allowed the abandonment , which meant the discontinuance of freight service and summer passenger service as well .

thus , federal authority over abandonments had an "all or nothing" aspect to it .

in the transportation act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-625 , 72 stat .

571 ) , congress granted the icc authority to allow a railroad to discontinue passenger service over a line while continuing freight service .

for intra state passenger service , a railroad was required to first petition its state government .

if the state prohibited discontinuance , the railroad could then appeal to the icc .

for inter state passenger routes , a railroad could discontinue the service but it would be subject to a stay by the icc .

the icc had four months to decide if it should stay ( delay ) the service discontinuance , which it could only do for one year .

one passenger train discontinuance case reached the supreme court in 1964 .

the southern railway sought to discontinue the last two passenger trains between greensboro and goldsboro , nc .

the icc granted the discontinuance on the grounds that the cost of providing the passenger service was three times the revenue it produced and that the need for the service was insubstantial .

the federal district court overturned the icc ruling , but the supreme court , with two justices dissenting , reinstated it .

the supreme court majority opinion held that where the demands of public convenience and necessity are slight , as in this case , it was proper for the icc in determining the existence of a burden on interstate commerce to give little weight to the carrier's overall prosperity .

in its argument , the majority also referred to the opposite situation , citing the example of unprofitable commuter trains .

the majority stated that in cases involving "vital commuter services in large metropolitan areas where the demands of public convenience and necessity are large , it is of course obvious that the commission would err if it did not give great weight to the ability of the carrier to absorb even large deficits resulting from such services. .

the two dissenting justices asserted that if railroads were allowed to terminate service based solely on the availability of alternate modes of transportation and a finding of a "net loss" on the service , railroads would discontinue virtually all of their commuter trains .

the dissenters cited a 1958 supreme court case that upheld the principle that a railroad that was prosperous overall could be required to provide particular services at a loss .

the 1958 case involved the chicago , milwaukee , st. paul & pacific railroad , which appealed to the illinois commerce commission to raise commuter fares so as to avoid a yearly loss of over $300,000 .

the illinois commission denied the fare raise .

the railroad appealed to the icc , which granted enough of a fare increase for the railroad to break even on the commuter service .

however , the supreme court ruled against the icc and in favor of the illinois commission , criticizing the icc for not giving due consideration to the overall profitability of the railroad's operations in illinois .

the 1958 and 1964 supreme court cases suggest that where passenger service is deemed vital , a profitable railroad could in some circumstances be required to provide such service even at a loss .

these precedents raise an important question regarding the terms of passenger access to freight track in the present day .

can a freight railroad be required to provide passenger operators access to its facilities at less than what it perceives as the full market value ? .

when congress directed the icc to balance public convenience and necessity with the burden on interstate commerce in considering railroads' requests to abandon track or discontinue passenger service , it did not indicate how heavy a burden was acceptable .

the icc generally equated "public convenience and necessity" with passenger interests .

however , in a 1965 case that allowed the boston and main railroad to discontinue two passenger trains , the icc defined the public interest to include the shipping customers of the railroad .

the icc concluded that in order to preserve the railroad for freight customers , passenger service must be permitted to end .

since railroad deregulation in 1980 , the supply and demand for freight railroad facilities has come closer to equilibrium .

what congress set out to achieve in the transportation act of 1920 , consolidation and the shedding of excess capacity , has been largely achieved .

since 2004 , the surface transportation board has required each railroad to submit a plan each year describing how it intends to avoid capacity shortages during the grain harvest season .

many railroads have been investing heavily to increase capacity , including , in some cases , restoring sections of double track in locations where the second track had been removed many years ago .

the disappearance of excess capacity was related to the decline of passenger service .

supporting passenger train operations had led many railroads to install multiple tracks , yard bypasses , and sophisticated signaling systems .

this infrastructure generated additional capacity by allowing trains of varying speeds to use the same rights of way .

without passenger trains , the freight railroads could shed much of this capacity and could also economize by maintaining tracks for freight - train speeds rather than for the higher speeds needed for competitive passenger service .

tighter supply of rail facilities has raised questions about the railroads' public obligations in such an environment .

under such conditions , what is a reasonable request for rail service ? .

does a railroad have an obligation to expand capacity in order to meet additional requests for service ? .

as stated in one supreme court case , "the common law of old in requiring the carrier to receive all goods and passengers recognized that 'if his coach be full' he was not liable for failing to transport more than he could carry. .

without enough room to accommodate everyone , a carrier still must treat customers fairly , if not identically .

what it means to treat customers fairly is complicated by the unique demands of passenger service .

passenger trains typically operate at higher speeds than freight trains , and railroads insist that a mix of speeds on the same track can actually reduce the number of trains that can be operated .

further , while some freight trains operate on tight schedules , many do not , and a passenger operator's insistence upon on - time performance may cause conflict with less time - sensitive freight operations .

fifteen years after deregulating the transportation system , congress abolished the icc and replaced it with the stb in the icc termination act of 1995 ( iccta , p.l .

104-88 , 109 stat .

830 ) .

iccta kept in place the deregulatory framework of the staggers act .

one modification made in iccta , however , has had a profound impact on a state's or municipality's prospects for gaining access to freight rights of way — perhaps shutting the door on the possibility except on terms acceptable to the freight railroad .

prior to iccta , the federal government and the states had some concurrent jurisdiction over railroad rates , classifications , rules , and practices , and states and localities retained authority over the construction , acquisition , operation , abandonment , or discontinuance of spur , industrial , team , switching , or side tracks if the tracks were located , or intended to be located , entirely in one state .

under iccta , these aspects of rail regulation were placed under the exclusive jurisdiction of the stb .

as stated in the house report , this change was made "to reflect the direct and complete preemption of state economic regulation of railroads. .

this change consolidating jurisdiction under the federal government has been cited by the stb and the courts when blocking state or local government attempts to condemn portions of railroad rights - of - way for other public purposes .

as discussed above , prior to iccta it may have been possible for local governments to condemn railroad property for some other public use if the second use would not materially interfere with railroad operations .

court decisions in condemnation cases since iccta indicate this is no longer the case .

for instance , a wisconsin city , citing its authority under its police power , attempted to condemn a portion of a railroad's right of way used for passing track in order to straighten an unsafe curve in a road parallel to the railroad .

the court ruled that the city could not condemn the railroad property because condemnation would be a form of rail regulation , preempted by iccta .

similarly , the city of lincoln , ne was unable to condemn a 20-foot - wide strip of railroad right of way for a distance of five blocks for use as a pedestrian and bike trail .

the railroad contended that it was using this property for loading and unloading lumber and that trail users would be too close to the tracks , creating a safety hazard .

the stb sided with the railroad , finding the proposed taking would unduly interfere with interstate commerce .

in another case , the city of st. paul , mn , sought to condemn a 24-foot - wide strip of railroad right of way for about 2 miles for use as a bike trail .

a federal court held that the issue of potential interference with railroad operations was not even relevant because the condemnation action in and of itself triggered the iccta preemption .

these cases , at the turn of this century , could be viewed as the other bookend to the station stoppage cases at the turn of the last century .

recall that the prevailing argument for upholding community stoppage laws back then was that local governments , rather than a "distant authority," could "more wisely" and with "deeper concern" manage the rights of way in their jurisdictions .

the same iccta provision appears to block attempts by passenger carriers seeking to gain access to freight rights of way at a lower price through condemnation rather than paying a negotiated price .

in 2006 , the chicago transit authority sought to condemn a 2.8 mile - long right of way over which it ran two tracks alongside the three tracks of the union pacific railroad .

the transit authority had leased the land from union pacific for 50 years .

in negotiations over lease renewal , the parties were unable to reach an agreement on the rent , and when the freight railroad rejected the transit authority's proposal for a one - time payment , the transit authority began a condemnation proceeding .

the court found that iccta preempted the condemnation proceeding , again because condemnation was a form of local regulation barred by the law .

from a freight railroad's perspective , an important distinction is whether allowing passenger trains would absorb otherwise idle capacity or would displace revenue freight trains .

freight railroads expect commuter rail authorities to pay for freight revenues foregone due to use of capacity for passenger service , and there is often disagreement over how severely the passenger operations compromise the railroad's ability to run additional freight trains .

congress might consider whether the federal railroad administration , experts in determining the infrastructure requirements for safe operation , could provide an independent assessment .

to passenger rail proponents , disputes over access to a limited track network are indicative of a lack of federal investment in this mode .

double tracking a rail network that is largely "stuck in a one - track world" would be one , albeit an expensive , option for reducing conflicts between freight and passenger use of track .

the transcontinental freight railroads have , in recent years , been adding parallel tracks on their busiest routes .

shorter - haul intermodal , refrigerated , and parcel cargoes are an incentive for freight railroads to provide "express" services , perhaps requiring additional parallel track along segments of their networks .

yet , one of their largest express customers , ups , has voiced frustration with the slow pace of their investment , including their slow pace in adopting new technology , like positive train control , that could increase capacity .

freight railroads and "higher" - speed intercity passenger operators ( as opposed to "high - speed" trains operating on dedicated passenger track ) could potentially share an interest in express track construction .

one method that has been proposed as a public - private partnership in enhancing rail infrastructure is the creation of a federal rail trust fund , financed by taxes on the users of the system .

ups's rail service needs raise a fundamental question for congress .

can the same rail network be expected to satisfy the needs of both shippers and passengers ? .

ups , like many shippers , requires a fluid rail network from coast to coast , with trains arriving reliably on time and in sync with its tightly "choreographed" logistics network .

is this possible if a transcontinental ups train must be shunted to a siding every time it encounters an amtrak train , or each time it approaches a city along the way during rush hour ? .

given the increasing demands on urban rail corridors , congress may wish to consider alternatives for managing them .

the "port authority" model might help manage some of the competing uses .

similar to a seaport authority , a publicly owned "rail port authority" could purchase key rail corridors ( many marine terminals were once owned by railroads ) in order to rationalize , reconfigure , or otherwise improve a city's rail network for both passenger and freight use .

while freight railroads can be expected to maximize use of their individual rights of way , as rivals they have little incentive to analyze an urban rail system as a whole or minimize conflicts with intersecting roadways .

similar to the municipal takeover of commuter services , publicly owned freight rail facilities would become eligible for a broader array of federal transportation funding programs .

public funding could help such authorities amass a level of capital that the private railroads are unable or unwilling to provide .

railroads using the facility would have to pay fees , which they may find agreeable because they avoid the need for large , upfront capital outlays .

a similar model has been used by the alameda corridor transportation authority in southern california , which purchased and modernized a freight rail line linking the ports with inland terminals .

grade separating this 20-mile rail corridor through the city increased freight train speeds , eliminated grade crossing conflicts , and freed up capacity on three other rail lines through the city .

the freight railroads pay fees to the authority to run trains over the corridor .

while the alameda corridor is not used for passenger service , this type of structure could address the concern that implementing passenger service on one railroad's corridor could disrupt the competitive balance between competing freight carriers .

the option of gaining access via purchase of freight rights of way by a public rail authority returns the discussion to the price of that access .

thus , the fundamental issue is whether freight railroads and prospective passenger rail authorities should negotiate over the price of railroad property just as any private parties would or whether an independent , but governmental , third party , such as the stb , should have some role in determining the terms of sale .

some railroad rights of way have been purchased by passenger rail operators through normal market negotiations , and thus one could conclude that the marketplace is capable of determining their relative value , in terms of passenger or freight use .

however , two aspects of these transactions make them different than the typical private property sale .

for one , there is only one potential buyer and only one potential seller .

second , public authorities are not seeking access to railroad rights of way to use them for some non - rail public purpose , merely to use them for their intended purpose .

neither are public authorities asking the freight railroads to absorb the losses of operating passenger trains , as they once were required to .

the risk of losses remains with the public .

given that a public service obligation is still attached to railroads , albeit largely lifted with respect to passenger service , do freight railroads have the right to solely set the price for passenger access or should the public's convenience and necessity be given some consideration ? .

a following question is who should be granted a legal right to insist upon use of freight track for passenger service ? .

congress might limit that right to amtrak , as under present law , but could also extend it to agencies of state and local governments , such as transit authorities .

creating track access rights for potential private operators of rail service may be a particularly thorny issue .

congress has indicated a desire to promote private investment in intercity passenger rail service , but potential private competitors to amtrak may expect the same privileged access to freight track that amtrak enjoys .

