the u.s. cosmetic , beauty supply , and perfume retail industry consists of approximately 13,000 establishments , with annual revenue of about $10 billion .

worldwide , the cosmetics and personal care products industry has more than $250 billion in annual retail sales .

according to economic census data released in 2009 , the u.s. cosmetic industry employs over 86,000 people .

the cosmetic market includes numerous personal care products that have many uses beyond the facial makeup that one typically thinks of when the term "cosmetics" is used .

industry sales are concentrated in the following areas ( percentage of sales by product category ) : ( 1 ) cosmetics , face cream , and perfume — 75% ; ( 2 ) hygienic products including deodorant , shampoo , conditioner , hair color , and shaving products — 20% ; and ( 3 ) small appliances — 4% .

the typical industry consumer is a woman between the ages of 25 to 55 , although there appears to be increasing growth in marketing to men and tweens ( 9- to 12-year - olds ) .

sales of cosmetic and personal care products may be affected by a consumer's personal income , although the "sales of basic personal items such as soap , shampoo , and shaving products are likely to be less impacted by a soft economy than other product areas viewed by consumers as more discretionary. .

prices for cosmetics vary widely , and depend on whether the product is a "prestige," mass market , or a professional or salon use brand .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) reportedly regulates $62 billion worth of cosmetics .

fda's primary responsibilities for regulating cosmetics include ensuring that cosmetics are not adulterated or misbranded .

this report describes the differences between cosmetics , drugs , and combination products ; provides an overview of the statutory provisions and rules under which fda regulates cosmetics ; and provides an overview of industry self - regulation programs .

the report also includes an appendix on keratin hair treatment products , also known as "brazilian blowouts. .

this report focuses on fda regulation of cosmetics and does not discuss federal trade commission regulation of advertising of cosmetics nor the regulation of potentially dangerous chemicals or pesticides by other agencies , with the exception of formaldehyde and other agents that may produce or lead to the production of formaldehyde .

this section discusses the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) definitions of cosmetics and drugs , and how the ffdca differentiates between cosmetics and a cosmetic that also meets the statutory definition of a drug .

classification of products is a concern for manufacturers , as cosmetics are not subject to the same approval , regulatory , or registration requirements as drugs .

in addition to saving considerable time and expense , this distinction allows manufacturers of products that are only cosmetics and not drugs or combination products , discussed later , to market their products with less regulatory oversight .

the ffdca prohibits the adulteration and misbranding of cosmetics and the introduction , receipt , and delivery of adulterated or misbranded cosmetics into interstate commerce .

a cosmetic is considered to be adulterated if , among other reasons , it contains a substance which may cause injury to users under the conditions of use prescribed on the product's labeling or if it contains a filthy , putrid , or decomposed substance .

a cosmetic is considered to be misbranded if its labeling is false or misleading , if it does not bear the required labeling information , or if the container is made or filled in a deceptive manner .

prior to the enactment of the ffdca in 1938 , cosmetics were not regulated by the federal government , but were regulated under a collection of state laws that had been enacted to regulate food and drugs .

at that time , several "cosmetics and drugs were made from the same natural materials" and the "laws did not include explicit definitions of the products regulated. .

following several incidents in which cosmetics were allegedly the cause of serious health problems , as well as industry concerns about states enacting their own laws , provisions were included in ffdca that prohibited the sale of adulterated or misbranded cosmetics in interstate commerce .

the ffdca also established uniform regulation of fda - regulated cosmetic products throughout the country .

in addition to the ffdca , cosmetics are regulated under the fair packaging and labeling act ( fpla ) and related regulations .

the fpla applies to the packaging and labeling of "consumer commodities," which include cosmetics "customarily produced or distributed for sale through retail sales agencies or instrumentalities for consumption by individuals , or use by individuals for purposes of personal care ... and which [are] usually consumed or expended in the course of such consumption or use. .

for the purposes of "for professional use only" labeling , discussed later , the fpla does not apply to "wholesale or retail distributors of consumer commodities , except to the extent that such persons ( 1 ) are engaged in the packaging or labeling of such commodities , or ( 2 ) prescribe or specify ... the manner in which such commodities are packaged or labeled. .

the ffdca statutory provisions that address cosmetics , with the exception of those regarding color additives , have remained basically unchanged since 1938 , although the cosmetic industry today encompasses a greater number of products with different uses than those on the market more than seventy years ago .

however , concerns of consumer and industry groups today are similar to those expressed prior to the enactment of the ffdca .

consumer groups have raised concerns about particular ingredients , and states have considered legislating in areas not covered by the ffdca or federal regulations .

if a cosmetic that is introduced into , in , or held for sale after shipment in interstate commerce is found to be adulterated or misbranded , fda may take enforcement actions , such as seeking an injunction ( which could prevent a company from making or distributing the violative product ) , seizing the violative product , or seeking criminal penalties .

additionally , fda has authority to prevent imports of violative cosmetic products from entering the united states .

fda's authority to regulate cosmetics also includes the authority to conduct inspections of cosmetic establishments , without notifying the establishments in advance , as long as the inspections occur "at reasonable times and within reasonable limits and in a reasonable manner. .

fda conducts inspections to assure product safety and to evaluate cosmetic products for potential adulteration or misbranding violations .

the agency may decide to inspect a facility based on consumer or industry complaints , the establishment's compliance history , or fda surveillance initiatives .

the agency may collect samples for examination and analysis during plant and import inspections , and follow up on complaints of adverse events alleged to be caused by a given cosmetic product .

the agency does not have a required schedule for inspecting cosmetic facilities .

fda has certain regulations and procedures for cosmetics with which manufacturers voluntarily may choose to comply , even though similar regulations and procedures are mandatory for other fda - regulated products .

for example , fda has regulations on voluntary facility registration and voluntarily reporting for ingredients used in cosmetic products and adverse reactions to cosmetics .

in contrast , registration requirements exist for other fda product manufacturers .

additionally , cosmetic manufacturers are not required , as drug manufacturers are , to "file data on ingredients , or report cosmetic - related injuries to fda. .

instead , under a voluntary fda program , cosmetic manufacturers and packagers may report the ingredients used in their product formulations .

furthermore , consumers and cosmetic manufacturers may voluntarily report adverse reactions to cosmetics to fda .

finally , fda does not have mandatory recall authority to require a cosmetic manufacturer to recall a product from the marketplace .

however , the agency may request a voluntary recall , and fda has issued general regulations on the conduct of voluntary recalls that outline the agency's expectations of manufacturers during a recall .

while fda does not have the authority to require compliance with these regulations , fda may take action against adulterated or misbranded cosmetics .

fda's authority over cosmetics is less comprehensive than its authority over other fda - regulated products with regard to gmp ; premarket notification , clearance , or approval ; testing ; and mandatory risk labeling .

as an example , cosmetic producers are not required to use gmp unless their cosmetics are also drugs .

fda has released gmp guidelines for cosmetic manufacturers , and has stated that "[f]ailure to adhere to gmp may result in an adulterated or misbranded product. .

with the exception of color additives , fda does not require premarket notification , safety testing , or premarket review or approval of the chemicals used in cosmetic products .

also , unlike drugs , cosmetic products are not required to meet fda requirements for safety and effectiveness .

as previously noted , the ffdca prohibits the adulteration or misbranding of cosmetics , and the introduction , receipt , and delivery of adulterated or misbranded cosmetics into interstate commerce .

if a cosmetic that is introduced into , in , or held for sale after shipment in interstate commerce is found to be adulterated or misbranded , fda may take enforcement actions .

the following sections describe the parameters of the adulteration and misbranding of cosmetics .

fda does not have authority to order a mandatory recall of a cosmetic product .

in contrast , the agency has the authority to order recalls of food , infant formula , medical devices , human tissue products , and tobacco products .

even though fda may not order a mandatory recall , fda may request that a company voluntarily recall cosmetic products .

manufacturers or distributors may undertake voluntary recalls to remove violative products from the market that are hazardous to health , defective , or grossly deceptive , and "against which the agency would initiate legal action. .

if a manufacturer or distributor is unwilling to remove dangerous products from the market without fda's written request to do so , the agency may issue a request for a product recall .

the agency monitors a firm that conducts a product recall , and the agency may take an active role in monitoring a recall by reviewing the firm's status reports and conducting its own audit checks to verify the recall's effectiveness .

fda evaluates the health hazard presented by the product and assigns a classification to indicate the degree of hazard posed by the product under recall , whether it is a cosmetic or another fda - regulated product ( see text box ) .

either fda or the cosmetic company will issue public notification of the recall .

the firm is responsible for the disposition of the recalled product , whether it is destroyed or brought into compliance .

in contrast to fda's authority over drugs and some devices , fda does not have the authority to require premarket approval of cosmetics or their ingredients , except for color additives .

because there are no statutory requirements for premarket approval of cosmetic ingredients , manufacturers are responsible for substantiating the safety of their products and ingredients before the products are marketed .

failure to adequately substantiate the safety prior to marketing causes the product to be considered misbranded , unless it bears a warning label that states: "the safety of this product has not been determined. .

however , because that warning label seems to be rarely used , consumers may be under the impression that cosmetics have been demonstrated to be safe .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has noted that fda's regulation requiring warning labels "cannot be effectively enforced because fda does not have the authority to require cosmetic manufacturers to test their products for safety or make their test results available to fda. .

fda , however , has restricted the use of certain ingredients in cosmetics or required warning statements on the labels of certain types of cosmetics ( see textbox below ) .

for example , fda issued a rule banning the use of methylene chloride in cosmetics after concluding "that methylene chloride is a poisonous or deleterious substance that may render cosmetic products injurious to users," due to the potential cancer risks of exposure to the substance .

if a cosmetic were to contain methylene chloride , it would be considered adulterated , and fda could take an enforcement action .

except for color additives and those cosmetic ingredients that are prohibited or restricted for use by a specific regulation , any ingredient used in the formulations of cosmetics is allowed , provided that the safety of the ingredient has been adequately substantiated , it is properly labeled , and its use does not cause the product to be adulterated or misbranded under the law .

fda's guidance document on inspections of cosmetic product manufacturers discusses several other ingredients that investigators should document if they are used in cosmetic products .

some ingredients used in cosmetic products have received particular attention as a result of concerns about their potential health risk .

for example , questions have been raised about the accuracy of ingredient statements and the adequacy of safety warnings on product labels for keratin hair treatment products containing formaldehyde .

concerns have also arisen regarding the use of coal tar hair dyes as color additives and nanomaterial ingredients , which are discussed more below .

as noted above , fda does not currently have the authority to mandate registration of cosmetic facilities , in contrast with the statutory registration requirements for establishments that produce other products regulated by the agency .

however , since 1974 , fda , in cooperation with the cosmetic industry , has had a voluntary cosmetic registration program ( vcrp ) to facilitate registration of cosmetic establishments .

gao has noted that "[r]egistration is important because it serves as the basis for determining where fda will conduct its inspections. .

fda has also stated that vcrp information helps the cosmetic ingredient review program ( discussed previously ) "in determining its priorities for ingredient safety review. .

under vcrp , fda encourages cosmetic establishments that manufacture or package cosmetic products to voluntarily register their facilities within 30 days of the start of their operations , regardless of whether their products enter interstate commerce .

fda regulations request that foreign cosmetic product manufacturers voluntarily register with the agency if their products are exported for sale in the united states .

cosmetic manufacturers and packagers also are encouraged to report the ingredients used in their product formulations .

fda does not assess a fee for the voluntary registration of a cosmetic product establishment .

certain classes of establishments are exempt from fda's voluntary registration request "because the [fda] commissioner has found that such registration is not justified. .

these include beauty shops ; cosmetologists ; retailers ; pharmacies ; physicians ; hospitals ; clinics ; public health agencies ; persons who compound cosmetics at a location but do not otherwise manufacture or package cosmetics from that location ; and persons who manufacture , prepare , compound , or process cosmetic products for activities such as teaching or research , but not for sale .

consumer safety organizations such as the environmental working group have submitted comments to the fda supporting the inclusion of "for professional use only" products in the voluntary registration scheme , particularly in light of issues with "brazilian blowout" products ( see section "' "for professional use only" labeling " and the appendix ) .

in its response to the comments , fda disagreed with the inclusion of professional use products in the vcrp , as the vcrp does not apply to products not in commercial distribution .

fda also disagreed with the suggested audit of the cosmetics industry , which the consumer group proposed in order "to determine the current participation rate" in the vcrp and "to estimate how many ingredients and products fda receives into the database compared to the total produced. .

the agency focused on its lack of "statutory authority to make registration in the vcrp mandatory," as well as "the cost of completing such a project," calling the audit "not a wise use of agency funds in the current economic environment. .

finally , fda disagreed "at this time" with the environmental working group's suggestion to create a certification program so that cosmetic companies could "indicate to consumers that they have participated in the vcrp," stating that the agency would need to research "how consumers would interpret such a certification claim," as well as how to enforce registration claims .

fda lacks the statutory authority to require cosmetic manufacturers to notify fda of adverse events associated with their products and to require cosmetic companies to report information they receive from consumers and others regarding adverse events .

currently , the agency advises consumers to self - report "negative reaction[s] to a beauty , personal hygiene , [and] makeup products" to the fda via the agency's safety information and adverse event reporting program — medwatch — or the consumer's local fda complaint coordinator .

the agency is interested in hearing from consumers who "experience a rash , hair loss , infection , or other problem — even if they didn't follow product directions," as well as when products have bad smells or unusual colors and may be contaminated .

the agency may use adverse event reports by consumers to detect repeated problems with a product and potentially to take enforcement or other legal action .

for example , adverse events that have been reported to fda include reactions to henna / mehndi , certain shades of ink used for tattoos and permanent makeup , and keratin hair treatment products .

temporary tattoos have been associated with reports of allergic reactions .

these products also have been subject to an import alert due to the lack of a required ingredient declaration on the label or the presence of colors not approved for use in cosmetics for the skin .

certain ink shades used for permanent makeup resulted in "more than 150 reports of adverse reactions in consumers. .

fda has also received at least 33 adverse event reports , an additional seven reports of hair loss , and a number of inquiries concerning the safety of "brazilian blowouts" and similar "for professional use only" hair treatment products , which may contain or release formaldehyde in the air when used by stylists to smooth hair , despite being labeled as "formaldehyde - free. .

the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , which regulates workers' exposure to formaldehyde and workplace safety , and state agencies that regulate hair salons have issued hazard alerts about these products .

this issue is discussed further in the appendix .

in the absence of fda requirements regarding adverse event reporting , the cosmetic industry has made efforts to self - regulate .

in 2007 , the industry trade association , the personal care products council ( pcpc ) , created a consumer commitment code that cosmetic product and ingredient manufacturers and marketers were "encouraged to acknowledge their support of" in writing .

one of the code's principles is that "a company should notify the [fda] of any known serious and unexpected adverse event as a result of the use of any of its cosmetic products marketed and used in the united states," where the terms "serious" and "unexpected" mean the same as fda regulations defining serious and unexpected adverse events for drugs .

this code is not a binding legal standard and cannot be enforced by fda .

the pcpc has stated that it "will not terminate the council's membership for noncompliance," but would instead encourage compliance with the code .

consumers may seek out particular cosmetics based on their labeling , such as cosmetics made with organic ingredients or without being tested on animals .

however , fda does not define certain terms used by manufacturers on their cosmetic products .

sections below on "organic" and "not tested on animals" claims address slight differences in how cosmetic products are marketed using certain claims and what consumers may believe such claims to mean .

additionally , not all cosmetic products are required to be labeled in the same manner , as the section below on products used by professionals discusses .

although fda's authorities over cosmetic products include some of those applicable to other fda - regulated products , they are generally less comprehensive and exclude certain requirements imposed on other fda - regulated products .

the manner in which a cosmetic product could or should be regulated , however , is not always clear .

fda has issued regulations and procedures for cosmetics with which manufacturers voluntarily may choose to comply .

additionally , the cosmetic industry's trade association has established a cosmetic ingredient review program for cosmetic manufacturers with the purpose of determining which cosmetic ingredients are safe under certain conditions of use .

nevertheless , some questions remain as to whether the fda's current oversight of cosmetic products and their ingredients is appropriate .

background keratin hair treatment products reportedly smooth frizzy hair , straighten curly hair , and reduce blow drying and straightening times .

such treatments may also be known as "brazilian blowouts" after the name of one company's products commonly used for such treatments .

the treatments typically cost several hundred dollars , depending on the length and texture of one's hair , and may last from six weeks to several months , depending on the type of treatment .

many brands of keratin hair treatment products have been found to contain free formaldehyde in solution ( which tends to combine with water , forming methylene glycol ) , or other chemicals that convert into formaldehyde gas , whether or not they are labeled as "formaldehyde - free. .

formaldehyde and a related chemical , methylene glycol , are "known to induce a fixative action on proteins ( eg , keratin ) ," and therefore hair straightening solutions reportedly "maintain straightened hair by altering protein structures via amino acid crosslinking reactions , which form crosslinks between hair keratins and with added keratin from the formulation" of the hair product .

questions have been raised about the accuracy of ingredient statements and the adequacy of safety warnings on product labels for keratin hair treatment products containing formaldehyde .

formaldehyde is a respiratory irritant and a known human carcinogen .

the concern is that stylists who use such products , and consumers who are treated with them , may be exposed to harmful levels of formaldehyde without their informed consent , because many products are labeled "formaldehyde - free. .

as discussed below , investigations by the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) , the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , and health canada have indicated that even products labeled "formaldehyde - free" may contain levels of the chemical considered potentially unsafe .

while osha regulates workers' exposure to formaldehyde and worker and workplace safety , as discussed below , fda regulates cosmetic products containing formaldehyde .

members of congress have requested that fda take enforcement actions against such keratin hair treatment products , and fda has issued a warning letter indicating certain brazilian blowout products are in violation of the ffdca .

fda is evaluating hair straightening and hair smoothing products for safety on an individual basis .

the manufacturer of brazilian blowout products has argued that testing by osha and "alternate reputable institutions" indicated that its products fall below osha safety standards .

osha has responded by asking the ceo of brazilian blowout to issue corrective statements to salon owners that "clearly stat[e] that osha air quality tests conducted … have yielded results above acceptable osha limits. .

formaldehyde the environmental protection agency ( epa ) attempts to quantify the risk that an individual will suffer adverse health effects due to particular levels of exposure to a chemical .

according to epa , formaldehyde: can cause watery eyes , burning sensations in the eyes and throat , nausea , and difficulty in breathing in some humans exposed at elevated levels ( above 0.1 parts per million ) .

high concentrations may trigger attacks in people with asthma .

there is evidence that some people can develop a sensitivity to formaldehyde .

it has also been shown to cause cancer in animals and may cause cancer in humans .

health effects include eye , nose , and throat irritation ; wheezing and coughing ; fatigue ; skin rash ; severe allergic reactions .

may cause cancer .

the federal agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) concurs and adds that exposure may lead to: neurological effects , and increased risk of asthma and / or allergy … in humans breathing 0.1 to 0.5 [parts formaldehyde per million parts of air ( ppm ) ] .

eczema and changes in lung function have been observed at 0.6 to 1.9 ppm .

decreased body weight , gastrointestinal ulcers , and liver and kidney damage were observed in animals orally exposed to 50 – 100 mg / kg / day formaldehyde .

the 12 th report on carcinogens ( roc ) , issued by the u.s. department of health and human services' ( hhs ) national toxicology program ( ntp ) in june 2011 changed the classification of formaldehyde from "reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen" to "known to be a human carcinogen," based on its criterion that there is "sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity from studies in humans , which indicates a causal relationship between exposure to the agent , substance , or mixture , and human cancer. .

this roc listing does not necessarily mean that formaldehyde will cause an exposed individual to develop cancer ; rather , it means that at some sufficient level of exposure to formaldehyde some humans will develop cancer .

the world health organization's international agency for research on cancer ( iarc ) listed formaldehyde as a carcinogen in 2006 .

osha recognizes the iarc list of carcinogens as well as the ntp roc list for the purposes of its hazard communication standard , discussed below .

osha formaldehyde standards workers' exposure to formaldehyde in general industries as well as shipyard employment and construction is regulated at the federal level and is addressed in osha standards or equivalent regulations in osha - approved state plans .

osha has issued rules on formaldehyde exposure limits , protective equipment , and cancer warning labels for products that contain formaldehyde .

the agency also notes that "[s]hort - term exposure to formaldehyde can be fatal," and that "[l]ong - term exposure to low levels of formaldehyde may cause respiratory difficulty , eczema , and sensitization. .

osha's formaldehyde standard "applies to all occupational exposures to formaldehyde , i.e .

from formaldehyde gas , its solutions , and materials that release formaldehyde. .

osha's formaldehyde standard states that "[t]he permissible exposure limit ( pel ) for formaldehyde in the workplace is 0.75 parts formaldehyde per million parts of air ( 0.75 ppm ) measured as an 8-hour time - weighted average. .

the standard also has short - term exposure limits of 2 ppm per 15-minute time period and sets a level at which "increased industrial hygiene monitoring and initiation of worker medical surveillance" is triggered .

osha notes that an "airborne concentration of formaldehyde above 0.1 ppm can cause irritation of the respiratory tract. .

employers who have workplaces covered by the osha standard are required to monitor their employees' exposure to formaldehyde .

osha requires communication of formaldehyde's potential health hazards for "[f]ormaldehyde gas , all mixtures or solutions composed of greater than 0.1 percent formaldehyde , and materials capable of releasing formaldehyde into the air , under reasonably foreseeable conditions of use , at concentrations reaching or exceeding 0.1 ppm. .

employers are required to ensure that such products have hazard warning labels if they are "capable of releasing formaldehyde at levels of 0.1 ppm to 0.5 ppm," and if the products are "capable of releasing formaldehyde at levels above 0.5 ppm," the labels must contain additional information and the words "potential cancer hazard. .

additionally , manufacturers and distributors of formaldehyde - containing products that meet the 0.1 percent level must "assure that material safety data sheets and updated information are provided to all employers purchasing such materials. .

based on a settlement with the california attorney general , the website for the brazilian blowout products now contains a material safety data sheet for brazilian blowout acai professional smoothing solution , which indicates that the product is classified as a hazardous substance and warns about using proper ventilation .

adverse event reports hair salon stylists in oregon first raised concerns about a hair smoothing product labeled "formaldehyde - free" when they began experiencing nosebleeds within a month of using the product and reportedly later developed chest pain and sore throats .

one stylist contacted the oregon health and science university's center for research on occupational and environmental toxicology , which conducted an investigation in 2010 with the oregon occupational safety and health division .

researchers found significant formaldehyde levels in 105 samples of hair smoothing treatments from 54 different salons .

oregon's occupational safety and health division then issued alerts about the formaldehyde levels to over 21,000 state - licensed hair stylists .

although products such as the brazilian blowout acai professional smoothing solution were labeled "formaldehyde - free," the tests found that the products had an average formaldehyde content of more than 8% .

some products contained amounts of formaldehyde "well above what could legally be labeled as 'formaldehyde - free.' .

oregon's occupational safety and health division received reports of adverse events from stylists across the united states after its alert , which included "burning of eyes and throat , watering of eyes , dry mouth , loss of smell , headache and a feeling of 'grogginess,' malaise , shortness of breath and breathing problems , a diagnosis of epiglottitis attributed by the stylist to their use of the product , fingertip numbness , and dermatitis," as well as reports of hair loss .

fda has received reports from state and local groups of "eye irritation , breathing problems , and headaches," as well as adverse event reports from "hair stylists , their customers , and individual users" of similar symptoms , plus fainting , bronchitis , inhalation pneumonitis , and vomiting .

similarly , health canada reportedly received adverse reaction reports for hair products with formaldehyde from 50-60 individuals , which included "burning eyes , nose , throat and breathing difficulties , with one report of hair loss," as well as reports of "headache , arthritis , dizziness , epistaxis [nosebleeds] , swollen glands , and numb tongue. .

niosh and osha investigations in december 2010 , niosh conducted a health hazard evaluation of the brazilian blowout acai professional smoothing solution , as used by one hair stylist employee on another hair stylist in a salon .

the evaluation indicated that the solution's concentration of formaldehyde ( greater than 0.1% ) was enough to merit the "hazard communication requirements of the osha formaldehyde standard. .

osha has conducted its own investigations of keratin treatment products .

osha's investigations "found formaldehyde in the air when stylists used hair smoothing products," even though not all of the products had "formaldehyde listed on their labels or in material safety data sheets as required by law. .

osha air tests of one product labeled as "formaldehyde - free" exceeded osha's limits on formaldehyde .

osha has issued at least one citation to an employer after air sampling found that salon workers "were exposed to formaldehyde levels that exceeded osha's 15-minute short term exposure limit. .

osha issued a hazard alert to hair salons indicating the hazards associated with the use of hair smoothing treatment products and the responsibilities of salons that use these products under the federal occupational safety and health act .

california and several other states have issued similar notices .

in august 2011 , the ceo of brazilian blowout sent a letter to salon owners indicating that "all osha and independent air - quality tests conducted on the brazilian blowout professional smoothing solution … have yielded results well - below even the most stringent of osha standards. .

in september 2011 , osha issued a letter to the brazilian blowout ceo informing him that osha disagreed with his remarks and requesting that he immediately take corrective actions such as sending a correction or retraction to his letter to salon owners , "clearly stating that osha air quality tests conducted … have yielded results above acceptable osha limits. .

actions by other countries in 2011 , health canada issued an advisory naming eleven keratin or similar smoothing hair treatment products with levels of formaldehyde ranging from 0.35% to 8.4% , which exceed the level of 0.2% at which it is "permitted as a preservative" in canada .

therefore , "hair smoothing products with formaldehyde levels" above 0.2% are banned from being sold in canada .

this 0.2% level for formaldehyde and its equivalents is also the upper limit recommended by the cosmetic ingredient review panel .

authorities in france and germany have warned against the use of hair smoothing products with high concentrations of formaldehyde , and both france and ireland took steps to remove products from the market .

cosmetic ingredient review analysis the cosmetic ingredient review ( cir ) recently re - evaluated the safety of formaldehyde and addressed the safety of methylene glycol , a compound formed when formaldehyde is combined with water , in cosmetic products .

as mentioned in the body of this report , under the cir program , expert panels analyze information on the safety of ingredients used in cosmetic products .

in october 2011 , cir issued a final amended report on formaldehyde and methylene glycol that stated that "[n]ot surprisingly , formaldehyde is an irritant at low concentration , especially to the eyes and the respiratory tract .

formaldehyde exposure can result in a sensitization reaction. .

cir stated that its panel "continues to believe that formaldehyde gas can produce [nasopharyngeal] cancers at high doses. .

cir's expert panel "was concerned" with adverse event reports , which it noted were "consistent with measured air levels of formaldehyde in salons" using hair straightening products and indicated that not all ventilation controls were effective in allowing for safe use .

cir cited the oregon occupational safety and health division's workplace survey of ventilation efforts that ranged from "a building hvac system , propping the business's doors open , or operating ceiling fans. .

the cir panel concluded that "[i]n the present practices of use and concentration ( on the order of 10% formaldehyde / methylene glycol , blow drying and heating up to 450°f with a flat iron , inadequate ventilation , resulting in many reports of adverse effects ) , hair smoothing products containing formaldehyde and methylene glycol are unsafe. .

however , cir found that formaldehyde and methylene glycol "are safe for use in cosmetics when formulated to ensure use at the minimal effective concentration , but in no case should the formalin [formaldehyde and water solution] concentration exceed 0.2%. .

as an example , the panel discussed the use and concentration of formaldehyde and methylene glycol in nail hardening products .

an assessment of fda's authorities some members of congress and the chief scientist of an industry trade association have asked fda to take action on keratin hair treatment products .

this section discusses fda's existing authorities and potential actions that the agency could take with regard to such cosmetic products , as well as the warning letter that fda has issued to the ceo of brazilian blowout and actions by the california attorney general .

fda does not have authority to regulate "the operation of salons or the practice of cosmetology. .

fda does not ban formaldehyde or methylene glycol in cosmetic products .

according to the cir , fda's voluntary cosmetic registration program contained 77 uses of formaldehyde and formaldehyde solution ( formalin ) .

fda has stated that the safety of formaldehyde "as a cosmetic ingredient depends on a variety of factors , such as its concentration in the final product and how the final product is used. .

fda could issue a rule prohibiting or restricting the use of formaldehyde and formaldehyde solutions in cosmetic products if the agency concluded that such substances were poisonous or deleterious .

if such ingredients were deemed deleterious , their inclusion in a cosmetic product would render the product adulterated under the ffdca .

it is a prohibited act to introduce an adulterated product into interstate commerce under the ffdca and such an action may subject an individual or company to criminal penalties .

fda does not require a warning label on cosmetic products containing formaldehyde , formalin , methlyene glycol , or related chemicals .

however , fda is authorized to conduct rulemaking to require a warning statement on cosmetic products with such ingredients .

fda regulations provide that "[t]he label of a cosmetic product shall bear a warning statement whenever necessary or appropriate to prevent a health hazard that may be associated with the product. .

fda may take enforcement actions against adulterated or misbranded cosmetic products , such as cosmetic products with misleading labels .

labeling must be deemed to be misleading if it does not reveal material facts "in light of other representations made or suggested by statement , [or] word. .

fda has indicated that the omission of material facts on the labeling of keratin hair treatment products — i.e .

labeling these products "formaldehyde - free" when they in fact contain formaldehyde — could make such products misbranded under the ffdca .

in august 2011 , fda issued a warning letter to the ceo of brazilian blowout , noting that the product was both adulterated and misbranded under the ffdca .

fda asserted that the product was adulterated because the cosmetic "bears or contains a deleterious substance [methylene glycol] that may render it injurious to users under the conditions of use prescribed in your labeling. .

additionally , fda stated that the product was misbranded because "its label and labeling ( including instructions for use ) makes misleading statements regarding the product's ingredients and fails to reveal material facts with respect to consequences that may result from the use of the product. .

fda advised the ceo to take corrective actions or face potential enforcement actions , including seizures and injunctions , and emphasized that manufacturers have a duty to ensure the products they market are safe and in compliance with fda requirements .

depending on how "formaldehyde free" hair keratin products have been advertised , the federal trade commission also may be authorized to initiate an action for deceptive advertising .

action by state attorneys general may also be possible .

the california attorney general's office filed a lawsuit against one company for labeling violations , deceptive advertising , and violations of state cosmetics and toxics acts .

the lawsuit resulted in a settlement with the manufacturer requiring a "caution" warning on two of its products ( including a california proposition 65 cancer warning ) ; the production of a material safety data sheet and its posting on the company's website ; the end of deceptive advertising , including modifications to the company's website ; retesting of products at approved laboratories ; reporting to the california department of public health safe cosmetics program ; the disclosure of refund policies ; proof of professional licensing before sale of professional use only products ; civil penalties ; and attorneys fees .

as discussed earlier in this report , fda does not have the authority to require premarket approval or premarket review of cosmetic ingredients or cosmetic products , except for color additives .

additionally , fda cannot mandate that a company recall a product that may violate the ffdca or fpla , but the agency can request that a manufacturer voluntarily recall a cosmetic product .

nor does the agency have the authority to mandate adverse event reports for interactions that consumers experience from the use of a company's products .

however , as indicated earlier , fda has encouraged consumer reporting of adverse events associated with cosmetics .

the agency's website discusses complaints regarding the use of brazilian blowout and other hair smoothing products and urges consumers and salon professionals to report adverse events to fda .

finally , fda cannot require professional use cosmetic products , such as brazilian blowout , to list their ingredients if they are not "consumer commodities" — products produced or distributed for retail sale — under the fpla .

however , if a cosmetic product was labeled "for professional use only" but sold at retail , the ingredients must be listed , or the cosmetic will be considered to be misbranded .

fda stated in november 2010 that it was "investigating whether or not brazilian blowout is marketed directly to consumers .

if so , failure to comply with the ingredient declaration requirement would constitute misbranding. .

