policymakers have several options when considering legislation that would result in reducing carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from the u.s. electricity sector .

some policy options might include a carbon tax or a carbon cap - and - trade approach .

a federal clean energy standard ( ces ) , such as that proposed in the clean energy standard act of 2012 ( s. 2146 ) , is an alternative approach that requires certain utility companies to provide a prescribed amount of electricity from qualified clean energy sources based on a percentage of each utility company's annual electricity sales to consumers .

several ces policies have been proposed in the past , although none have become law .

according to the energy information administration ( eia ) , the electric power sector represents approximately 41% of u.s. energy - related co 2 emissions .

the remaining 59% of co 2 emissions are from the transportation ( 33% ) and buildings / infrastructure ( 26% ) sectors .

unlike previous carbon reduction policy proposals , s. 2146 is focused only on co 2 emission reductions in the u.s. electric power sector .

the concept of a u.s. clean energy standard was proposed by president barack obama in his 2011 state of the union address , and the white house subsequently published a proposed framework for a federal ces .

in march of 2011 , the senate energy and natural resources committee ( senr ) released a clean energy standard white paper that solicited feedback on several ces policy design questions .

on march 1 , 2012 , the clean energy standard act of 2012 ( s. 2146 ) was introduced in the senate .

this report provides a summary and analysis of the ces proposed in s. 2146 .

s. 2146 proposes to amend title vi of the public utility regulatory policies act ( purpa ) of 1978 ( 16 u.s.c .

2601 et seq. ) .

by adding a new section , section 610 , titled "federal clean energy standard. .

according to the proposed bill , the stated purpose of the federal clean energy standard is: to create a market - oriented standard for electric energy generation that stimulates clean energy innovation and promotes a diverse set of low - and zero - carbon generation solutions in the united states at the lowest incremental cost to electric consumers .

the clean energy standard act of 2012 includes a number of design elements that define the ces structure , methods of compliance , and other aspects .

this report describes the proposed policy , based on the following general questions: ( 1 ) who is required to comply ? .

 ( 2 ) what are the compliance requirements ? .

 ( 3 ) what types of electricity generation would qualify for the ces ? .

and ( 4 ) what mechanisms are available as a means of ces compliance ? .

additional design elements are also briefly discussed .

at the request of the senate committee on energy and natural resources , eia analyzed the potential impact of the clean energy standard act of 2012 on the u.s. electricity sector .

results from eia's analysis indicate that the projected electricity generation fuel mix would change when compared to eia's annual energy outlook reference case projections ( see figure 7 ) .

changes to the electric power fuel mix are projected to reduce electric sector co 2 emissions in 2035 by 44% when compared to eia's reference case scenario .

as with any long - term forecast , models used to calculate such estimates are subject to certain economic , cost , technology , market , and other assumptions that can make the accuracy and reliability of long - range projections questionable .

eia's analysis compares two scenarios ( reference and s. 2146 ) with identical macro - level assumptions and adds policy parameters defined in the ces to the s. 2146 scenario .

while this approach may not be able to accurately predict what will actually happen in 2035 , it does provide some indication of potential changes to the electric power sector associated with the ces policy design .

however , it is possible that changes to certain underlying assumptions could yield different results than those provided in the analysis of s. 2146 .

coal , nuclear , and non - hydro renewable energy sources would experience the most significant changes .

in 2035 , electricity generated from coal would decrease by 54% , nuclear power would increase by 62% , and non - hydro renewables would increase by 34% relative to reference case projections .

growth in non - hydro renewable sources of electricity is dominated by wind and wood / biomass ; however , solar electricity is essentially the same as in eia's reference case projections ( see figure 8 ) .

natural gas generation is also expected to experience a relatively modest increase of 8% over 2035 reference case projections including natural gas - fired chp generation , which would increase by 21% in 2035 .

eia's analysis also indicates that s. 2146 results in essentially no carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) projects as a means of ces compliance .

with regard to the potential impact on electricity prices , eia projects that average u.s. electricity prices would increase , compared to eia reference case projections , by approximately 4% in 2025 and 18% in 2035 .

eia also notes that the provision in s. 2146 to exempt certain utility companies from ces compliance requirements could create some degree of regional price disparity between exempt and non - exempt utilities .

using one estimation approach , eia indicates that by 2030 electricity prices from non - exempt utilities could be 3% to 30% higher than exempt utilities .

finally , eia's analysis estimates that the use of alternative compliance payments as a means of ces compliance is minimal throughout the projection period .

s. 2146 includes a number of policy design elements that are integrated to create a structure for the clean energy standard policy .

the proposed ces raises some areas that congress may decide to further clarify during future deliberations about the proposed bill .

should congress choose to continue evaluating the possible implementation of a clean energy standard for the u.s. electric power sector , future debate about the proposed policy may include various topics associated with defining "clean energy. .

s. 2146 defines clean energy based on carbon dioxide emissions at the point when electricity is generated .

however , s. 2146 generally does not take into account potential emissions , waste , or other environmental impacts that might occur throughout the entire lifecycle of electricity generation from various energy sources .

some may argue that the entire lifecycle ( energy extraction , transportation , land use , etc. ) .

should be considered when defining clean energy , while others may argue that a ces focused on reducing electric power co 2 emissions is a sound approach to reducing greenhouse gas emissions .

every energy source for electricity generation has benefits and drawbacks .

nuclear power can provide carbon - free , reliable , and baseload electricity , yet there are concerns with disposal of spent fuel and weapons proliferation .

natural gas generation emits roughly half the amount of co 2 , compared to coal , per mwh of electricity generated ; however , there are environmental concerns with natural gas extraction .

hydropower could be considered a carbon - free and renewable source of electricity , but there are fish , wildlife , and water quality concerns associated with hydropower development .

non - hydro renewable electricity , with possibly the exception of biomass , is generally considered to be the cleanest source of power generation ; however , there are concerns with endangered species , animal habitat , land use , and other issues associated with renewable electricity development .

