federal incentives for operational renewable electricity projects have generally been in the form of tax benefits , including production tax credits ( ptc ) , investment tax credits ( itc ) , and accelerated depreciation .

renewable energy production tax credits were first introduced in the energy policy act of 1992 .

section 45 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) outlines production tax credit incentives for wind , biomass , geothermal , landfill gas , trash , qualified hydropower , and marine and hydrokinetic projects that generate electricity .

under current law , the production tax credit for new wind projects will no longer be available as of january 1 , 2013 .

for all other eligible renewable energy projects , the ptc is available to projects placed in service before january 1 , 2014 .

ptc policies provide incentives for electricity projects by providing a tax credit for each kilowatt - hour of electricity produced by a qualified project during the first 10 years of operation .

currently , the tax credit for wind projects is 2.2 cents ( $0.022 ) per kilowatt - hour .

the ptc incentive is annually adjusted for inflation .

to date , the wind industry has been the largest beneficiary of federal production tax credits .

the industry has experienced substantial growth over the last several years , with annual capacity installations generally increasing since 2005 ( see figure 1 ) .

as of the end of march 2012 , cumulative u.s. wind power capacity was 48,611 megawatts , equal to approximately 4% of total u.s. generation capacity .

in 2011 wind was the largest source of non - hydro renewable electricity generation , providing approximately 120 million megawatt - hours , roughly 3% of total u.s. generation .

in response to u.s. wind market growth , a number of manufacturing and assembly facilities were established to supply wind turbine components and systems .

in 2012 , the u.s. wind manufacturing sector is estimated to have the capacity to produce approximately 13 gigawatts ( gw ) of wind turbines annually .

industry estimates indicate that approximately 470 facilities in the united states provide various products ( eg , towers , turbines , gear boxes ) for the wind turbine manufacturing supply chain .

in 2011 , the wind industry reported that these facilities supported approximately 30,000 jobs .

there are many arguments both for and against tax incentives for renewable electricity generation .

proponents of extending the wind ptc point to the potential loss of manufacturing and construction jobs that will result if the tax incentive is allowed to expire , the environmental benefits of u.s. wind development , and the potential to re - establish the united states as a global leader in an emerging industry .

opponents of a wind ptc extension argue that all electricity generators should be subject to market - based competition , wind electricity generation has been incentivized for a long enough period of time , and wind projects should compete on their own economic and environmental merits without the support of federal financial incentives .

this report examines how the production tax credit and its impending expiration impact the wind industry , and how other factors influence market demand for wind power projects .

u.s. wind installations are expected to reach record levels in 2012 , with industry analysts estimating between 10 gw and 12 gw of total installations by the end of the year .

as a result , related economic development , employment , and manufacturing activities needed to support 2012 wind installations are likely to be at record levels .

wind developers , utility companies , and investors are accelerating their planned wind projects in order to qualify for tax credit incentives that might not be available in 2013 and beyond .

in essence , the pending ptc expiration at the end of 2012 has actually created a short - term surge in wind - related manufacturing and employment .

due to lead times — generally 12 to 18 months — required to fully develop wind projects , most manufacturing activities supporting 2012 wind capacity additions likely occurred either in 2011 or during the first quarter of 2012 .

wind - related employment and economic development activity in the second half of 2012 will be primarily focused on construction , installation , and commissioning activities for projects in development .

based on current market conditions and other factors , it is unlikely that 2012 wind development levels can be sustained in either the near or long term , regardless of ptc availability .

accelerated wind development in anticipation of the ptc expiring can create a severe market downturn in the year following ptc expiration .

the wind ptc has expired three times since 2000 ( in 2000 , 2002 , and 2004 ) , and the wind industry experienced precipitous drops in annual wind capacity installations in each of those years .

one market estimate projects that 2013 wind capacity additions may drop to as low as 1 gw in 2013 , if the ptc is not extended .

production tax credits for wind - generated electricity provide a financial incentive for project developers and investors to install wind projects in the united states .

however , the ptc incentive is only one of several factors that influence wind development , and a ptc extension , in isolation of other market factors , may not result in ever - larger levels of wind deployment .

other important factors for project development include state renewable portfolio standards , electricity demand growth , and natural gas prices .

each of these factors is discussed in more detail below .

the following sections provide some background on how a ptc extension might impact u.s. wind project installations and manufacturing .

a brief discussion of the potential impact of a short - term versus long - term ptc extension is also provided .

as briefly discussed above , availability of the federal production tax credit is one of several factors that impact the amount of wind development and deployment in the united states .

generally , state - level renewable portfolio standards ( rps ) create a source of demand for wind projects .

overall u.s. electricity demand growth is also an important factor as it determines the total addressable market that wind projects can target .

low natural gas prices can create economic competitiveness pressure for wind projects but high natural gas prices can result in additional opportunities for the wind sector .

while not an all - inclusive list of factors that affect wind development , the factors addressed below do represent some of the critical non - ptc factors that influence the u.s. wind industry .

the following sections provide additional details about each factor .

the 112 th congress may decide if the ptc incentive for wind electricity will be extended , modified , or terminated .

during the congressional debate about the future of the wind ptc incentive , congress may consider various policy options , including those discussed below .

absent congressional action , the ptc incentive for wind electricity projects will no longer be available for new installations placed in service after january 1 , 2013 .

some market projections suggest that annual wind capacity additions will decline precipitously if the ptc expires ( see figure 2 ) .

as a result , wind - related manufacturing and project development employment would decline as well .

allowing the ptc to expire may motivate wind equipment manufacturers and developers to take certain actions ( eg , maximize turbine performance , minimize manufacturing costs ) necessary to make wind electricity more broadly competitive on an unsubsidized basis .

these actions could potentially result in a stronger and more robust , although possibly smaller , wind industry that can compete directly with all sources of power generation .

however if state rps policies remain as - is and low natural gas prices persist , a prolonged industry contraction could limit the ability of the wind industry to respond once , and if , market conditions change .

congress might also consider extending the ptc incentive .

some market estimates indicate that a ptc extension would result in increasing u.s. wind capacity installations , when compared with allowing the ptc to expire — but at levels less than those observed since 2009 and less than current u.s. wind turbine manufacturing capacity ( see figure 2 ) .

determining the duration of a possible ptc extension is also an important policy consideration .

generally , the shorter the extension the more near - term wind market activity that may be stimulated since project developers are motivated to install new capacity in order to qualify for ptc incentives .

however , depending on the timing of an extension , a one - year extension may have limited impact due to 12-18 month wind project development lead times .

also , as discussed above , the near - term market stimulation that might result from a ptc extension may accelerate wind development at the expense of future - year rps - driven demand .

a permanent ptc may not stimulate near - term wind development activity since there would likely be less motivation to accelerate projects in order qualify for federal tax incentives ( see figure 3 ) .

however , in a market where natural gas prices are rising , a permanent ptc could potentially stimulate wind electricity demand that might not otherwise occur .

some bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress that would extend the availability of the ptc incentive for wind electricity projects .

table 1 includes four bills that have been introduced and compares the duration of the ptc extension under each proposal .

another policy option that has been discussed during the 112 th congress is the possibility of an extension that phases out the ptc incentive over time .

the basic concept of a ptc phase - out is to gradually reduce the value of the incentive over time in order to provide the industry a degree of certainty and a motivation to improve cost and performance efficiencies in order to become price competitive without the ptc .

the design of a ptc phase - out policy could potentially be difficult because , in order to stimulate u.s. wind development , the rate at which the ptc is reduced may need to be offset by , or aligned to changes in , other market factors ( eg , higher natural gas prices , more stringent state rps policies , increased u.s. electricity demand ) .

these other market factors will likely be beyond the scope of control of the ptc phase - out policy .

an alternative approach may be a dynamic ptc phase - out design that requires a minimum ptc incentive reduction annually but could also be adjusted based on other market conditions ( eg , natural gas prices , system costs , technology improvements ) .

implementation of a dynamic ptc phase - out could potentially be complicated as well and the policy would need to be designed in such a way to motivate the industry to continue cost reduction and technology improvement initiatives .

the family and business tax cut certainty act of 2012 ( s. 3521 ) passed a senate finance committee vote and was reported to the senate on august 28 , 2012 .

among a number of tax - related provisions and extensions , s. 3521 includes language that extends the availability of production tax credits for wind facilities until january 1 , 2014 .

the bill also modifies the definition of a qualified facility by allowing projects that start construction by january 1 , 2014 , to qualify for ptc incentives .

this modification could be viewed as important to wind projects as it alleviates investment and development pressures that might result from having to place new projects into service by the end of 2013 .

precedent for using a start - of - construction deadline for tax incentives includes the section 1603 cash grant program administered by the u.s. treasury .

as part of the section 1603 program , projects could qualify for the cash grant by starting construction before a certain date , but the project must be placed into service before the underlying tax credit for each respective technology expired .

the wind ptc extension and modification outlined in s. 3521 enables projects to qualify for the ptc if construction begins before january 1 , 2014 ; however , there is no requirement for the qualified project to be placed in service by a certain date .

by not having a placed - in - service deadline , projects would have the flexibility to complete construction based on their optimal completion schedules .

on the other hand , including a placed - in - service deadline as part of a ptc extension could potentially result in stimulating manufacturing and construction activity required to receive ptc incentives .

