private individuals and firms , often called "contractors" and "subcontractors," have transported mail between postal facilities since at least 1792 ( 1 stat .

233 ) , and according to the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) , contractors have delivered mail to homes and businesses since 1900 .

today , contractors transport mail between postal facilities via land , air , water , and rail .

one type of land ( i.e. , "surface" ) mail transportation contract is the "highway contract route" ( hcr ) .

hcr contracts come in three subtypes .

"transportation" contracts have private "suppliers" transport mail between postal facilities .

"combination" contracts require suppliers to make a small number of mail deliveries in the course of transporting mail between the usps's facilities .

"contract delivery service" ( cds ) contracts compensate suppliers for collecting and delivering mail in rural areas .

this latter subtype of contract became the focus of controversy in 2007 .

in november 2010 , the nrlca - usps collective bargaining agreement expired .

a year later , the nalc - usps contract expired .

whether the mail contracting mous remain in force is unclear .

the usps and the two unions had negotiations and entered mediation .

unable to settle their differences , the parties went to binding arbitration .

the usps and the nrlca completed binding arbitration in july 2012 .

the previous collective bargaining agreement's language regarding the hiring of private contractors to deliver mail was not altered , leaving it unclear whether the usps and nrlca have come to a working agreement on this particular issue .

the usps and the nalc entered binding arbitration in june 2012 .

arbitration of the usps - nalc agreement likely will be completed in the coming months .

the postal reorganization act of 1970 ( pra ; p.l .

91-375 ; 84 stat .

725 ) replaced the u.s. post office department with the usps , an independent establishment of the executive branch ( 39 u.s.c .

201 ) .

the pra requires the usps to "maintain an efficient system of collection , sorting , and delivery of the mail nationwide" ( 39 u.s.c .

403 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) .

to this end , the pra provides the usps with considerable discretion over its operations .

39 u.s.c .

5005 authorizes the usps to "obtain mail transportation service ... by contract from any person or carrier for surface and water transportation under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate. .

additionally , congress provided the usps with the authorities to ( 1 ) "enter into and perform contracts" ( 39 u.s.c .

401 ) ; ( 2 ) "provide for the collection , handling , transportation , delivery , forwarding , returning , and holding of mail" ( 39 u.s.c .

404 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) ; and ( 3 ) "establish mail routes and authorize mail transportation service thereon" ( 39 u.s.c .

5203 ( a ) ) .

however , the pra also carries provisions relating to usps employee compensation .

for one , the pra sets a compensation and benefits floor: it shall be the policy of the postal service to maintain compensation and benefits for all officers and employees on a standard of comparability to the compensation and benefits paid for comparable levels of work in the private sector of the economy ( 39 u.s.c .

1003 ( a ) ) .

additionally , letter carriers are civil servants and , under the pra , are entitled to wages established through contracts collectively bargained by the usps and postal unions ( 39 u.s.c .

1001 ( b ) and 39 u.s.c .

1201 et seq. ) .

the nalc has contended that the usps's use of cds carriers instead of usps mail carriers "violates the spirit of the nation's basic postal law. .

using contractors , the union has said , circumvents the collective bargaining process and opens the door for the usps to replace all career mail carriers with contractors .

hence , the pra's provisions regarding the usps's authority to contract and operate an "efficient" system of mail may be at tension with the statute's provision on usps employee compensation .

between 1998 and 2012 , the number of carrier routes served by cds carriers increased from 5,424 to 9,991 , or 84.2% ( table 1 ) .

similarly , over the past 15 years the number of delivery points served by cds carriers has increased from 1,828,257 to 2,680,140 , or 46.6% ( table 3 ) .

however , throughout this period , the usps career city and rural carriers delivered mail on the vast majority of postal carrier routes — not less than 95.6% ( table 2 ) .

city and rural carriers also have served at least 98% of the nation's delivery points ( table 4 ) .

thus , although the usps has increased its use of cds carriers to deliver mail , these contractors serve on 4.4% of all routes and deliver mail at 2% of all delivery points .

additionally , the data show a shift between the portions of the total routes and deliveries handled by city and rural letter carriers .

the percentage of routes served by rural carriers has grown from 26.5% to 32.4% , while the percentage of routes served by city carriers has declined from 71.2% to 63.2% .

additionally , the percentage of delivery points served by rural carriers has increased from 25.4% to 30.7% ; whereas the percentage of delivery points served by city carriers has decreased from 73.0% to 67.3% .

current postal law requires the usps to operate an "efficient" system of mail and provides the usps with various authorities to achieve this objective .

however , the law also sets a pay and compensation floor for usps employees and requires the usps to collectively bargain with its employees .

these aspects of postal law come into conflict in the matter of the usps using private persons or firms to deliver mail .

the data above indicate that the usps has increased its use of contractors over the past 15 years .

yet , the data also indicate that contractors serve only a very small percentage of carrier routes and deliver to very few homes and businesses .

whether the use of private persons and firms to deliver mail will arise as an issue of interest to congress is unclear .

the usps , nalc , and nrlca may settle the matter through arbitration and ensuing memoranda of understanding .

in the event that the use of contractors cannot be settled through the parties themselves , there are at least two broad perspectives that might be taken on the situation .

first , it might be argued that congress should take no action .

historically , congress has not enacted specific policies concerning the extent of the usps's use of contractors to deliver mail .

it has left the matter to be decided by the postal service and its letter carrier unions through collective bargaining and the grievance process .

congress may continue this practice , reasoning that the usps has legitimate grounds to pursue cost - savings via the use of contractors .

indeed , it might be further contended that the use of contractors to deliver mail is in keeping with long - time usps practices .

contractors have been used to collect , transport , sort , and deliver mail ; and machines built by private firms do much of the mail sorting work once performed by usps employees .

letter carriage would not appear to be an inherently governmental function under current procurement policy , so the usps should be free to outsource this work as it deems proper .

second and alternately , congress may choose to intervene , viewing the issue as involving an unintended conflict arising out of two national policies — usps operational efficiency and the rights of unionized , federal employees .

from this perspective , it could be argued that the usps is supposed to be a self - supporting agency ; but that does not necessitate that the usps should be permitted to outsource however much postal work it chooses .

it might be further argued that there is a positive societal benefit in the federal government hiring individuals ( often minorities and veterans ) and compensating them well .

thus , congress might either ban the practice of using contractors to deliver mail ( or perform other mail - movement activities ) ; or it could limit the amount of mail delivery work performed by contractors — perhaps by capping the percentage of routes served by non - usps employees .

were congress either to ban or limit the use of contractors , it might wish to consider helping the usps recoup any lost savings by providing it with additional authorities to increase its revenues or decrease its operating costs .

