the united nations ( u.n. ) conference on sustainable development ( uncsd or "rio+20" ) will convene june 20-22 , 2012 , in rio de janeiro , brazil .

this conference marks the 20 th anniversary of the u.n. conference on environment and development ( unced ) in rio in 1992 and the 10 th anniversary of the world summit on sustainable development ( wssd ) in johannesburg , south africa .

as many as 115 heads of state may attend , with up to 50,000 other participants .

rio+20 organizers seek three objectives: securing renewed political commitment to sustainable development , assessing the progress and implementation gaps in meeting already agreed commitments , and addressing new and emerging challenges .

no legally binding agreements are expected to be made at the meeting .

government delegations may agree to a process to identify new sustainable development goals ( sdgs ) .

in addition , reform of international environmental institutions is on the conference agenda , with a focus on the u.n. commission on sustainable development and the u.n .

environment program ( unep ) .

in 1992 , governments attending the "rio" conference ( formally called the united nations conference on environment and development or unced ) politically endorsed the objective of "sustainable development" — achieving economic , environmental , and social development that "meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs . .

high - level government representatives produced a political declaration , agenda 21 , and a statement of forest principles — none of which contain legally binding commitments .

agenda 21 led to establishment of the u.n. commission on sustainable development , under the u.n. economic and social council , as well as creation of national commissions on sustainable development in many countries , including the united states .

the rio meeting also opened for signature two treaties: the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) and the united nations framework convention on biological diversity ( cbd ) .

this report summarizes the objectives and major issues of rio+20 and gives a sampling of the wide diversity of views to be discussed by government officials ; non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) ; business leaders and trade associations ; and representatives of youth , women , land - locked countries , cities , researchers , artisans , farmers , and many , many others who will be present at rio+20 .

it also outlines united states policy toward the conference and possible issues for congressional consideration , including possible action on conference outcomes , the role of agenda 21 , and , more broadly , the possible role of sustainable development in the united states and u.s. foreign policy .

few members of congress or their staffs are expected to attend rio+20 .

many experts anticipate no legally binding or immediately consequential outcomes from the conference and some might question the relevance of the conference to congress .

nonetheless , it is possible that some elements of any communique may serve u.s. national interests and foreign policy .

these may merit examination through briefings or hearings .

members of congress may find it useful to be apprised of the active discussion occurring mostly outside the united states on sustainable development .

background documents prepared for rio+20 , including the global environmental outlook , may provide data and descriptions of circumstances and policies in other countries that may be useful to congressional decision - making .

there may be additional issues for congress related to rio+20 that merit attention or communication with constituents .

for example , there may be differences of view between the federal executive and legislative branches of the united states on sustainable development and implementation of its principles .

also , some segments of the u.s. population have expressed suspicion and opposition to what they perceive sustainable development to be , and particularly about its potential impact on national sovereignty ; some may query their members' offices .

some have offered their concerns about agenda 21 ( see adjoining box ) , which is likely to be referenced in the 2012 conference .

more broadly , there is some debate regarding the role of sustainable development in the united states .

for much of the world , the striving for sustainable development is of central economic , social , and environmental importance .

in the united states , there is lack of accord on the intersection among economic , social , and environmental policies .

almost any topic containing "sustainable" or "green" may elicit controversy in the united states .

dialogue in congress on the concepts behind them may provide constructive opportunities for identifying common ground .

over the past decade , many stakeholders have grown increasingly impatient with , and resistant to , "top - down" decision - making by national governments and international entities .

international processes have witnessed a shift toward greater inclusion of and decision - making by civil society , local communities , and the private sector .

this movement seems welcomed by a large majority of rio+20 participants .

the broad inclusiveness of the conference may produce outputs that more resemble a cacophony of messages than an orchestrated plan with broad consensus .

like many international documents on issues that are complex , the output may offer length and ambiguity rather than clarity and consensus .

rio+20 is premised on analysis showing that the objectives of sustainable development of the 1992 rio conference have not been achieved .

the fifth global environmental outlook ( geo - 5 , see section below ) concluded in early june 2012 that significant progress has been made on only 4 of 90 assessed , internationally agreed goals associated with sustainable development .

nonetheless , the rio+20 website indicates that "[g]overnments are expected to adopt clear and focused practical measures for implementing sustainable development , based on the many examples of success we have seen over the last 20 years. .

for optimistic observers , "the second earth summit is a chance to take honest stock of the situation and present ways to break political deadlock and hasten progress on the ground , in the air and in the oceans. .

others see the process in a stalemate that leaders in rio are unlikely to resolve , and call for wholesale , perhaps radical , change .

among the jaded , one observer commented that "the united nations seems to be more concerned about the number of paragraphs agreed upon than about concepts. .

rio+20 includes three days of public meetings ( sustainable development dialogues ) , followed by three days of meetings among diplomatic delegations from 193 nations , including many heads of state .

governments outlined three overall objectives for the conference: 1. securing a renewed political commitment for sustainable development ; 2. assessing progress and remaining gaps in implementation of sustainable development efforts ; and 3. addressing new and emerging challenges .

as part of these objectives , governments are expected to assess the implementation of international environmental agreements , such as the kyoto protocol under the u.n .

framework agreement on climate change ( unfccc ) , and the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) , a set of eight internationally agreed - to development goals created in 2000 .

many participants and observers hope that rio+20 outcomes will address the rio+20 objectives in a communique from high level officials , which may contain agreement to a process to produce new sustainable development goals , and affirmation of — and a framework for action to implement — internationally agreed goals .

the draft communique , entitled the future we want , is eclectic and sweeping , like the background reports and side meetings .

as of the beginning of the third and last preparatory committee , only one - quarter of the draft text had been agreed and was "unbracketed" ( i.e. , does not contain proposed alternative language ) .

tens of pages , however , had been eliminated from earlier drafts .

delegations will likely continue previous differences over proposals to create a new global environment agency , "strengthen" financing , enhance technology transfer , and increase capacity in nations .

in addition , the rio+20 conference process includes collection of voluntarily submitted commitments to action from all stakeholders .

the u.n. established a registry for such commitments .

the preparatory committees identified two main themes: the green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication ; and the institutional framework for sustainable development ( ifsd ) .

rio+20 may launch a new process to develop sustainable development goals to succeed and extend the mdgs ( appendix b ) .

some participants propose that sdgs could provide a framework for work toward sustainable development beyond 2015 .

many ideas put forward for individual sdgs would expand the scope of the mdgs , and there remains little agreement on specific language .

moreover , views differ on whether the sdgs would be applicable to all countries and applicable uniformly , or whether there would be differentiation among categories of countries .

the wealthier countries emphasize the growing importance of rapidly developing economies , and that the choices made in developing countries will have greatest effect on people and the global environment .

lower - income countries point to the greater capacities of the wealthier economies and argue that they must take on greater responsibilities and augment assistance to lower - income countries .

if there is agreement to create sdgs , there are at least three remaining areas of contention: integration : there remain differences of views on how the three "pillars" of sustainable development — social , economic , and environmental — might be integrated in the sdgs .

some participants have expressed concerns that social and economic priorities may not receive sufficient emphasis in sdgs , and some observers have expressed concern that sdgs risk evolving into a distinct track parallel to a post - mdg path .

others suggest that sdgs and post - 2015 mdgs would be complementary .

process : the process by which sdgs may be developed remains unresolved as well .

g - 77 countries prefer that it be "inter - governmental" without oversight by the general assembly or the secretary - general , as was done for the mdgs .

others contend that a process would need guidance from some office or agency , with the secretary general's office as the most likely contender , under the general assembly .

priorities : while delegations appear to generally agree that priorities should be set among emergent sdgs , they diverge on what the priority areas should be .

the united states , for example , has opposed inclusion of "equity" and "sustainable production and consumption" in a priority list .

of all the proposals , only two sdgs were agreed to ad referendum by government delegations in the early june preparatory meeting: sdg 1 .

we underscore that the mdgs are a useful tool in focusing achievement of specific development gains as part of a broad development vision and framework for the development activities of the united nations , for national priority setting and for mobilisation of stakeholders and resources towards common goals .

we therefore remain firmly committed to their full and timely achievement .

sdg 2 .

we recognize that the development of goals could also be useful for pursuing focused and coherent action on sustainable development .

we further recognize the importance and utility of a set of sustainable development goals , which are based on agenda 21 and jpoi [johannesburg plan of implementation] , fully respect the rio principles , in particular common but differentiated responsibilities , build upon commitments already made , respect international law and contribute to the full implementation of the outcomes of all major summits in economic , social and environmental fields , taking into account that these goals should ensure a holistic coherence with the goals set out in agenda 21 .

these goals should address and incorporate in a balanced way all three dimensions of sustainable development and their inter - linkages .

these goals should be incorporated and integrated in the united nations development agenda beyond 2015 , thus contributing to the achievement of sustainable development and serving as a driver for implementation and mainstreaming of sustainable development in the united nations system as a whole .

the development of these goals should not divert focus or effort from the achievement of the millennium development goals .

one of the key background documents for rio+20 is the fifth global environmental outlook ( geo - 5 ) , prepared under unep .

its "summary for policymakers" was negotiated and endorsed by many governments , including the united states , in january 2012 .

it concludes that , despite moderate successes in some areas on some environmental problems , neither the scope nor speed of adverse environmental changes worldwide has decreased over the past five years .

geo - 5 identified 4 of 90 internationally agreed goals related to sustainable development on which significant progress has been made .

some progress has been made on 40 goals , such as reducing rates of deforestation and expanding protected areas .

little progress has occurred for others , such as abating human - induced climate change , preventing desertification , and maintaining fish stocks .

the report observed deterioration for 8 goals , such as protecting coral reefs .

geo - 5 raises many unresolved challenges of degrading "natural capital," on which the productivity of economies and human well - being depend .

geo - 5 reports that statistics show deteriorating air quality and rising concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere ; depleting groundwater reservoirs ; eutrophying coastal waters and acidifying ocean waters ; losses of vertebrate biodiversity of up to 30% in some areas with thousands more species at risk ; declining reporting on hazardous wastes ; and other problems .

many of these problems are most acute in rapidly developing but low - income countries that may lack adequate financial , institutional , and technical capacity to address them .

many of these problems also flow across national boundaries .

in addition , geo - 5 urges more reliable and systematic monitoring by nations of their environments and of related economic , social , and environmental processes , in order to inform decision - making .

it stresses the importance of improved standardization of methods and access by the public to data .

the report identifies a host of best practices by issue area .

regarding the potentially controversial topic of environmental governance , geo - 5 identifies best practices as multi - level / multi - stakeholder participation ; increased introduction of the principle of subsidiarity ; governance at local levels ; policy synergy and removal of conflict ; strategic environmental assessment ; accounting systems that value natural capital and ecosystem services ; improved access to information , public participation and environmental justice ; capacity strengthening of all actors ; improved goal setting and monitoring systems .

to illustrate how u.s. interests , and therefore congressional interests , relate to the rio+20 event and negotiations , this section discusses the u.s. interest in sustainable development and security issues related to freshwater in the international context .

water has played a prominent role in the dialogue leading up to rio+20 .

while freshwater is not the focus of rio+20 or other recent international negotiations ( eg , the climate change negotiations in durban , south africa , in 2011 ) , the natural resource management challenge of water and attention to water's role in achieving poverty , health , and climate objectives is generating water - related discussions at u.n. conferences .

water was selected as a priority issue in all the geo - 5 scoping consultations ( see "water in geo - 5" box for assessment of progress on water indicators ) .

international freshwater issues are receiving rising attention in the united states and elsewhere as a security issue .

although the argument that water and other environmental conditions can contribute to either improving or deteriorating community safety and political stability is not a new concept , attention to and analysis of the global water situation , its stressors , and linkages to other sectors is growing rapidly .

a february 2012 intelligence community assessment of global water security illustrates the rising view of water as critical not only to public or environmental health but also to political stability , food and energy supplies , and climate change mitigation and adaptation .

specifically , the report warns that water is anticipated to increasingly contribute to instability in nations important to u.s. national security interests .

consequently , some u.s. decision makers and stakeholders are evaluating what actions and opportunities are available for influencing the future role of water in fostering improved international security .

rio+20 is seen by some stakeholders as one such opportunity .

in preparation for rio+20 , conference organizers distributed for discussion a "zero draft" of the communique .

no legally binding commitments are expected in the version high - level officials may adopt .

the portion of the draft specific to water reiterated the right to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right .

this aim would be consistent with the 2010 united nations human rights declaration by the u.n. general assembly on access to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right essential to the full enjoyment of life and all other human rights .

the zero draft also supported "the necessity of setting goals for wastewater management" and proposed renewed commitment to integrated water resources management and water efficiency plans .

these would be encouraged through capacity development ; exchange of experiences , best practices , and lessons learned ; and sharing appropriate environmentally sound technologies and know - how .

in addition to the language in the zero draft , there were proposals for specific water targets and water - related discussion in other background and advocacy documents ( eg , how to meet and manage water use and promote water use efficiency in both agriculture and in energy development , water's role in natural disasters and resiliency to disasters and climate change , emerging water quality concerns ) .

as previously noted , rio+20 could launch a process to develop sustainable development goals by 2015 .

these may supplement or replace the current mdgs ; like the mdgs they would almost certainly be non - binding .

among the eight current mdgs ( appendix b ) , the one to "ensure environmental sustainability" includes the target to "[h]alve , by 2015 , the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. .

one proposal in the sdg discussion would elevate water to its own goal─"safe drinking water and sanitation for all," rather than water as a quantifiable target within a broader goal .

some proposals would give more attention to sanitation given the slow progress on it under the mdgs .

the united states provided a submission of its views on november 1 , 2011 , entitled sustainable development for the next twenty years .

it identifies three "key messages" that guide the u.s. approach to rio+20: 1 .

the built environment: clean energy and urbanization , addressing clean energy , new infrastructure , and access for all ; urbanization and sustainable cities ; water systems ; sustainable manufacturing and environmental goods and services ; and human capacity and green jobs .

2 .

the natural environment: ecosystem management and rural development , comprised of food security and sustainable agriculture ; oceans , coasts , and fisheries ; and ecosystem services and natural resource management .

3 .

the institutional environment: modernizing global competition , including making new connections: linking governments , communities , and businesses for action ; transforming traditional institutions ; strengthening international environmental governance ; and informing decisions , catalyzing action , and measuring progress .

no comprehensive statement is available of how this u.s. vision translates into positions on specific elements of the rio+20 proposals .

still , some views may be distilled from statements .

as examples , the united states agrees with strengthening international environmental institutions , but opposes adding a council on sustainable development to the u.n. architecture or making unep a specialized agency of the united nations ; views the transfer of technology as outside the scope of sustainable development commitments ; opposes discussion of intellectual property rights ; opposes a call for a new agreement to protect biodiversity in the marine environment in the high seas ( i.e. , outside of national jurisdictions ) ; opposes proposals for significant new funding for sustainable development ; encourages actions toward sustainable development by stakeholders , especially women and youth ; seeks greater emphasis globally on transparency and public awareness of corporate and governmental performance on environmental responsibilities , facilitated by new communication technologies ; and resists commitments related to climate change or other issues addressed in other fora .

appendix a. timeline of environment and development discussions appendix b .

the millennium development goals ( 2000 ) on september 8 , 2000 , the united nations general assembly adopted the united nations millennium declaration ( a / res / 55 / 2 ) .

among other aspects of the declaration , the general assembly adopted what are commonly called the eight millennium development goals ( mdgs ) , most to be achieved by 2015 .

the mdgs are aspirational and not legally binding .

the goals and their respective targets are described below .

eradicate extreme hunger and poverty 1 .

reduce by half the proportion of people living on less than a dollar a day ; 2 .

achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all , including women and young people ; 3 .

reduce by half the proportion of people who suffer from hunger .

achieve universal primary education 1 .

ensure that , by the same date , children everywhere , boys and girls alike , will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling and that girls and boys will have equal access to all levels of education .

promote gender equality and empower women 1 .

eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 , and at all levels by 2015 .

reduce child mortality 1 .

reduce by two - thirds the mortality rate among children under age five .

improve maternal health 1 .

reduce by three - quarters the maternal mortality ratio .

combat hiv / aids , malaria , and other diseases 1 .

halt and begin to reverse the spread of hiv / aids ; 2 .

achieve , by 2010 , universal access to treatment for hiv / aids for all those who need it ; 3 .

halt and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases .

ensure environmental sustainability 1 .

integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs ; reverse loss of environmental resources ; 2 .

reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation ; 3 .

achieve significant improvement in lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers , by 2020 .

develop a global partnership for development 1 .

develop further an open , rule - based , predictable , non - discriminatory trading and financial system ; 2 .

address the special needs of landlocked developing countries and small island developing states ; 3 .

deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries ; 4 .

in cooperation with pharmaceutical companies , provide access to affordable essential drugs in developing countries ; 5 .

in cooperation with the private sector , make available the benefits of new technologies , especially information and communications .

