on january 13 , 2012 , president obama asked congress for authority to reorganize and consolidate into one department the business - and trade - related functions and programs of six federal entities: department of commerce ; export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) ; overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) ; small business administration ( sba ) ; trade and development agency ( tda ) ; and office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) .

u.s. policy interest in the organizational structure of u.s. government trade functions has grown in recent years , stimulated by congressional and federal efforts to promote u.s. exports and employment , including through the national export initiative ( nei ) , in response to the global and u.s. economic downturn ; concerns about the international competitive position of u.s. industries vis - à - vis emerging markets , such as china , brazil , and india ; efforts to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of government service by reducing duplication of functions and improving coordination ; national debates on reducing federal spending and the size of the u.s. government ; and concerns about the size of the u.s. trade balance .

members of congress would play a significant role in a trade reorganization debate through their legislative and oversight responsibilities .

congress could conduct oversight , engage in consultations with the administration , hold hearings , grant reorganizational authority to the president , introduce and enact trade reorganization legislation separate from the president's plan , and / or consider other policy alternatives .

this report discusses: ( 1 ) president obama's trade reorganization proposal ; ( 2 ) the context of the trade reorganization debate ; ( 3 ) key issues that congress may face related to the debate ; ( 4 ) potential policy options for congress ; and ( 5 ) the outlook for trade reorganization .

this report focuses on the substantive aspect of the trade reorganization debate .

for a discussion of the reorganization authority that the president has requested from congress , see crs report r42852 , presidential reorganization authority: history , recent initiatives , and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

for a detailed discussion of key federal agencies with trade functions , see crs report r41495 , u.s. government agencies involved in export promotion: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

separately , president obama also has launched a comprehensive review of the u.s. export control system and has proposed changes to the organizational structure for the export control system .

this issue is beyond the scope of this report .

see crs report r41916 , the u.s .

export control system and the president's reform initiative , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

in the 2011 state of the union address , president obama advocated the need to reorganize the federal government to ensure that it is "more competent and more efficient. .

along those lines , the president noted that there are multiple federal agencies that have export - related functions .

on march 11 , 2011 , the president issued a memorandum directing the office of management and budget ( omb ) to conduct a review of federal agencies and programs "involved in trade and competitiveness , including analyzing their scope and effectiveness , areas of overlap and duplication , unmet needs , and possible cost savings" and to submit recommendations on reorganizing and streamlining federal government functions in these areas .

omb's recommendations to the president have not been publicly released to date .

on january 13 , 2012 , president obama asked congress for authority to reorganize and consolidate the business - and trade - related functions of six federal agencies into one department: the commerce department , the ex - im bank , opic , sba , tda , and ustr ( see the textbox for an overview of these agencies ) .

the reorganization authority requested by the president is currently dormant .

this authority , which was available to presidents periodically between 1932 and 1984 , would allow the president to present reorganization plans to congress under an expedited process .

on february 16 , 2012 , president obama sent draft legislation , entitled the reforming and consolidating government act of 2012 , to congress that would give him the authority to reorganize and consolidate the federal government .

the legislation , introduced as s. 2129 ( lieberman ) on february 17 , 2012 , would reinstate authority granted to past presidents to reorganize the executive branch .

a similar bill was introduced in the house ( h.r .

4409 , barrow ) on april 19 , 2012 .

president obama reiterated his trade reorganization proposal in his fy2014 budget request .

he may resubmit his request for reorganizational authority in the 113 th congress .

the administration's stated intention for the proposed new department is to streamline trade negotiation , financing , promotion , and enforcement functions .

the new department reportedly would be organized into four "pillars": ( 1 ) trade and investment functions ; ( 2 ) small business and economic development ; ( 3 ) technology and innovation ; and ( 4 ) economic statistics .

elements of the commerce department not associated with these four pillars could be transferred to other agencies .

for example , functions of national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , currently in the commerce department , could be transferred to the department of the interior .

according to press reports , the ustr would maintain cabinet - level status , but would report to the secretary of the newly created department .

omb reportedly projects that the new department would save $3 billion over the next 10 years and eliminate between 1,000 to 2,000 full - time equivalent jobs by attrition over a couple of years .

the president's fy2014 budget request for the six agencies in the proposed reorganization reflects the current organizational structure of u.s. trade functions .

table 1 provides the budget information for these six agencies , which may offer a sense of the scope of the proposed reorganization .

trade reorganization raises a number of issues for congress .

this section first discusses the general debate about the reorganization , and then analyzes specific issues raised by president obama's trade reorganization proposal .

congress may ultimately examine several different policy options on trade reorganization , as discussed below .

although president obama has reiterated his proposal for trade reorganization in the fy2014 budget request , the outlook for trade reorganization is unclear .

whether or not , and to what degree , trade reorganization action is taken in the 113 th congress may depend on a range of factors .

catalysts for trade reorganization include the continued u.s. policy focus on export promotion and emphasis on smaller government and cost - savings measures .

it is worth noting that reorganizations of other parts of the executive branch have happened in response to major crises or events , such as the post - 9 / 11 creation of the department of homeland security .

in the case of trade reorganization , it is difficult to tell to what extent the dynamics of the u.s. economy or other factors could make a compelling argument for trade reorganization .

at the same time , there may be a number of potential impediments to trade reorganization .

jurisdiction of federal government agencies involved in export promotion , for example , is spread across multiple congressional committees .

some observers predict that congressional committees "will be reluctant to agree to such changes due to concerns about an impact on their jurisdiction. .

in cases where the administration cannot act alone to reorganize elements of federal trade functions , merging new agencies may require legislation .

efforts to reorganize federal government agencies also may spur turf battles among federal agencies and complicate the ability to reach interagency consensus .

in addition , certain stakeholders , such as small business or agricultural producers , may express concern about the impact of reorganization on their special interests .

furthermore , the feasibility of trade reorganization , particularly through any proposal that includes ustr , may be questioned in light of the major u.s. trade agreement negotiations currently underway , such as the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) fta , or that are proposed , such as the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) fta .

potential trade reorganization raises questions about the interagency process for trade policymaking , trade promotion , and other trade functions .

in the event that some form of trade reorganization advances , a need for interagency coordination likely would remain , given the range of federal government agencies that conduct trade functions and that are not included in the current proposal .

acronyms summary of legislative proposals on trade reorganization , select congresses the early 1980s , during the reagan administration , and the mid - 1990s , during the clinton administration , were two particularly active periods of debate on trade reorganization .

during these time periods , congress considered several legislative proposals to reorganize the federal government's trade functions .

what follows is a discussion of the some of the legislative proposals introduced during these periods 96 th congress the international trade and investment reorganization act ( s. 377 ) , introduced on february 7 , 1979 , and referred to the senate committee on governmental affairs , would have established a department of international trade and investment by absorbing the office of the special trade representative ( now the ustr ) ; placing the trade and foreign investment functions of the departments of commerce , state , and the treasury in the new department ; and transferring the functions of the export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) and overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) to the new department .

98 th congress in 1983 , the reagan administration proposed the consolidation of the ustr and the trade - related functions of the department of commerce and other agencies .

the primary legislative vehicle for the administration's proposal was the department of international trade and industry act of 1983 ( s. 121 ) and its companion bill ( h.r .

2288 ) .

this legislative initiative would have created the united states trade administration ( usta ) , headed by a u.s. trade representative .

the bill would have transferred the functions of the ustr to the usta .

it also would have transferred the trade - related functions of the department of commerce to the new department , including the international trade administration ( ita ) , the u.s. and foreign commercial service , international economic policy , trade development , the export administration , the import administration , and the national telecommunication and information administration .

in addition , the bill would have transferred the functions of the ex - im bank , opic , and tda to the newly created usta .

some reorganization proposals considered in congress include agencies whose primary functions extended beyond trade .

for example , the department of trade and commerce act of 1983 ( s. 21 ) and its companion bill ( h.r .

1202 ) , which would have renamed the department of commerce as the department of trade and commerce , would have consolidated trade functions from an expansive range of federal agencies in the proposed new department: ustr ; departments of defense ( export of strategic materials ) , energy ( trade in energy and energy - producing materials ) , labor ( trade adjustment assistance ) , state ( international trade and investment functions ) , the treasury ( international trade and investment functions ) , transportation ( transportation systems and equipment ) , and agriculture ( export of agricultural products ) ; and sba ( export financing for small businesses ) .

the bill also would have transferred to the new department all functions of the ex - im bank , opic , trade and development program of the international development cooperation agency , u.s. customs service of the treasury department , and international trade functions of the u.s. international trade commission .

the trade reorganization act of 1983 ( h.r .

4432 ) was introduced on november 16 , 1983 in the house .

the bill would have created a department of commerce and trade that would have resembled s. 121 , with some differences , notably the creation of an office of industrial policy and an industrial competitiveness council .

104 th congress h.r .

1756 , the department of commerce dismantling act , would have eliminated the department of commerce by terminating certain functions and transferring others to existing agencies .

the bill would have eliminated the ita and transferred the import administration and the foreign component of the u.s. and foreign commercial service to the ustr .

the domestic component of the commercial service would have been eliminated , as would the other international economic policy and trade development functions of the ita .

the bill also would have eliminated the bureau of export administration ( bxa ) , transferred bxa's export licensing functions to the state department , and transferred the bxa's export enforcement functions to customs .

in addition , h.r .

1756 would have terminated certain other functions of the commerce department and transferred others to existing agencies .

the bill would have terminated commerce's administrative functions , the economic development administration , the minority business development agency ( mbda ) , the united states travel and tourism administration ( ustta ) , and industrial technology programs .

it would have transferred the weight and measure functions of the national institute for standards and technology ( nist ) to the national science foundation ( nsf ) .

it would have terminated the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) and transferred its functions to the federal trade commission ( ftc ) .

it would have transferred the patent and trademark office ( pto ) to the department of justice .

it would have eliminated the economic and statistics administration ( esa ) , transferred the bureau of the census to the treasury department , and transferred the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) to the federal reserve system .

it would have transferred many of the functions of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) to several different federal agencies .

another trade reorganization bill ( s. 929 ) was introduced in the senate on june 15 , 1995 , and referred to the senate committee on governmental affairs .

on september 7 , 1995 , the senate committee on governmental affairs reported out senator roth's substitute amendment to s. 929 , the commerce department termination and government reorganization act of 1995 .

on october 20 , 1995 , the bill was placed on senate legislative calendar under general order .

s. 929 would have abolished the department of commerce and replaced it with an independent agency , the united states trade administration ( usta ) .

s. 929 would have transferred the functions of the department of commerce ( specifically the functions of the ita ) , along with the ex - im bank , opic , tda , and ustr , to the newly created usta .

under the bill , the usta would have been headed by the ustr , who would have retained cabinet status and ambassadorial rank .

the ustr would have continued to be responsible for trade policy and negotiations , but under the bill , the ustr's responsibility also would have extended to export promotion , trade policy analysis , trade law administration , and other functions of the ita and the bxa .

s. 929 also would have terminated several of commerce's sub - agencies: ustta , eda , ntia , mbda ; national technical information service ( ntis ) ; office of the chief economist ; technology administration ; advanced technology program ; and the manufacturing extension program ( mep ) .

s. 929 would have transferred the functions of the bureau of the census and the bureau of economic analysis to the department of labor .

in addition , it would have established a bipartisan government 2000 commission to develop a comprehensive reorganization plan for the government .

on october 26 , 1995 , the house passed h.r .

2491 , the budget reconciliation bill .

title xvii , the "abolishment of department of commerce," would have required the dismantling of the department of commerce .

the bill incorporated provisions from h.r .

1756 .

the bill would have transferred to the ustr the functions of the ita and the bxa ; eliminated the tda and transferred its functions to the ustr ; and reestablished the office of the ustr as an independent office outside of the eop .

on october 28 , 1995 , the senate passed a different version of h.r .

2491 , which did not include the provision to dismantle the department of commerce .

the house - senate conference report on h.r .

2491 , which was agreed to on november 16 , 1995 , did not contain the commerce department dismantling provision .

the bill was vetoed by president clinton on december 6 , 1995 .

h.r .

2124 , the trade reorganization act of 1995 , was introduced on july 27 , 1995 .

it was similar to the roth substitute for s. 929 in its provisions to consolidate the functions of the ita and the bxa with the ustr , along with the tda , into a newly created united states trade administration .

in addition , the bill called for the appointment of a deputy administrator to be responsible for the trade functions transferred from the commerce department and the appointment of two deputy u.s. trade representatives , one for overall trade negotiations and one for negotiations at the wto .

in contrast to the roth amendment , h.r .

2124 would not have changed the status of the ex - im bank and opic .

key milestones in administrative and legislative action related to trade function .

