peru has had a turbulent political history , alternating between periods of democratic and authoritarian rule .

political turmoil dates back to peru's traumatic experience during the spanish conquest , which gave rise to the economic , ethnic , and geographic divisions that characterize peruvian society today .

since its independence in 1821 , peru has had 13 constitutions , with only 9 of 19 elected governments completing their terms .

peru's most recent transition to democracy occurred in 1980 after 12 years of military rule .

the decade that followed was characterized by a prolonged economic crisis and the government's unsuccessful struggle to quell a radical maoist guerrilla insurgency known as the shining path ( sendero luminoso ) .

president alan garcía's first term ( 1985-1990 ) was characterized by many observers as disastrous .

of the leftist american popular revolutionary alliance ( apra ) , garcía's antagonistic relationship with the international financial community and excessive spending on social programs led to hyperinflation ( an annual rate above 7,600% ) and a debt crisis .

by 1990 , the peruvian population was looking for a change and found it in the independent candidate alberto fujimori .

initially applauded for his aggressive economic reform program and stepped up counterinsurgency efforts , fujimori became increasingly autocratic , dissolving the legislature in 1992 , overseeing the writing of a new constitution in 1993 — which allowed him to run again , and win , in 1995 — and engaging in strong - handed military tactics to wipe out the shining path that resulted in serious human rights violations .

reelected in 2000 , fujimori's government collapsed with revelations of electoral fraud and high - level corruption , and he fled the country later that same year .

in a landmark legal case , on april 7 , 2009 , former president fujimori was convicted and sentenced to 25 years in prison for "crimes against humanity," on charges of corruption and human rights abuses .

analysts regard the court's decision as a considerable accomplishment for peru's judicial system , which has been considered weak and subject to political influence .

peru then entered a period of relative political stability , economic growth , and poverty reduction , begun by a capable interim government headed by president valentin paniagua ( november 2000 - july 2001 ) , and continued by peru's first president of indigenous descent , alejandro toledo ( 2001-2006 ) .

toledo pushed through significant reforms that increased tax collection , reduced expenditures and the budget deficit , and negotiated a free trade agreement with the united states .

softening his populist rhetoric , alan garcía launched a political comeback and won the presidential race in 2006 .

many observers cast him as "the lesser of two evils" compared to his opponent , ollanta humala , who espoused nationalist , anti - globalization policies .

garcía ( 2006-2011 ) maintained orthodox macro - economic policies .

economic growth continued under garcía , and so , too , did popular protests over the failure of that growth to improve social conditions for peru's poorest people , and over the exploitation of natural resources .

humala went on to win the presidency in 2011 .

following his unsuccessful bid for the presidency in 2006 , ollanta humala moderated his stance five years later from an extreme leftist , populist , nationalist approach allied with venezuela's president hugo chavez , to a more center - leftist approach modeled after brazil's former president luiz inacio lula da silva .

humala won the elections and was sworn in as peru's president in july 2011 for a five - year term .

he defeated keiko fujimori , a conservative member of congress and daughter of disgraced former president alberto fujimori .

in his first address as president , humala promised to maintain free - market policies while also working to narrow the wide economic distribution gap and eliminate the social exclusion of peru's poor , mostly indigenous population .

he reiterated that commitment in a speech to the peruvian congress as he completed his first year in office .

acknowledging that his government had not done all it pledged to do , humala said his goal was to cut peru's poverty by half , from 30% to 15% of the population by the end of his term in 2016 .

at the end of 2012 , about a year and a half into humala's term , the poverty rate had dropped to 26% of the population .

initially , humala's cabinet encompassed a broad range of the political spectrum , from orthodox economists to former military officers and left wing radicals pursuing a consensus - based pragmatic approach .

humala shuffled his cabinet three times in his first year , dismissing all of his top leftist advisers in a major cabinet re - shuffle in late 2011 , and consolidating a more centrist approach since then .

after he was elected , humala began negotiations with the mining sector , so that , once inaugurated , he was quickly able to propose an increase in mining royalties paid to the government .

mining companies accepted the increase as inevitable , since both presidential candidates had advocated it , and were willing to accept moderate increases in exchange for a stable set of royalty payment rules .

the peruvian congress passed the bill , which became effective in january 2012 .

the increased royalties are expected to provide an additional us$1 billion annually to the national budget to fund humala's proposed social inclusion programs and infrastructure projects .

peru's economy has been stronger than virtually all other latin american economies since 2001 .

its gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth rate averaged 8.8% from 2001 to 2008 .

during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis , peru's economy slowed to 0.9% , but was one of the few in latin america to maintain positive growth .

meeting with then - president garcía in washington in early june 2010 , president barack obama called peru an "extraordinary economic success story. .

in 2011 , peru's economy grew by 6.9% .

the economist intelligence unit estimates 6.3% gdp growth for 2012 and predicts continued strong growth of around 6% in 2013 and for the next several years .

most of peru's growth is due to the export of natural resources such as copper , gold , silver , zinc , lead , iron ore , fish , petroleum , natural gas , and lumber .

president humala has generally pursued free market , business - friendly economic policies .

nonetheless , his administration recently tried to assert a stronger state role in the economy .

his government was considering taking over the assets of a spanish oil company , repsol .

humala reportedly backed away from the effort in the face of negative pressure from his cabinet and business groups .

peru generally has friendly relations with its south american neighbors , although tensions with chile arise occasionally .

peru's congress triggered renewed tensions in 2005 when it declared new maritime borders ; chile claims that the maritime borders had been agreed to in fishing pacts signed in the early 1950s .

in 2008 the garcía administration asked the international court of justice ( icj ) in the hague to arbitrate the dispute ; the court recently heard the case , and is expected to hand down a decision this summer .

actions on both sides of the border led to tensions again in 2009 .

chile conducted multinational military exercises that rankled peru , and peru arrested a member of its air force for allegedly spying and providing classified defense information to chile .

during the presidential campaign , humala made inflammatory remarks regarding chile , demanding chile apologize to peru for assaults during the war of the pacific in 1879 and warning chile not to discriminate against peruvians residing in chile , or peru would do the same against chileans within its borders .

shortly after he was elected , however , humala traveled to chile , saying he wanted to get relations between the two countries off on a good foot .

at a meeting in may 2013 , the foreign ministers of both countries , rafael roncagliolo of peru and alfredo moreno of chile , said their countries will respect the icj's decision in the case .

the ministers also signed an agreement to work on a joint "unit for peace maintenance operations. .

peru and ecuador resolved their sometimes violent border disputes by signing a peace accord in 1998 , of which the united states was one of four guarantor states .

peru and ecuador coordinate a border integration project with u.s. and other international support .

as mentioned earlier , peru is a member of the south american regional integration organizations , can , unasur , and the pacific alliance , and an associate member of mercosur .

 ( see " socioeconomic conditions " , above. ) .

about 200 peruvian troops participate in peacekeeping operations as part of the u.n. stabilization mission in haiti .

peru and the united states have a strong and cooperative relationship .

the united states supports the strengthening of peru's democratic institutions and its respect for human rights .

the two countries also cooperate on environmental protection and counternarcotics efforts .

in the economic realm , the united states supports bilateral trade relations and peru's further integration into the world economy .

president - elect humala met with secretary of state hillary clinton and president barack obama in washington in early july 2011 .

humala said he wished to further strengthen ties between the two countries , and clinton said that "the united states stands ready to be his partner. .

presidents obama and humala met briefly at the summit of the americas on april 14 , 2012 , in cartagena , colombia .

the two presidents are scheduled to meet again on june 11 , 2013 , during president humala's first official visit to the white house .

according to the obama administration , they will discuss u.s. efforts to support the humala administration's agenda of social inclusion , broad based economic growth , and citizen security .

they will also discuss joint efforts to further trans - pacific partnership agreement negotiations , and cooperate on education , energy and climate change , science and technology , and bilateral trade .

humala will also launch partnerships with several u.s. universities during his trip , including the massachusetts institute of technology and universities in maryland , delaware , and utah .

u.s. defense secretary leon panetta met with president humala and defense minister pedro cateriano in peru on october 6 , 2012 .

the officials said the two militaries cooperate in areas including humanitarian assistance , such as joint disaster response training ; internal security ; defense reform ; u.n. peacekeeping ; and regional security , and they discussed further collaboration .

panetta said the united states was prepared to work with peru "on joint planning , information sharing [and] trilateral cooperation with colombia to address our shared security concerns in this area," and on updating their defense cooperation agreement , which dates from 1952 , to improve cooperation .

the officials also reportedly discussed peru's desire to acquire 20 u.s. helicopters , and to use counternarcotics resources for counterinsurgency efforts as well .

 ( see " counternarcotics efforts " below. ) .

according to the department of state , the goals of u.s. assistance to peru are to help it consolidate democratic rule , invest in its people , combat narcotrafficking and terrorism , and reform state institutions to improve public infrastructure and service delivery .

congress has supported these goals through appropriated funding .

nonetheless , funding for peru has been declining since at least fy2010 , when the united states provided almost $120 million in assistance to peru .

funding decreased to $97 million in fy2011 , and to $79 million in fy2012 , and requested funding for fy2013 and fy2014 continues the decline .

 ( see table 1 below. ) .

congress designated funding to peru as part of several other regional programs .

in the consolidated appropriations act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , congress stipulated that "not less than" $10 million of development assistance , and "not less than" $10 million of economic support funds shall be made available for peru , central american countries , and the dominican republic for labor and environmental capacity building activities relating to free trade agreements with the united states .

in its joint explanatory statement , congress said that $10 million should be made available for biodiversity conservation programs in the andean amazon region .

the obama administration requested $73 million for peru for fy2013 .

fy2013 foreign assistance is being funded through a continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-6 ) , however , which funds most accounts at the fy2012 enacted level .

furthermore , sequestration required by the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , as amended by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 / h.r .

8 , signed into law january 2 , 2013 ) , is currently in effect and requires an across - the - board reduction from the fy2013 enacted funding level .

given uncertainty over the country allocations that would be used as the base line to calculate the sequestration , crs is unable to calculate post - sequestration funding levels for peru .

a possible rough estimate could be reached by reducing fy2012 figures by 5% ; that would assume that all cuts would be even across the board , which they will not necessarily be .

the administration requested just under $73 million for peru for fy2014 .

there has been no legislative action on fy2014 foreign operations funding yet .

peru and the united states signed a $35.6 million millennium challenge threshold program for 2008 to 2010 that supported peru's efforts to reduce corruption in public administration and improve child immunization coverage .

the program , implemented by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , was extended to july 2011 .

the nationwide immunization program is completed .

to allow the completion of one remaining anti - corruption program , the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) extended the end date until september 2012 .

these activities were to be incorporated into usaid programs for the remainder of fy2012 and probably into fy2013 .

a dominant theme in the relations between the two countries is the effort to stem the flow of illegal drugs , mostly cocaine , from peru to the united states .

peru is one of the three andean countries that produce virtually all of the world's coca .

according to the state department , peru "has the world's highest potential production of pure cocaine," and is the second - largest cultivator of coca .

estimates of peru's total area of coca production vary widely .

according to the united nations office on drugs and crime , coca cultivation increased by 2% over the previous year , from 61,200 hectares in 2010 to 62,500 hectares in 2011 .

the u.s. government , using a different methodology , estimated that 53,000 hectares were under cultivation in peru in 2010 , and 49,500 hectares in 2011 , constituting a 6.6% decrease .

within the country , there have been significant changes in production .

the upper huallaga valley , formerly the country's largest producer of coca , experienced a strong drop in cultivation , due mostly to intensive eradication there .

producing as much as 40% of the country's coca , the valley of the apurimac and ene rivers , known as the vrae region , is now peru's largest coca cultivating region .

because of security concerns there , however , peru's eradication agency does not conduct operations there .

according to the state department , 93% of the coca grown in peru is illegal and intended for cocaine production .

the rest is for traditional domestic consumption .

the state department also reports that peru is a major importer of precursor chemicals that are used to produce cocaine .

the cultivation of coca and production of cocaine have contributed to social problems in peru .

coca eradication is highly controversial in peru , with coca farmers violently resisting it .

some coca farmers have become allied with remnants of the shining path , or sendero luminoso , terrorist organization .

now closely linked with narcotics trafficking , the shining path conducted 87 terrorist acts in 2012 , killing 1 civilian , 13 members of the military , and 5 police officers .

a faction of the shining path operates in the vrae , with several hundred armed members .

drug addiction has become a serious problem , with an insufficient number of treatment and rehabilitation centers .

the state department estimated there were 150 , 000 addicts across the country in 2011 , but reported "32,000 to 45,000 cocaine addicts and an even larger number of marijuana addicts" in its 2013 report .

illicit coca cultivation and production has damaged the environment , contributing to the deforestation of 2.5 million hectares over 30 years , and the pollution of forests and streams from 118 million liters of precursor chemicals dumped in them over a period of 5 years .

u.s. counternarcotics programs in peru focus on three areas: eradication , interdiction , and alternative development .

the obama administration's request for fy2014 includes $26 million in international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) funds , an increase of $3 million from the fy2013 request .

according to the 2011 incsr , from 2009 to 2010 alternative development programs led to a 24% increase in the legal incomes of participating families , and to a 25% decrease in their level of poverty .

the 2013 incsr reports that usaid programs supported over 19,000 families with the cultivation of alternative crops in 2012 .

when he took office , president humala said he was reevaluating peru's counternarcotics policy , and also that he saw the united states as a "strategic partner" in combating illegal drug production and trafficking .

the united states has required total eradication of coca before a farmer can enter into alternative development programs in peru ; critics say farmers should be allowed to make a gradual transition to alternative crops so that they maintain a source of income .

when the humala administration stopped eradication shortly after assuming office , many observers thought it indicated a major shift in policy , especially considering that humala had support from coca growers in his campaign .

but the humala administration quickly resumed eradication in august 2011 , and soon removed the officials he had initially placed in charge of counter - narcotics policy , some said out of concern their policies might antagonize the united states .

in march 2012 peru adopted a new five - year ( 2012-2016 ) counternarcotics strategy , and according to the 2013 incsr , "dedicated substantial resources to implement it. .

the new plan calls for a 200% increase in coca eradication by the end of the five years .

president humala declared a 60-day state of emergency in several coca - producing areas with a shining path presence in september 2011 .

these areas were also the site of protests by coca farmers opposed to the government's forced eradication of their crops .

days after the state of emergency was declared , the defense minister announced that the military was going to "take total control of the vrae. .

according to the government , the military intervention to re - take control of the region was to be coupled with the development of infrastructure such as roads , communications , schools , and hospitals by army engineers .

nonetheless , the imposition of full military control of the area for the first time since the administration of former president alberto fujimori , now imprisoned for human rights violations and other crimes , raises concerns for many over human rights and development issues .

protests over eradication have continued , and the vrae continues to be an emergency zone .

securing the vrae is complicated by the presence there of remnants of the shining path ( sendero luminoso ) insurgency movement , who reportedly operate alongside local drug traffickers .

a shining path faction killed two police agents and injured two others in october 2012 .

in response , the humala administration said it planned to monitor the shining path via satellite , and was in discussions with u.s. officials to allow helicopters provided by the united states for counter - narcotics operations to be used for counterinsurgency operations as well .

the state department says a primary focus of u.s. support is to enhance the ability of peruvian security forces to counter the shining path's narcotics and terrorist activities in the vraem and to increase the government's presence there .

the united states is one of peru's top trading partners .

u.s. goods exports to peru in 2012 totaled $9.4 billion , a 12% increase over 2011 .

peru exports to the united states decreased almost 3% over the same period , to $6.4 billion .

peru is the 32 nd - largest export market for u.s. goods .

peru's other top trading partners are china and switzerland .

both the executive branch and congress have promoted trade with peru , and protection of its environment , often linking the two .

the u.s. - peru trade promotion agreement ( ptpa ) went into effect february 1 , 2009 .

congress passed environmental amendments to the ptpa that commit peru ( and the united states ) to enforce its domestic environmental laws , and adopt new laws to fulfill obligations under multilateral environmental agreements .

other amendments to the ptpa call for the two countries to take steps to enhance forest sector governance and promote legal trade in timber products .

on april 17 , 2012 , a conservation non - profit organization invoked those amendments in petitioning the u.s. trade representative to investigate and verify the legal origin of wood shipments from peru .

an environmental investigation agency ( eia ) report indicated that millions of dollars' worth of illegal wood from the peruvian amazon were exported to the united states between 2008 and 2010 .

if the u.s. government finds evidence of illegality , it can take actions , including prohibiting the companies involved from exporting to the united states until peru produces evidence that each company is complying with the law and regulations .

eia noted that peruvian agencies are exercising greater oversight over the industry ; to conduct its analysis , the group used data from a government agency it said was reformed and strengthened under provisions of the ptpa .

as mentioned above , congress stipulated in the fy2012 appropriations law that both development assistance and economic support funds shall be made available for peru for labor and environmental capacity building activities relating to free trade agreements with the united states .

in its joint explanatory statement , congress said that $10 million should be made available for biodiversity conservation programs in the andean amazon region .

in 2009 the united states announced it would be entering into an asia - pacific trade agreement known as the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) .

peru is one of the negotiating partners .

according to the ustr , the tpp will be "a means to advance u.s. economic interests with the fastest - growing economies in the world , and a tool to expand u.s .

exports. .

critics assert that any economic benefits deriving from the agreement "will be relatively small and the regulatory costs could be significantly high — especially for the emerging market and developing countries engaged in the negotiations. .

the 17 th round of tpp negotiations were held in lima , ending on may 24 , 2013 .

outstanding issues still being negotiated include services , government procurement , sanitary and phytosanitary standards , trade remedies , labor , and dispute settlements .

the countries also discussed how to integrate japan into the next round of the negotiations in july .

peru and the united states signed a debt - for - nature swap in 2008 that reduces peru's debt to the united states by more than $25 million over seven years , until 2015 .

in exchange , peru agreed to use those funds to support grants to protect its tropical forests .

peru and the united states held the fourth meetings of joint environmental commissions to review progress on implementation of the tpa environmental provisions , and of environmental cooperation activities under the u.s. - peru environmental cooperation agreement .

the two countries reportedly made progress toward establishing an independent secretariat to consider enforcement matters as called for in the tpa , and said they would sign an agreement on the secretariat soon .

