the senate and the house have each passed bills whose provisions would affect a broad range of food and drug administration ( fda ) activities regarding drugs , biological products , and medical devices: s. 3187 , the food and drug administration safety and innovation act , passed on may 24 , 2012 ; and h.r .

5651 , the food and drug administration reform act of 2012 , passed on may 30 , 2012 .

the timing of these bills coincides with the october 1 , 2012 expiration of fda's authority under current law to collect fees under the prescription drug user fee amendments ( pdufa ) of 2007 and the medical device user fee amendments ( mdufa ) of 2007 .

because revenue from those fees supports over 2,000 full - time equivalent fda positions and accounts for more than half of the agency's drug and device review resources , members of congress have referred to the user fee reauthorizations as generally uncontroversial , must - pass legislation .

the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions and the house committee on energy and commerce have , in addition to developing legislation that would reauthorize the drug and device user fees , crafted additional titles that would create new user fee authority for generic drugs and biosimilar biological products , permanently authorize programs to encourage or require studies of drugs for pediatric use , medical device regulation , drug regulation , and several areas , such as advisory committee conflict of interest , that cut across fda product areas .

congress had also made user fee authorizing legislation in 2007 a vehicle for addressing other fda - related issues .

this report provides a legislative analysis of the provisions in s. 3187 and h.r .

5651 , including brief summaries of relevant provisions in current law , mostly the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

current law descriptions generally relate only to provisions that the bills would change ; the current law column , therefore , does not always provide a complete description of the relevant law .

material is grouped by broad topics and presented in the general order of sections in the senate bill , the first to be reported out of committee .

the report begins each topic with a discussion of the overall issue to set the policy or legislative context of the bills' provisions and then uses a table to present the comparison of the bills and current law .

in tables 1 through 4 , which describe the legislative language for four user fee programs , the senate and house descriptions are merged in one column because of their substantive similarity ( the few differences are noted ) .

tables 3 , 4 , and 11 address new provisions and do not , therefore , have current law columns .

the remaining tables have three columns: current law , s. 3187 , and h.r .

5651 .

in each table , the rows generally follow the order of provisions in the senate bill , with comparable house provisions , if any , described in the relevant senate rows .

house provisions without comparable senate provisions are then presented in the order they appear in the house bill .

the following grid lists the tables that follow in this report ; it also lists the section numbers of s. 3187 ( as passed ) and h.r .

5651 ( as passed ) covered in each table .

this report is one in a suite of crs products that provide detailed background and analysis of fda - related issues .

for further information on many of the issues that members and panelists raised in the committee hearings leading up to these bills ( including drug approval , development incentives , device regulation , pediatric drugs , and user fees ) , see the crs website ( the medical product regulation listings at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / subissue.aspx ? cliid=2678 ) or contact [author name scrubbed] , specialist in drug safety and effectiveness , or one of the other authors of this report .

titles i through iv of both the senate and house bills would authorize fda to collect user fees and direct the revenue to fund specified activities relating to prescription drugs , medical devices , generic drugs , and biosimilar biological products .

the first two are reauthorizations of current programs ; the second two would authorize new user fee programs .

with the prescription drug user fee act in 1992 , congress authorized fda to collect user fees from the manufacturers of brand - name prescription drugs and biological products and to use the revenue for specified activities .

pdufa became possible when fda , industry , and congress agreed on two concepts: ( 1 ) performance goals — fda would commit to performance goals it would negotiate with industry that set target completion times for various review processes ; and ( 2 ) use of fees — the revenue from prescription drug user fees would be used only for activities to support the review of human drug applications and would supplement — rather than replace — funding that congress appropriated to fda .

the added resources from user fees allowed fda to increase staff to review what was then a backlog of new drug applications and to reduce application review times .

over the years , congress has added similar authority regarding medical devices and animal drugs .

user fees make up 35% of the fy2012 fda budget .

their contribution to fda's human drug program is larger at 51% .

following the precedent set by pdufa , all the user fee programs addressed in this legislation include both ( 1 ) legislation and ( 2 ) performance goals agreements developed with representatives of the regulated industry in consultation with representatives of patients and advocates , academic and science experts , and congressional committees .

drug manufacturers may be reluctant to test drugs and medical devices in children because of economic , ethical , legal , and other obstacles .

market forces alone do not provide sufficient incentives to overcome these obstacles .

the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca , p.l .

107-109 ) and the pediatric research equity act ( prea , p.l .

108-155 ) offer drug manufacturers financial and regulatory incentives to test their products for use in children .

the pediatric medical device safety and improvement act of 2007 ( pmdsia , p.l .

110-85 ) creates reporting requirements for pediatric medical devices , incentives for manufacturers to create pediatric medical devices , and gives the fda the authority to require postmarket studies of approved pediatric devices to ensure their continued efficacy and safety .

bpca and prea , passed by congress in 2002 and 2003 and subsequently reauthorized in 2007 , represent congress' attempt to address the need for pediatric testing .

bpca created an incentive ( extended market exclusivity ) for manufacturers to conduct studies on pediatric use , and prea created a requirement for manufacturers to test the safety and effectiveness of their products in pediatric populations .

bpca sunsets on october 1 , 2012 , and current law authorizes prea only as long as bpca is in effect .

extended marketing exclusivity may be an attractive incentive to a manufacturer with a product that is being sold under patent or other types of exclusivity protections .

bpca also includes provisions to refer pediatric studies of off - patent products , which no longer have market exclusivity , to the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and manufacturer - declined studies of on - patent products to the foundation for the nih ( fnih ) .

bpca and prea studies result in information on new dosing , new indications of use , new safety information , and new data on effectiveness that inform labeling changes for pediatric dosing , warnings , and instructions on how to prepare formulations for pediatric populations .

although bpca and prea were developed separately , they are usually discussed in tandem .

their 2007 reauthorizations were paired in both committee hearings and legislative vehicle .

both s. 3187 and h.r .

2516 would permanently authorize bpca and prea .

they each would also amend or add provisions in current law .

provisions in these bills are compared with each other and to current law in table 5 .

medical devices include a wide range of products that are used to diagnose , treat , monitor , or prevent a disease or condition in a patient .

medical devices are broadly integrated into health care , and include simple devices , such as tongue depressors , as well as more complex devices , such as implantable hips .

the extent of fda authority to regulate whether a device may be marketed in the united states and how it is monitored afterward varies across types of devices .

in order to determine the applicability of premarket requirements ( i.e. , clearance or approval before marketing ) for a given device , fda classifies the device based on the risk to the patient: ( 1 ) low - risk devices are class i ; ( 2 ) moderate - risk are class ii ; and ( 3 ) high - risk are class iii .

low - risk medical devices ( class i ) and a very small number of moderate - risk medical devices ( class ii ) are exempt from premarket review .

in general , for moderate - risk and high - risk medical devices , there are two pathways that manufacturers can use to bring such devices to market with fda's permission: ( 1 ) premarket approval ( pma ) and ( 2 ) premarket notification submission ( also known as a 510 ( k ) submission , after the section in the ffdca that authorized this type of notification ) .

according to a 2009 gao report , of the more than 50,000 devices that were listed by manufacturers with fda from fy2003 through fy2007 , about 67% were exempt from premarket review ; the remainder entered the market via the 510 ( k ) process ( 31% ) , the pma process ( 1% ) or via other means , such as humanitarian use devices .

once a device is on the market , fda has authority to carry out certain activities to monitor their safety and effectiveness .

the extent of the agency's postmarket authority is tied to characteristics of the device .

manufacturer requirements include areas such as labeling , postmarket surveillance , device tracking , and adverse event reporting .

provisions in the house and senate passed bills both would make modifications to various aspects of premarket and postmarket device regulation .

premarket modifications include those intended to: ( 1 ) streamline the de novo 510 ( k ) for novel devices ; ( 2 ) affect the efficiency , transparency , and data requirements of the 510 ( k ) and pma processes ; and ( 3 ) alter or make clarifications to certain types of exempt devices , for example , custom devices and humanitarian use devices .

with respect to postmarket regulation , provisions focus on expanding active postmarket surveillance ; altering requirements related to postmarket studies for devices ; and strengthening both device recall and tracking capabilities through a recall program and the unique device identifier system .

miscellaneous reforms include those aimed at increasing transparency of fda's approval and clearance decisions and processes for issuing industry guidance documents ; improving health information technology for the agency ; and harmonizing device regulation with fda's international counterparts .

medical device related provisions are presented in table 6 , in the order in which they appear in the senate bill .

a key fda responsibility is to regulate the safety and effectiveness of drugs sold in the united states .

fda divides that responsibility into two phases: preapproval ( premarket ) and postapproval ( postmarket ) .

fda reviews manufacturers' applications to market drugs in the united states ; a drug may not be sold unless it has fda approval .

the agency continues its oversight of drug safety and effectiveness as long as the drug is on the market .

for an overview of fda's responsibility in many of these areas , see crs report r41983 , how fda approves drugs and regulates their safety and effectiveness , by [author name scrubbed] .

beginning with the food and drugs act of 1906 , congress has incrementally refined and expanded fda's responsibilities regarding drug approval and regulation .

members of the 112 th congress have suggested that fda take additional efforts across the lifespan of its drug products .

provisions that either the senate or house have passed cluster around encouraging product development , expediting application and review processes , attending to product integrity , preventing and mitigating drug shortages , and regulating medical gases .

this report continues with each of those clusters , in the order they appear in the senate bill .

the drug regulation section ends with a cluster of individual provisions that , although labeled miscellaneous , each target an area of congressional concern and potential fda responsibility .

currently , the secretary is required to consider potential conflicts of interest in appointing persons to fda advisory committees .

the secretary must "review the expertise of the individual and the financial disclosure report filed by the individual pursuant to the ethics in government act of 1978 … so as to reduce the likelihood that an appointed individual will later require" one of two written waivers under the criminal financial conflict of interest statute , or a waiver under fda's conflict of interest waiver provision , in order to serve at advisory committee meetings .

under the criminal financial conflict of interest statute , advisory committee members ( whether they are special or regular government employees ) are prohibited from participating "personally and substantially … through decision , approval , disapproval , recommendation , the rendering of advice … or otherwise" if they have a financial interest .

advisory committee members are also prohibited from participating if any of the following have a financial interest: the member's spouse ; minor child ; general partner ; organization in which the member serves as an officer , director , trustee , general partner or employee ; or any person or organization with whom he is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment .

however , the criminal financial conflict of interest statute has several waiver provisions .

the first of two specifically referenced in ffdca sec .

712 allows for a waiver if the advisory committee member fully discloses the financial interest and the official who appoints the member makes a written determination , in advance , that the financial "interest is not so substantial as to be deemed likely to affect the integrity of the services which the government may expect from such officer or employee. .

the second wavier allows the official responsible for the advisory committee member's appointment , after reviewing the financial disclosure report , to make a written certification "that the need for the individual's services outweighs the potential for a conflict of interest created by the financial interest involved. .

the ffdca has its own , additional prohibition and waiver for conflicts of interest .

under the current ffdca sec .

712 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , any member of an advisory committee would be prohibited from participating in any "particular matter" in an advisory committee meeting in which such member , or an immediate family member of such member , has a "financial interest that could be affected by the advice given to the secretary with respect to such matter. .

the hhs secretary retains the right to grant a waiver to any member of such advisory panel to participate in "a particular matter considered in a committee meeting," either as a voting or non - voting member of the advisory committee , when the secretary determines that "it is necessary to afford the advisory committee essential expertise. .

provisions in s. 3187 and h.r .

5651 regarding advisory committee conflicts of interest are summarized and compared with current law and with each other in table 13 .

a number of additional provisions in the two bills are summarized and compared in table 14 .

these provisions are: reauthorization of the critical path public - private partnerships ; guidance regarding internet promotion of medical products ; electronic submission of applications ; tanning bed labeling ; global clinical trials ; regulatory science ; information technology ; reporting requirements for medical products covered by user fee agreements ; strategic integrated management plan for fda workforce ; patient participation in medical product discussions ; nanomaterials in fda - regulated products ; gao report regarding online pharmacies ; medication and device errors ; statutory pay - as - you - go statement ; communicating drug information , including to underrepresented subgroups ; report on small businesses ; whistleblower protection , u.s. public health service ; clinical trial registration ; compliance date for over - the - counter sunscreen products ; changes to the controlled substances act ( csa ) ; and prescription drug monitoring programs .

the senate voted 96-1 to pass s. 3187 on may 24 , 2012 .

the house voted 387-5 to pass h.r .

5651 on may 30 , 2012 .

pdufa and mdufa sunset on october 1 , 2012 and committee bipartisan leadership has been committed to completing the reauthorizations before fda would have to initiate lay - off notification procedures that would disrupt drug and device application review and postmarket safety activities .

fda - focused newsletters and the national media report that "ping - pong" negotiations , rather than a formal conference committee , are underway between house and senate staff and members to resolve the differences between the bills .

despite a successful bipartisan effort to build a core set of drug and device provisions that could join , but not derail , must - pass user fee provisions , there remain complex issues that members of congress will likely pursue after a final bill is passed out of s. 3187 and h.r .

5651 .

these include changing the premarket approval and clearance procedures for medical devices , further developing a supply chain system that meets global demands , and looking at whether federal health program drug payment policies influence drug shortages .

whether congress needs a must - pass vehicle , next facing fda in 2017 , to achieve these legislative changes remains to be seen .

