congress has enacted three major laws that govern labor - management relations .

the first law , the railway labor act ( rla ) , was enacted in 1926 .

the rla applies to railway and airline carriers .

in 1935 , congress passed the national labor relations act ( nlra ) , which applies to private sector employers other than railroad and airline carriers .

congress enacted the federal service labor - management relations statute ( fslmrs ) in 1978 .

the act applies to most federal employees .

this report provides a brief history , including major amendments , of each of the three statutes .

the discussion of each law begins with an overview of the statute and then discusses in more detail the key statutory provisions of the law and how the law is administered and enforced .

this report uses specific "terms of art" relevant to these three acts .

appendix a defines these terms .

appendix b provides a list of acronyms used in the report .

appendix c compares the provisions of the three statutes .

while many private sector employees gained statutory rights to collective bargaining and remedies to unfair labor practices throughout the 1920s and 1930s , many of their public counterparts did not have such protections until the 1960s .

traditional concepts of government sovereignty and public employees' general satisfaction with their job security contributed to this disparity .

however , by the 1960s , many federal public employees found their jobs to be less secure due to organizational and technological changes .

moreover , many commentators thought that the federal government's willingness to extend collective bargaining rights to private employees but not to its own employees was inconsistent .

union recognition bills were introduced in each congress throughout the 1950s , but both president harry truman and president dwight eisenhower strongly opposed them .

in 1961 , president john f. kennedy formed the task force on employee - management relations in the federal service , which evaluated and made recommendations about federal employee unionization .

in 1962 , president kennedy implemented the recommendations of the task force through executive order 10988 .

the order granted federal employees the right to join , or not to join , labor unions and to bargain collectively .

these new rights , however , were not as extensive as those of private employees .

for instance , federal employees generally could not negotiate over wages or benefits and were prohibited from striking .

additionally , an agency could require that employees negotiate over a collective bargaining agreement only during nonofficial time ( i.e. , at times when employees were not on duty and entitled to compensation ) .

in 1969 , president richard nixon issued executive order 11491 , which further developed the framework of federal labor - management relations .

it provided that majority recognition would be the only form of union recognition , established the federal labor relations council ( the predecessor to the current federal labor relations authority , flra ) and the federal service impasses panel ( fsip ) , and listed prohibited unfair labor practices for both unions and management .

it also allowed employees to use limited "official time" to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement .

although federal employees were given collective bargaining rights under the executive orders ( eos ) issued by presidents kennedy and nixon , those rights were not necessarily secure , as eos are subject to unilateral change or termination by the president .

in 1978 , however , congress codified and adopted many of the eos' provisions as title vii of the civil service reform act of 1978 .

the law is commonly referred to as the federal service labor - management relations statute ( fslmrs ) .

while the statute followed the general principles of the eos , it also made certain changes , such as limiting the statute's coverage and allowing employees official time to negotiate collective bargaining agreements .

in 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13522 , directed federal agencies to work with employees and unions to improve the delivery of services to the american people .

the eo created the national council on federal labor - management relations ( the council ) .

the council advises the president on matters involving labor - management relations in the executive branch .

the council was charged with creating pilot labor - management forums within the federal government to allow agency managers and unions to discuss labor - management issues in a nonadversarial setting .

although several federal agencies were explicitly excluded from fslmrs coverage ( see " employer defined " below ) , some are covered by separate labor - relations statutes or policies .

the government accountability office ( gao ) is excluded from fslmrs coverage , but the general accounting office personnel act of 1980 gave gao employees the right to organize and bargain collectively .

neither the fslmrs nor the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) act of 1933 granted tva employees collective bargaining rights .

however , in 1935 , tva adopted a policy that allows employees to organize and bargain over wages .

without actually changing the language of the national labor relations act ( nlra ) , congress incorporated most nlra provisions into the postal reorganization act of 1970 .

this action gave enforceable collective bargaining rights to employees of the u.s .

postal service .

the fslmrs seeks to prevent labor - management disputes that could burden or obstruct federal government operations .

it grants certain rights to both workers and employers , seeks to prevent practices that could frustrate a peaceful worker - employer relationship , and provides mechanisms for workers and employers to resolve disputes .

to achieve these goals , the fslmrs regulates the labor - management relationship between workers and employers in most federal agencies .

it provides parties with a standard process for choosing a union to act as an employee representative in the collective bargaining process and details which individuals can participate in the process .

once a union is selected , the fslmrs governs which subjects workers and unions can negotiate .

the fsmlrs also regulates how workers , employers , and unions should behave towards each other during the union selection and collective bargaining processes and prohibits certain unfair actions .

the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) administers and enforces the fslmrs .

the flra has the authority to investigate and adjudicate representation disputes , ulp complaints , and contract disputes .

the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) is an independent agency that provides voluntary mediation services to parties who cannot resolve a bargaining dispute .

the federal service impasses panel ( fsip ) is an entity within the flra that provides additional assistance in resolving disputes if fmcs services cannot resolve the dispute or if the parties specifically request fsip's services .

the fslmrs regulates collective bargaining rights and duties for most federal agencies , employees , and unions .

the preliminary sections of the fslmrs define "employer," "employee," and "labor organization. .

state and local laws govern state and local public employees .

the fslmrs applies to most federal executive agencies , along with the library of congress , the government printing office , and the smithsonian institution .

several agencies are specifically excluded from the statute's coverage .

those excluded agencies are the government accountability office , the federal bureau of investigation , the central intelligence agency , the national security agency , the tennessee valley authority , the federal labor relations authority , the federal impasses panel , and the u.s. secret service .

the president has the power to unilaterally exclude an agency or subdivision from coverage under the fslmrs if he determines the entity's "primary function" is "intelligence , counterintelligence , investigative , or national security work" and that the provisions of the statute cannot be applied "in a manner consistent with national security requirements and considerations. .

with this power , the president has excluded additional agencies and agency subdivisions , including the national nuclear security administration , the federal air marshall service , and several subdivisions of each branch of the military .

an employee includes any individual employed in an agency or an individual who is no longer employed at an agency because of unfair labor practices and who has not obtained regular and substantially similar employment elsewhere .

the definition specifically excludes some individuals from the definition of employee , including noncitizens , members of the uniformed services , supervisors , management officials , officers or employees in the foreign service , and individuals who participate in a strike in violation of the statute .

a labor organization is defined as an organization composed , at least in part , of employees who participate in and pay dues to that organization .

the organization must have the purpose of dealing with an agency regarding conditions of employment and grievances .

organizations that deny membership on the basis of sex , color , race , creed , national origin , and other similar characteristics ; advocate the overthrow of the u.s. government ; are sponsored by an agency ; or participate or assist in a strike are not labor organizations recognized under the statute .

the statute both mandates and prohibits certain actions of all parties involved in labor - management relations .

the statute grants employees the right to organize and bargain collectively and sets forth the procedures and standards to be applied in the selection of a union as an employee representative and the subsequent relations between the union and the employer .

unions and agencies can bargain over working conditions but cannot bargain over those topics already governed by another law ( eg , rates of pay as determined by the general schedule ) .

working conditions might include work hours and allocation of employee offices .

employees must share a "community of interest" to be recognized as an appropriate unit for union representation .

the union selection process is more limited in the federal sector than in the private sector , as a union can only be certified as an employee representative through a secret ballot election and union - security agreements are illegal .

certain conduct is prohibited in the employer - union relationship during union organization and collective bargaining .

employers and unions cannot interfere with employees' right to organize and select a union .

employers and unions are required to bargain with each other in good faith , and employers can only bargain with an employee - selected union .

if a bargaining impasse is reached , federal employees are prohibited from participating in strikes , work stoppages , slowdowns , or picketing that interferes with agency operations .

the fslmrs gives federal employees the right to bargain collectively over conditions of employment .

conditions of employment include "personnel policies , practices , and matters ... affecting work conditions. .

an employee's right to participate in political activities , the classification of positions , and any matters covered by other federal statutes ( eg , wages ) are specifically excluded from this definition .

employees and their unions are also not allowed to bargain over the statutory rights of management that are set forth in the statute .

these nonnegotiable managerial rights include the authority to determine the organization's mission or budget and the authority to hire , discharge , or assign work to an employee .

the parties may , however , bargain over grievance procedures for adversely affected employees , the way in which management will exercise its authority , and , at the agency's election , the number of employees or positions assigned to a work project .

federal employees have the right to select their union , and agencies must give exclusive recognition to the union selected by employees .

union security agreements are prohibited under the fslmrs .

unions representing federal employees must represent all unit employees , regardless of whether they pay dues .

unions can represent those employees who are grouped together in an appropriate unit .

to find a unit "appropriate" for representation , the fslmrs requires that three criteria be met .

1 .

the unit must encompass employees who share a clear "community of interest," identifiable employment concerns distinct from those of other groups of employees .

2 .

the unit must promote an effective relationship with the agency .

3 .

the unit must promote efficient operations of the agency .

management officials and supervisors cannot be included in a bargaining unit unless they have historically been included in the unit .

additional employees prohibited from a unit include employees who administer fslmrs provisions and employees whose work affects national security .

the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) determines which employees are eligible to vote in secret ballot elections .

regularly scheduled intermittent employees who work in positions that exist year round or who have a reasonable expectation of continued employment can vote in elections .

temporary employees can also vote , if they have a reasonable expectation of continued employment beyond their initial six months of work and share a community of interest with the permanent employees included in the bargaining unit .

under the fslmrs , a union can only be certified as an employee representative through a secret ballot election .

to initiate a secret ballot election , an individual , union , or agency must first file a representation petition and a "showing of interest" that either 30% or more of unit employees wish to be represented by a union or that at least 30% of unit employees allege that the union no longer represents a majority of the unit employees .

the regional director of the flra's general counsel ( see discussion of " fslmrs enforcement and adjudication processes " below ) will determine whether the showing of interest is sufficient and meet with parties to resolve any preliminary disputes .

it then conducts an investigation into any allegations made , including identifying related cases , identifying other parties who may be affected , and making any other necessary determinations .

after an investigation and any hearings , the regional director can order a secret ballot election .

if an election is ordered , parties are encouraged to enter into consent - election agreements that include the choices to be on the ballot and the method of election .

however , if parties cannot agree to these terms , the regional director will issue a "direction of election. .

a direction of election sets out the election procedures .

parties have the opportunity to bring any nonprocedural issues before the regional director in a hearing .

once an election is held , a union will be certified as an employee representative if it receives a majority of votes cast .

if an election has more than one union on the ballot and no choice receives a majority of the votes , the two choices with the most votes face each other in a runoff election .

a party can file an objection to procedural aspects of an election or conduct that may have adversely impacted the election within five days of the vote tally .

while the results of an election are pending , parties must maintain the terms of any existing collective bargaining agreement .

the fslmrs gives employees who are unrepresented by a certified union an additional collective bargaining protection .

national consultation rights ( ncrs ) entitle a union to be informed of agency - proposed substantive changes in employment conditions and to present its views and recommendations on the matter , even if the union does not have exclusive agency recognition .

an agency must consider any views and recommendations submitted to it by a union with ncrs before making a final decision .

a union gains ncrs if a unit does not have a recognized exclusive representative within its agency and the union is the exclusive representative of at least 3,500 or 10% of employees in the agency .

an election can also be held to determine if a bargaining unit no longer wishes to be represented by its existing union .

as with a petition for a representation election , an individual , union , or agency can file a petition for an election , and the petition must be signed by or accompanied by authorization cards of at least 30% of the unit employees who allege that the union no longer represents a majority of the unit employees .

additionally , a regional director can revoke certification if a union disclaims its interest in representing the unit or if the regional director determines that the unit is no longer appropriate because of a "substantial change in character and scope of the unit" and that an election is unnecessary .

the fslmrs defines and prohibits certain conduct as unfair labor practices ( ulps ) to protect the rights of both workers and employers .

the flra can issue cease - and - desist orders to stop a ulp , require employers to reinstate and give backpay to employees who were improperly discharged for union activities , and require parties to renegotiate contracts in accordance with its orders .

a union may be required to give an employee backpay if it caused an employer to discharge that employee .

the fslmrs protects employees' right to organize and imposes restrictions on employers and unions during this process .

the statute prohibits employers and unions from interfering with or coercing employees exercising their right to organize .

for instance , neither an employer nor a union can threaten discharge or make threatening statements to employees to influence their decision to join a union .

a union cannot cause an employer to discriminate against employees regarding employment conditions .

agencies are prohibited from sponsoring , controlling , or assisting a union .

prohibited conduct includes actively assisting a union in organizing its employees or campaigning for a particular union or individual running for union office .

both employers and unions are required to negotiate in good faith with one another over conditions of employment .

this obligation to negotiate includes , if requested by either party , the duty to enter into a written collective bargaining agreement .

this obligation does not require either party to make a concession or agree to a proposal by the other party .

the duty to bargain in good faith includes coming to the bargaining table with a willingness to reach a collective bargaining agreement and meeting at reasonable times and places .

for instance , both employers and unions are required to bargain on negotiable matters proposed by one or both parties that are not already in the collective bargaining agreement .

additionally , employers cannot unilaterally change working conditions .

working conditions might include work hours or allocation of employee offices .

neither employers nor unions can refuse to cooperate in impasse procedures and decisions .

failure to cooperate includes failing to comply with a final order from the federal service impasses panel ( fsip ) , the flra's dispute resolution entity .

employers cannot discipline or discriminate against employees who file complaints under the statute .

a union cannot coerce , discipline , fine , or attempt to coerce a union member as punishment or to hinder their work .

employees are protected from union harassment when they are performing their official work duties .

additionally , unions cannot discriminate against employees regarding union membership because of race , color , creed , national origin , sex , age , civil service status , political affiliation , marital status , or handicap .

neither employers nor unions can refuse to comply with any other provision of the statute .

federal employees can use self - help to exert pressure on an employer , but the types of self - help available are more limited than under federal labor relations laws that apply to the private sector .

federal employees can engage in peaceful , informational picketing as long as the activity does not interfere with agency operations .

however , unlike private - sector employees , federal employees cannot participate in , and unions cannot encourage , strikes , work stoppages , slowdowns , or pickets that interfere with agency operations .

additionally , a union commits a ulp if it fails to prevent such activity .

if a union willfully or intentionally supports such actions , the flra can revoke its exclusive recognition status .

the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) is the primary agency that administers and enforces the statute .

the flra has the authority to investigate and adjudicate representation disputes , ulp complaints , and contract disputes .

the federal mediation and conciliation service ( fmcs ) provides voluntary mediation services to parties who have reached a negotiation impasse .

the federal service impasses panel ( fsip ) is an entity within the flra that provides additional assistance in resolving disputes if fmcs services cannot resolve the dispute or if the parties specifically request fsip's services .

the flra's general counsel investigates and prosecutes ulp complaints .

flra decisions can be reviewed by federal courts in limited circumstances .

judicial review of fsip decisions is unavailable .

the flra is an independent federal agency charged with administering and enforcing the fslmrs .

it is composed of a three - member authority , the general counsel , and the fsip .

the authority's responsibilities include hearing ulp cases , determining the appropriateness of units , and conducting secret ballot elections .

the members of the authority are appointed by the president for five - year terms .

no more than two members can be of the same political party .

the general counsel investigates and prosecutes complaints before the authority and is appointed by the president for a five - year term .

the flra can delegate its power to determine election issues and to investigate and prosecute ulp complaints to its regional offices .

the fmcs provides mediation services for parties who have reached an impasse in negotiations .

fmcs services are available to both private and public workers and employers .

in the federal sector , use of fmcs services is voluntary .

if federal parties are unable to resolve their dispute using fmcs services , they can request that fsip consider the matter or they can agree to binding arbitration procedures .

the arbitration procedures must be approved by fsip .

to aid in arbitration , the fmcs maintains a list of approximately 1,400 independent arbitrators who can hear and decide disputes over collective bargaining interpretation or application .

fsip is an entity within the flra and provides assistance in resolving disputes between agencies and unions over working conditions .

fsip has seven members who are appointed by the president and serve staggered five - year terms .

if parties cannot resolve an impasse by using a third - party mediator or if either party requests fsip's services , fsip can make recommendations to the parties and assist them in resolving the dispute .

if the parties still cannot come to an agreement , fsip can impose an agreement on the parties .

issues delegated to a regional director or administrative law judge can be reviewed and then affirmed , reversed , or modified by the authority .

in some cases , a party can also seek court review of a final order made by the authority .

for a court to review a decision , generally , the authority's determinations must be arbitrary or contrary to the law .

direct judicial review of fsip orders is unavailable .

an employee , union , or agency can initiate a ulp investigation by filing a charge with an flra regional director .

generally , a charge must be filed no more than six months after the alleged ulp occurred .

the charge is investigated by regional office staff .

the regional director , at his discretion , may issue a complaint , which sets forth the alleged ulp and the hearing date before an alj .

if the regional director decides not to issue a complaint , the decision can be appealed to the general counsel .

throughout the processing of a charge , the authority offers parties voluntary alternative dispute resolution services , including training , education , and intervention at its collaboration and alternative dispute resolution office ( cadro ) .

if the regional director decides to issue a complaint and the parties are still unable to settle the dispute , the general counsel prosecutes the complaint before an alj .

the alj's decision can be reviewed by the authority .

if the authority does not review the decision , the decision becomes the authority's decision .

if the authority finds that a ulp has occurred , it can order an agency to reinstate an employee with backpay , the parties to enter into a collective bargaining agreement , a party to stop committing the ulp ( cease - and - desist order ) , or any other action that would carry out the purpose of the statute .

additionally , district courts can issue temporary relief ( eg , cease - and - desist orders ) during the processing of a complaint if the general counsel believes that not maintaining the status quo would frustrate the intent of the statute .

disputes over whether parties have an obligation to negotiate a specific contract term generally fall into one of two categories: negotiability disputes and bargaining obligation disputes .

in a negotiability dispute , the agency and union disagree about whether a proposed contract term is contrary to the law such that the agency is not required to negotiate over it .

if the agency contends it is not required to negotiate over a matter , the union may initiate a negotiability appeal in which it asks the authority to review the matter .

in a bargaining obligation dispute , an agency usually argues that it has no obligation to bargain over a matter because the proposal is already covered by an existing collective bargaining agreement , the union has waived the right to bargain , a change initiated by the agency is too minor to warrant bargaining , or the matter does not cover a condition of employment .

these disputes can be resolved through ulp resolution procedures , negotiated grievance procedures , or negotiability appeal procedures .

to initiate procedures in a negotiability appeal , a union must file a petition with the authority's office of case control , not the regional office .

the parties then explain their dispute to the authority in a conference and a series of written allegations , and the authority makes a decision .

if at any time during the appeal , the parties express an interest in mediation , they will be referred to cadro .

all collective bargaining agreements are required to contain negotiated grievance procedures , which lay out procedures for settling grievances .

these procedures must provide for binding arbitration if a grievance cannot be settled by the parties .

usually , the procedures set forth in negotiated grievance procedures are the only procedures available for resolving grievances .

a negotiated grievance procedure automatically covers all issues , except those excluded by law or those that parties explicitly exclude .

those subjects that are excluded from negotiated grievance procedures by the fslmrs include retirement , life insurance , or health insurance benefits and suspension or removal for reasons of national security .

procedures other than the negotiated grievance procedures exist for disputes involving a removal or demotion for unacceptable performance ; serious adverse actions , such as a reduction in grade or pay ; employment discrimination allegations ; personnel actions prohibited by statute ; and unfair labor practices .

either party can file an exception to most arbitration awards with the authority within 30 days of the award being served on the parties .

the authority can make recommendations and take appropriate action regarding the award if it finds the award is contrary to law or on "other grounds similar to those applied by federal courts in private sector labor - management relations. .

parties have several dispute resolution options when they have reached an impasse in the collective bargaining process .

the agency and union may agree on a method to help resolve the dispute , such as binding private arbitration .

parties can also voluntarily go to the fmcs for assistance to resolve an impasse .

if parties have exhausted voluntary attempts to settle an impasse , either party can request that fsip consider the issue .

if fsip asserts jurisdiction , it can either recommend dispute resolution procedures to the parties ( eg , refer the parties to cadro ) or assist them in resolving the impasse .

fsip's procedures are generally informal , but it can hold hearings , administer oaths , issue subpoenas , and take any other necessary actions to resolve the impasse .

afterwards , fsip makes a final decision and order , which is binding on the parties for the term of their agreement .

unlike the rla and flra , the fslmrs does not have any emergency dispute resolution provisions .

appendix a. glossary of terms appendix b .

list of acronyms appendix c. comparison of rla , nlra , and fslmrs key provision .

