twenty - first century criminals increasingly rely on the internet and advanced technologies to further their criminal operations .

according to europol's organized crime threat assessment , "internet technology has now emerged as a key facilitator for the vast majority of offline organised crime activity. .

for instance , criminals can easily leverage the internet to carry out traditional crimes such as distributing illicit drugs and sex trafficking .

in addition , they exploit the digital world to facilitate crimes that are often technology driven , including identity theft , payment card fraud , and intellectual property theft .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) considers high - tech crimes to be the most significant crimes confronting the united states .

policy makers have shown an increasing interest in ensuring the federal government has the tools and capabilities to combat modern day crime — particularly those with cyber components — while safeguarding privacy rights .

today's cyber criminals "have evolved their practices to make their crimes more profitable.... [t]hey choose specialties , master their skills , create networks of colleagues , and organize their crimes. .

these criminals can victimize individuals and organizations alike .

they are motivated by self interest and profit .

one estimate has placed the annual cost of cybercrime to adults in 24 countries across the globe at $113 billion .

in addition to the economic impact , cybercrimes can have public health and national security consequences , among others .

u.s. officials face the challenging task of identifying the perpetrators of malicious cyber incidents in which victim and criminal can be far removed from one another .

the person or persons behind an incident can range from lone actors to expansive criminal networks or even nation states .

this challenge of actor attribution is further compounded by the anonymity afforded by the digital realm .

it can sometimes be difficult to determine the actor's motivation — is the criminal driven by greed or glory in the form of recognition among fellow criminals in the cyber world , or does the criminal have broader ideological motives ? .

finding the answers to these questions is key to distinguishing between cybercrimes and other cyber threats such as cyber attacks , cyber espionage , and cyber warfare .

relevant distinctions exist between these various malicious activities in the cyber domain just as lines have been drawn between their real world counterparts .

for over three decades , congress has been concerned about cybercrime and its related threats .

today , these concerns often arise among a larger discussion surrounding the federal government's role in ensuring cyber security .

this report discusses the concept of cybercrime and related cyber threats such as cyber espionage and cyber warfare .

while it touches on these related threats , this report only does so in the context of framing the discussion of cybercrime .

it questions whether — and under what circumstances — clear distinctions between the various threats should be delineated .

the report also outlines how current federal strategies may address cybercrime .

it raises issues surrounding the measurement and tracking of cybercrime .

throughout , it discusses whether a clearer understanding of what constitutes cybercrime as well as its prevalence and harm could better equip policy makers to debate the sufficiency of federal law enforcement resources available to counter cybercrime and to conduct oversight in this arena .

a singular , agreed - upon definition of cybercrime does not exist .

various definitions have been offered by industry experts and scholars , and several have been formulated within the federal government .

definitions have varied in their levels of specificity and breadth .

for instance , one of the largest computer security companies , symantec corporation , defines cybercrime as "any crime that is committed using a computer or network , or hardware device. .

irrespective of the definition , conceptualizing cybercrime involves a number of key elements and questions , including where do the criminal acts exist in the real and digital worlds ( and what technologies are involved ) , why are malicious activities initiated , and who is involved in carrying out the malicious acts ? .

in the sections below , the questions of where , why , and who are discussed as they relate to cybercrime .

this is followed by a discussion of government definitions of cybercrime and a debate on whether or when a common definition of cybercrime may be useful .

the united states does not have a national strategy exclusively focused on combating cybercrime .

rather , there are other , broader strategies that have cybercrime components .

policy makers may question whether there should be a distinct strategy for combating cybercrime or whether efforts to control these crimes are best addressed through more wide - ranging strategies , such as those targeting cybersecurity or transnational organized crime .

congress may also question whether these broader strategies provide specific cybercrime - related objectives and clear means to achieve these goals .

the framework within which cybercrime is conceptualized may provide a backdrop for evaluating what type of strategy — existing or otherwise — may be best leveraged to counter the modern day cybercrime threats .

for instance , if cybercrime is thought of more as a national security threat than a public security threat , a strategy focused on countering national security threats ( including cyber threats ) may be more appropriate than a public security - focused strategy for confronting cybercrime , and vice versa .

however , categorically clumping the collection of cybercrime activities under the umbrella of "national security threat," "economic security threat," "public security threat," etc .

may prove challenging because of the range of crimes and variety of malicious actors .

as such , another means of examining what form of strategy to employ regarding cybercrime may be to take an "all threats" approach specific to the cyber domain .

this type of strategy would focus on the cyber space ( as opposed to the physical space ) through which the criminal activity takes place , regardless of the security level of the threat .

some have suggested that the starting point for any strategy addressing cybercrime should focus on actor attribution and that "greater attribution and clearer rules for responding to both non - attributed and attributed attacks would enable the development and implementation of better strategies and tactics for responding to cyber threats. .

existing methods for responding to attacks in the physical world differ based on the identity and motivation of the actor .

for example , legal frameworks direct that law enforcement responds to criminal actors , the intelligence community engages in counterintelligence , and the military addresses threats posed by nation - states .

in the cyber world , however , these different actors may use similar techniques .

as such , attributing a given incident to a particular individual or entity — and responding within the appropriate legal framework — may be challenging .

the appendix presents a selection of current u.s. strategies and international conventions in which the united states participates .

policy makers may evaluate the effectiveness of these existing tools in enhancing actor attribution and countering the spectrum of evolving cybercrime threats .

while any one given strategy may be insufficient to address the array of cybercrime threats , the interplay between several strategies may provide a framework for effective crime fighting in the digital domain .

congressional oversight may highlight any gaps in strategies and may be able to evaluate whether the strategies are designed ( and carried out ) to work with one another .

according to one expert , "the threat of cybercrime is largely being ignored , and that [threat] is greater than most people believe. .

indeed , malicious actors exploiting cyberspace have been identified by the intelligence community as a top threat .

however , comprehensive data on cybercrime incidents and their impact are not available , and without exact numbers on the current scope and prevalence of cybercrime , it is difficult to evaluate the magnitude of the threats posed by cyber criminals .

there are a number of issues that have prevented the accurate measurement and tracking of cybercrime .

firstly , the lack of a clear definition of what constitutes cybercrime presents a barrier to tracking comprehensive cybercrime data .

this is compounded by the facts that ( 1 ) the range of cybercrimes is ever expanding in the globalized world and ( 2 ) cyber crimes often overlap with more traditional , non - cyber crimes — thus providing challenges in gauging the true scope of cybercrime .

various agencies and researchers have put forth estimates of the prevalence and costs of cybercrime .

however , these often measure a different range of criminal activities and base estimates on differing victim populations .

the ponemon institute , through its 2014 cost of cyber crime study: united states , estimates that the median cost of cybercrime to select organizations is $9.7 million annually .

further , the study's findings suggest that this median cost increased from nearly $9.1 million in 2013 .

the median cost is based on a self - report survey of 59 u.s. - based organizations across various industry sectors .

in its report , the ponemon institute did not provide a definition of cybercrime as used in the survey or report of the findings .

further , no information was provided on whether survey documents provided to the study participants included a definition of "cybercrime" that was to be used throughout the survey .

results from the 2014 global economic crime survey — polling 5,128 respondents across 99 countries — indicate that 7% of u.s. organizations lost at least $1 million to cybercrime in 2014 .

further , 19% of u.s. organizations reportedly lost $50,000-$1 million from cybercrime .

similar to other studies measuring cybercrime - related losses , this survey does not appear to use a specific , measurable definition of cybercrime .

mcafee and the center for strategic and international studies have also estimated the losses from cybercrime .

in their report , net losses: estimating the global cost of cybercrime , they recognize that defining cybercrime is challenging , and any definition will ultimately impact loss estimates .

they also note that data on cybercrime are lacking and this "means that any dollar amount for the global cost of cybercrime is an estimate based on incomplete data. .

nonetheless , they estimate that cybercrime accounts for about 0.8% of global gdp and about 0.64% of the united states' gdp .

some surveys of cybercrime measure a specific aspect of what may be considered cybercrime , such as phishing attempts or data breaches .

indeed , the prevalence of data breaches is an often - cited statistic , related to an unknown — and by no means comprehensive — range of cybercrimes .

the number of data breaches , as well as the number of records affected by these breaches , has fluctuated over the past several years .

the identity theft resource center ( itrc ) tracks data breaches across the nation , and their statistics indicate that the total number of reported data breaches increased in 2014 ( n = 783 ) after generally fluctuating over the previous five years .

this is the largest number of data breaches since the itrc began amassing these data in 2005 .

symantec observed the prevalence of malicious internet activity — including malicious code , spam , phishing hosts , and bot zombies — across the globe .

the united states ranked as the top country where malicious botnets or robot networks originated in 2013 , followed by china , italy , and taiwan .

while this report includes data on a range of malicious internet activities , it does not provide information as to the prevalence of all forms of cybercrime in specific countries .

