the american opportunity tax credit ( aotc ) provides financial assistance to taxpayers whose children ( or who themselves ) are pursuing post - secondary education .

this report examines how the aotc works , its impact on encouraging attendance at higher education institutions , and issues with administering the credit .

this report provides both an in - depth description of this tax credit and an analysis of its economic impact .

this report is organized to first provide an overview of the aotc , followed by a legislative history that highlights the evolution of education tax credits from proposals in the 1960s through the recent permanent extension of the aotc at the end of 2015 .

this report then analyzes the credit by looking at who claims the credit , the effect education tax credits have on increasing attendance at higher education institutions , and administrative issues with the aotc .

finally , this report concludes with a brief overview of various policy options .

the american opportunity tax credit ( aotc ) allows eligible taxpayers to reduce their federal income taxes by up to $2,500 per eligible student .

the credit was enacted as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , temporarily replacing the hope credit for 2009 and 2010 .

the hope credit was originally enacted in 1997 as part of the taxpayer relief act ( p.l .

105-34 ) .

as outlined in table 1 , the aotc modified several parameters of the hope credit .

the aotc was extended for 2011 and 2012 by the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

subsequently , the aotc was extended for five more years , through the end of 2017 , by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ; atra ) .

the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act ( division q of p.l .

114-113 ) , made the aotc permanent , effectively eliminating the hope credit .

higher education tax credits — first enacted in 1997 by the taxpayer relief act ( p.l .

105-34 ) — originated decades earlier in the 1960s when congress was considering federal financial support for higher education .

during consideration of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) — which provided financial assistance to low - income americans in the form of grants , work study , and loans — "college tuition credits evolved as an alternative to financial aid programs. .

the johnson administration opposed tuition credits , believing that they would result in reduced revenues that could have otherwise been used for financial aid programs for the lowest - income americans .

they also believed the credit would have a limited impact in influencing whether a student did or did not attend college .

according to media reports , then - treasury secretary stanley surrey stated that a tax credit for higher education "would not result in even a single additional student going to college. .

the $1 billion or so that the treasury would lose in revenue by providing a credit or several hundred dollars annually to the parents of college students can be put to better use in the form of direct financial assistance to young people who would not otherwise get to college at all .

in the late 1970s , congress again considered higher education tax credits .

at the time , college costs had risen sharply and many middle - class families were not eligible for federal financial aid programs to mitigate these costs .

ultimately , congress did not enact higher education tax credits and instead expanded existing federal student aid programs , raising the income limits so that more middle - income families would qualify .

nearly two decades later , in a 1996 commencement address at princeton university , president clinton outlined a proposal that would later become the hope credit , stressing that additional education beyond high school was the key to prosperity for americans .

president clinton believed that it was essential to make the 13 th and 14 th years of education as universal as the first 12 years .

to make these first two years of higher education affordable , president clinton proposed the creation of the hope credit .

the credit would be structured so that "if you work hard and earn a b average in high school , we [the federal government] will give you a tax credit to pay the cost of two years of tuition at the average community college. .

this credit was modeled on and took its name from georgia's help outstanding pupils educationally ( hope ) scholarship , which entitles students in georgia with at least a b average in high school to a scholarship that covers tuition expenses at state universities and colleges .

 ( the georgia hope scholarship is not a tax credit — it is a direct spending program that is not tied to georgia's state tax system. ) .

some experts voiced concerns that the main purpose of education tax credits was to provide a tax cut that would be popular with voters , rather than actually increase college attendance .

ultimately , the hope credit was enacted as part of the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-34 ) , a law that included numerous other tax - cutting provisions .

the hope credit ( the key parameters of this provision are outlined in table 1 ) provided eligible taxpayers with up to a $1,500 credit ( adjusted for inflation ) for tuition expenses for the first two years of higher education .

notably , the requirement that students maintain a b average in high school for eligibility was dropped .

beyond those first two years of higher education , the taxpayer relief act of 1997 also created the lifetime learning credit ( see appendix a for more information on this credit ) — but for many taxpayers the value of the lifetime learning credit was less than the hope credit .

in 2008 , then - candidate barack obama proposed replacing the hope and lifetime learning credits with the american opportunity tax credit ( aotc ) .

as originally proposed during the presidential campaign , the aotc would be a credit equal to up to $4,000 ( 100% of the first $4,000 of qualifying higher education expenses ) annually .

crucially , the proposed credit was fully refundable , meaning that certain taxpayers with no tax liability — which includes many low - income americans — would be able to benefit from this provision and receive up to $4,000 as a refund .

in addition , the proposed credit would be computed by the irs using a taxpayer's previous year tax data and provided directly to the higher education institution , not the taxpayer .

students who benefited from the credit would be required to perform 100 hours of community service when they had completed their education .

on a per capita basis , the value of the aotc , as enacted ( $2,500 ) as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , was not as large as originally proposed ( $4,000 ) , but it was a larger tax benefit than the hope credit ( $1,800 ) , which it replaced for 2009 and 2010 .

 ( the aotc replaced the hope credit , but does not affect the lifetime learning credit. ) .

for more information on key parameters of the aotc , see table 1 .

the aotc as enacted had a maximum value of $2,500 and was partially refundable .

taxpayers with little or no tax liability were eligible to receive a part of the credit — 40% of its value — as a refund .

in addition , unlike the obama - proposed aotc , the actual credit did not go directly to educational institutions but instead was claimed by eligible households based on their qualifying education expenses .

finally , the community service requirement was not included as a provision of the final credit .

the aotc was extended for 2011 and 2012 by the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

at the end of 2012 , the aotc was extended for five additional years , through the end of 2017 , by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ; atra ) .

the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act ( division q of p.l .

114-113 ) , made the aotc permanent , effectively eliminating the hope credit .

the path act also included a number of provisions intended to reduce improper payments of the aotc .

these provisions included the disallowance of the credit due to fraud or a reckless disregard of the credit's rules and the id requirements for the taxpayer , student , and educational institution .

the enactment of the aotc has resulted in a substantial increase in the amount of education credits claimed by taxpayers , as illustrated in figure 1 .

the increase in education tax credits underscores a broader trend , which began in 1997 , of providing federal financial assistance for higher education through the tax code .

in light of the budgetary implications of the aotc , congress may be interested in understanding the economic impact of this provision .

the following sections provide an economic analysis of the aotc .

they include an examination of who claims the credit , its effectiveness in boosting college attendance , and a discussion of administrative issues concerning the aotc .

analysis of who claims the aotc indicates that it tends to provide the greatest benefit to middle - income and upper - middle - income taxpayers .

from an economic standpoint , the aotc is an effective tax policy if it causes individuals to engage in a desired behavior — in this case attaining a post - secondary education .

research suggests that the presence of the aotc is not a major factor in increasing attendance at post - secondary institutions , especially for middle - and upper - middle - income taxpayers who are its primary beneficiaries .

hence , this credit may not be influencing behavior for many recipients and instead may be largely going to many taxpayers that would have pursued a higher education or sent their children to an institution of higher education absent the credit .

in addition , the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) has identified administrative issues with the aotc and its predecessor , the hope credit .

congress may also want to consider modifying the aotc , or consolidating the aotc with other education tax benefits .

finally , congress may want to consider federal financial aid for higher education holistically , which could include alternative ways to reduce the cost of higher education .

policymakers may choose to modify the aotc .

the aotc could be modified in a variety of ways .

policymakers may choose to either expand or limit certain parameters of the credit , for example , by using a different credit formula , changing the amount of qualifying expenses that can be used to claim the credit , adjusting the portion of the credit ( currently 40% ) that is refundable , modifying the income level at which the credit phases out , allowing taxpayers to claim the credit for either more or less than four years of post - secondary education , changing the definition of qualifying expenses ( for example to include room and board ) , and providing nondegree - seeking students ( such as students in job - training programs ) eligibility for the credit .

if desired , certain changes to the aotc may expand the credit's availability to lower - income recipients .

for example , policymakers could make a greater percentage of the credit refundable .

they could also modify the credit such that a lower level of expenses would be necessary to claim the maximum credit ( for example , the formula could be 100% of the first $2,500 of qualifying expenses ) .

in contrast , other modifications , like increasing the income level at which the credit phases out , may expand the credit to additional upper - income taxpayers .

these changes may increase confusion among taxpayers , especially when trying to determine which higher education tax credit ( or the above - the - line deduction for tuition and fees ) provides the greatest benefit .

policymakers may instead choose to consolidate the aotc with other education tax incentives that reduce tuition costs — the lifetime learning credit and tuition and fees deduction .

prior to enactment of the aotc , there have been several legislative proposals to consolidate these tax benefits .

for example , in the 109 th congress , senator baucus introduced the education competitiveness act of 2006 ( s. 3902 ) , which repealed the hope and lifetime learning credits and replaced them with a fully refundable $2,000 higher education tax credit .

in the 110 th congress , the bipartisan universal higher education and lifetime learning act of 2007 ( h.r .

2458 ) consolidated the hope and lifetime learning credits and the tuition and fees deduction into one partially refundable credit with a maximum value of $3,000 ( 50% or up to $1,500 was available as a refund ) .

in addition , this legislation set a lifetime limit of $12,000 per student for the credit ( the credit could be claimed for no more than two years of graduate education ) .

more recently , the house - passed version of h.r .

1 ( the version of the bill which passed the house as amended on november 16 , 2017 ) would have eliminated the lifetime learning credit while simultaneously expanding the aotc to a five - year credit , with a smaller credit in the fifth year .

the joint committee on taxation estimated that this change would have cost $17.8 billion between 2017 and 2028 .

 ( policymakers could , however , consolidate and modify education tax credits in such a way that would increase revenue , decrease revenue , or remain revenue neutral. ) .

ultimately , this change was not included in the final bill , which was signed into law on december 22 , 2017 .

the aotc is one of a variety of policies designed to lower the cost of education to students and their families and hence increase accessibility to higher education .

policymakers may pursue several options concerning the aotc .

alternatively , they may choose to reevaluate the federal government's role in higher education financing more broadly by considering education tax incentives like the aotc in context with other forms of federal financial aid to develop a broader higher education financing policy .

for example , policymakers could expand the types of expenses that would qualify for the aotc such that a low - income student who uses a pell grant to pay for most or all of their tuition could still benefit from the aotc .

or policymakers may choose to reformulate the federal government's role in higher education financing entirely by encouraging alternative financing mechanisms like human capital contracts , which allow a student to repay an investor a percentage of future earnings for a fixed period of time .

although there may be shortfalls with this particular proposal , approaching higher education policy holistically — instead of tax policy versus traditional financial aid — may provide more benefit to low - and middle - income students .

appendix a .

other tax provisions for current - year higher education expenses under current law , there are a variety of benefits available to taxpayers for current - year higher education expenses .

a complete list can be found in crs report r41967 , higher education tax benefits: brief overview and budgetary effects , by [author name scrubbed] .

of these benefits , the aotc , the hope credit , the lifetime learning credit , and the above - the - line deduction for tuition and fees are often discussed together as the main tax benefits for current - year higher education expenses ( under current law , the tuition and fees deduction is scheduled to expire at the end of 2017 ) .

a taxpayer cannot claim both the deduction and an education credit ( lifetime learning or aotc ) for the same student in the same year .

details on the lifetime learning credit and the tuition and fees deduction are provided below .

appendix b .

calculating the aotc: a stylized example the smiths pay $8,000 of college expenses for sarah .

of the $8,000 in expenses , $6,000 are for tuition and are considered qualifying expenses , while $2,000 are for room and board expenses , which are not qualifying expenses .

the smiths' daughter sarah attends university x in the same year her parents incur the $8,000 in college expenses .

the smiths file their tax return as married joint filers .

they have a combined income of $100,000 , which is below the level at which the credit begins to phase out ( $160,000 ) .

to help pay for these costs , the university gives sarah a $4,000 tax - free scholarship ( i.e. , none of the scholarship is subject to taxation ) , which can be used to pay for any part of sarah's university expenses .

the remainder of the cost is paid for with student loans .

sarah is a first - year undergraduate at university x enrolled full - time in a degree program and is eligible to claim the aotc .

she is claimed as a dependent by the smiths .

step 1 .

qualifying expenses: sarah has $6,000 in qualifying expenses that are reduced by the entire value of her tax - free scholarship .

importantly , even though the tax - free scholarship can be used for expenses aside from tuition and fees , because it is tax - free , she must reduce her qualifying expenses by the total value of the award .

if she had used the $4,000 award to pay for room and board ( not a qualifying expense ) and she had also reported it on her ( or her parent's income tax return ) , she would not need to reduce her qualifying expenses by the value of the award .

however , because the award is entirely tax - free , her $6,000 in qualifying expenses are reduced by $4,000 and she has $2,000 in qualifying expenses .

step 2 .

calculating the aotc: because sarah has $2,000 in qualifying expenses , her parents can claim a $2,000 aotc ( 100% x first $2,000 of qualifying expenses ) .

