in august 2011 , the obama administration released its domestic counter - radicalization strategy .

the administration dubbed this effort "countering violent extremism" ( cve ) .

implementation of the cve strategy revolves around impeding the radicalization of violent jihadists in the united states .

as this may suggest , for this report , a couple of concepts are key .

namely , "radicalization" describes the process of acquiring and holding radical or extremist beliefs ; and "terrorism" describes violent or illegal action taken on the basis of these radical or extremist beliefs .

this report examines the implementation of the administration's counter - radicalization strategy and provides possible policy considerations for congress relating to this relatively new area of coordinated federal activity .

implementation of the cve strategy involves many elements within the executive branch and brushes against a number of key issues involving constitutionally protected activity versus effective counterterrorism policing efforts .

government - related efforts to stave off terrorist activity in the united states exist within two broad contexts .

first , the operational aspects of violent terrorist plots largely involve clandestine illegal activity .

since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , hundreds of individuals have been implicated in more than 70 homegrown violent jihadist plots or attacks .

in this secretive realm , law enforcement pursues terrorists in a real - world version of hide - and - seek .

domestic law enforcement strategies devised in the decade since 9 / 11 to prevent terrorism largely focus their efforts in this area .

federal law enforcement activity in this arena is geared toward rooting out terrorists and stopping them from successfully executing their plots .

the second context is the open marketplace of ideas .

here , private citizens are free to weigh competing ideologies and engage in constitutionally protected speech and expression .

in this arena , a relative few ordinary law - abiding persons move from the mainstream and adopt radical ideologies that embrace terrorism .

as they radicalize , they do not necessarily commit crimes .

much like the policing that occurs in the secretive realm , the federal government's cve strategy is a preventative approach to terrorism , but it is not wholly focused on policing .

rather , federal activity in this arena is geared toward helping local communities and individuals boost their resilience to terrorist radicalization efforts .

the divergent nature of these two contexts may imply clear distinction between the marketplace of ideas and the secretive operational realm .

in reality , they are far from distinct .

what happens operationally has significant impacts in the marketplace of ideas ( figure 1 ) .

this interrelationship is highlighted by any number of issues .

for example , the success of terrorist plots in the secretive realm may spur radicalization and generate public fear in the marketplace of ideas ; conversely , successful investigations in the secretive realm may discourage radicalizing individuals within the marketplace of ideas from eventually embracing violent acts of terrorism as an ultimate goal ; effective policing within the secretive realm may depend on a trusting community acting supportively in the marketplace of ideas ; perceived policing excesses in the secretive realm may impede community engagement with law enforcement ; and high levels of radicalization occurring in the marketplace of ideas may expand the potential pool of terrorist recruits , while an effective government strategy to counter radicalization may staunch terrorist recruitment .

in fact , some of the key challenges involved in implementing a national strategy to deal with terrorist radicalization spring from the interplay between the marketplace of ideas and the secretive realm .

because so much of the radicalization process occurs within the marketplace of ideas , counter - radicalization efforts involve activity in the same realm .

american counter - radicalization approaches favor government engagement with communities affected by terrorism .

scholars who have studied the circumstances that are associated with voluntary cooperation by muslim - americans in anti - terror policing efforts have identified strong evidence that when authorities are viewed as more legitimate , their rules and decisions are more likely to be accepted .

community engagement is — in part — an effort to make law enforcement authority more accepted within localities .

"the united states has made great strides," says one federal counterterrorism official , "in what might be called tactical counterterrorism — taking individual terrorists off the streets , and disrupting cells and their operations ... an effective counterterrorism strategy must go beyond this ... ( to address ) the threat of violent extremism. .

with the announcement of the cve strategy , the obama administration has begun to address this concern .

these administration efforts may attract greater oversight from congress , especially because the strategy involves the interplay between the public marketplace of ideas involving constitutionally protected activity and the secretive operational realm where terrorists plot and law enforcement pursues .

as mentioned elsewhere in this report , federal cve activity emphasizes engagement with muslim communities across the country .

it broadly recognizes this , training , and counter messaging as key components of cve .

however , aside from embracing robust outreach and training for government agencies , the strategy lacks specific initiatives to combat radicalization at the grass - roots level .

this suggests a number of other issues .

who speaks for diverse muslim communities in america ? .

as mentioned above , "[w]hen asked which of a list of national muslim - american organizations represents their interests , 55% of muslim men and 42% of muslim women say that none do. .

perhaps sentiments are clearer at the local level , however these figures suggest the difficulty of selecting partners who accurately represent community needs .

it is difficult to speak of one muslim "constituency" in the united states .

the 2.75 million muslims in the united states have divergent sectarian points of view , come from many ethnic or national backgrounds , and live in a variety of areas .

muslim americans support many secular and religious organizations .

what criteria will the administration employ in its selection efforts , and how transparent will the process be ? .

once approved as partners , what "rules of the road" will govern continued cooperation ? .

in essence , what would have to happen for a muslim community group to fall out of favor with the government ? .

ad hoc decision making might cause the whole cve outreach process to appear arbitrary to some community participants .

congress may consider requiring the administration to release public guidelines in this area .

public guidelines may be especially important , because engagement directly involves engaging people and issues in the open marketplace of ideas and protected constitutional activity .

there appears to be little federally driven guidance to community groups on how to intervene with people vulnerable to radicalization .

such an intervention effort , the channel program , has been a key element of the united kingdom's counter radicalization strategy since 2007 .

the british government describes channel as a "multi - agency programme to identify and provide support to people at risk of radicalisation" and involvement in "all forms of terrorism. .

channel "relies on close collaboration between police , partners and other key stakeholders ... and where necessary , provides an appropriate support package tailored to an individual's needs. .

copying the channel program in its entirety may not be appropriate for the u.s. context .

however , it is unclear whether the obama administration considers some variant of channel workable or even necessary in the united states .

the u.s. cve strategy does cite the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) comprehensive gang model as an example of "locally - based initiatives that connect communities and government to address community challenges through collaboration and the development of stakeholder networks. .

ojjdp — a component of doj's office of justice programs — describes the model as "one of the few approaches to gangs that encompasses a multidisciplinary response to gangs on multiple levels. .

the preventative model is intended as a blueprint for organizing local counter - gang efforts that do not necessarily result in law enforcement - driven outcomes , such as investigations , arrests , and prosecutions .

for intervention , it targets young adult and teen gang members , not entities such as hate groups , prison gangs , or ideologically driven gangs consisting of adults .

the model involves five strategies: community mobilization: involvement of local citizens , including former gang members and community groups and agencies , and the coordination of programs and staff functions within and across agencies .

opportunities provision: the development of a variety of specific education , training , and employment programs targeting gang - involved youth .

social intervention: youth - serving agencies , schools , street outreach workers , grassroots groups , faith - based organizations , law enforcement agencies , and other criminal justice organizations reaching out and acting as links between gang - involved youth and their families , the conventional world , and needed services .

suppression: formal and informal social control procedures , including close supervision or monitoring of gang youth by agencies of the criminal justice system and also by community - based agencies , schools , and grassroots groups .

organizational change and development: development and implementation of policies and procedures that result in the most effective use of available and potential resources to better address the gang problem .

the model is designed to focus on youth active in gangs or those who exhibit factors indicating potential gang involvement .

it also advocates engagement with the families of such youth .

among its many suggestions , the model discusses interventions such as job training , employment , family counseling , academic tutoring , and anger management classes for young people at - risk .

it also calls on law enforcement agencies and courts to move beyond traditional roles in the suppression of gangs — urging them to consider more intervention - oriented activities such as referring youth to social service programs .

the cve strategy provides little detail about how the comprehensive gang model may be applied to keep vulnerable people from radicalizing and becoming terrorists .

congress may consider examining the utility and feasibility of developing a cve intervention model for the united states .

while elaborating the specific details of such a program may be best left to the federal agencies potentially involved , broadly and publicly exploring what shape it would take might be of value to congress .

key questions may involve issues such as ( 1 ) which agencies would take the lead in creating a program based on the comprehensive gang model ? .

 ( 2 ) how would the fbi have to adapt its counterterrorism mission — strictly focused on investigating and disrupting terrorist activity — to handle the notion of "social intervention" as suggested by the comprehensive gang model ? .

the administration's cve strategy stresses that "the best defenses against violent extremist ideologies are well - informed and equipped families , local communities , and local institutions. .

determining and explaining how local entities — whether public or private — should interact with federal partners may pose quite a challenge .

for example , are there existing federal grant programs that can be harnessed by local actors to develop a cve intervention program ? .

a publicly available comprehensive list of grant programs that can be harnessed for cve activities does not exist .

congress may opt to consider the feasibility or the value of such a list or a clearinghouse available to local entities to identify such programs .

by possibly pursuing this , congress may help to ensure that local constituents have better information about and more direct access to federal cve programs .

on the other hand , such a list may be perceived as an additional layer of bureaucracy between constituents and grant programs .

as the united kingdom has clearly stated in its counter - radicalization program , extremist ideologies play a role in radicalization .

furthermore , quintan wiktorowicz ( at the time on the national security council ) commented that "we [the united states] will push back against the full scope of different violent ideologies with an inclusive , positive narrative. .

however , in the united states , mere belief in radical notions , no matter how reprehensible they are , is not necessarily illegal .

the american civil liberties union's ( aclu's ) michael german has stated that the aclu is "deeply concerned about the potential for government censorship of internet content based on the [cve] strategy's proposal for countering violent extremist propaganda. .

even more fundamentally , the task of countering extremist ideas raises key issues regarding the implementation of the cve strategy .

in the sip , the administration notes that when countering violent extremist propaganda , "in many instances , it will be more effective to empower communities to develop credible alternatives that challenge violent extremist narratives rather than having the federal government attempt to do so. .

this begs the question: do the strategy and the sip place the federal government in the business of determining which ideologies are dangerous and which are safe — essentially determining which beliefs are good and which are bad ? .

this can be viewed from two angles .

one involves establishing parameters for engagement with local communities , the other involves evaluating the end product of engagement , the counter - narrative .

first , while the sip may suggest that the government should not be involved in creating alternatives to violent extremist propaganda , it appears to assume that the government will be involved in sifting between dangerous and safe ideas — establishing parameters for engagement on this issue .

without picking and choosing between good and bad ideologies , "empowering" local activists to counter specific concepts may prove difficult .

empowering individuals and groups to counter un - named , un - described concepts may prove challenging .

second , if the framing of a counter - narrative challenging terrorist ideologies is necessary , how precisely should the federal government partner with state and local government and civilian counterparts in the development of this counter - narrative ? .

how do government entities keep a counter - narrative from being publicly viewed as propaganda or fueling terrorist conspiracy theories about the united states ? .

oversight in this area may be vital .

as a start , congress may wish to ask the administration to better define what it means when referring to "violent extremist narratives. .

there is no designated single lead agency for any of the three objectives laid out in the sip .

likewise , there is no single agency managing all of the individual activities and efforts of the plan .

at the national level , it arguably may be of value to have a single federal agency in charge of the government's cve efforts .

one expert has stated as much: the white house should designate a single agency that serves as the principal hub for collecting , disseminating , and evaluating information on counter - radicalization .

its main function would be to collect , analyze , and share best practices with a wide range of governmental and non - governmental actors , including community leaders and non - profits .

without a lead agency it may be difficult to monitor the levels of federal funding devoted to cve efforts .

how many personnel are devoted to cve in the federal government ? .

for how many of these employees is counter radicalization a full - time job ? .

are there mechanisms to track federal cve expenditure ? .

which federal body is responsible for this ? .

very specifically , the lack of a lead agency is reflected in the fact that doj , dhs , and fbi have each issued training guidelines for cve .

they are very similar , but the issuance of three almost identical but separate guidelines raises the question: why not just have one set created by one body overseeing the cve program ? .

congress may pursue with the administration the feasibility or value of designating a lead agency , or the possibility of naming a lead via legislation .

however , it is unclear what types of authority — especially in the budgetary realm — such a lead may be able to wield over well - established agencies playing central roles in the cve strategy .

on the other side of these budgetary questions , without a lead agency , how will the administration evaluate the effectiveness of federal cve efforts ? .

the sip underscores that individual departments and agencies involved in cve "will be responsible for assessing their specific activities in pursuit of sip objectives , in coordination with an assessment working group. .

while this may seem straight - forward , the british government has struggled with measurement issues related to its counter - radicalization strategy .

u.k. officials have made "progress ... in measuring outputs but not always in measuring outcomes. .

in other words , counting the number of engagement events is one thing .

it is quite another thing to evaluate their impact .

the sip mentions this problem as well .

however , the sip does not discuss ( 1 ) specific metrics , ( 2 ) what real authority the assessment working group will have to independently evaluate and impact cve activity within federal departments and agencies , and ( 3 ) whether the assessment working group will have the power to standardize measures of success across federal agencies and departments .

in the end , the lack of a lead agency with budgetary control over cve efforts and clear responsibility for implementation of the strategy makes it difficult to conceptualize exactly how spending in this area will be prioritized , evaluated , and then re - prioritized based on results .

without a high degree of transparency , an engagement strategy driven by federal agencies charged with intelligence gathering and law enforcement responsibilities may run the risk of being perceived as an effort to co - opt communities into the security process — providing tips , leads , sources , and informants .

this threatens to "securitize" a relationship intended as outreach within the marketplace of ideas .

it has been noted that "unlike counterterrorism , which targets terrorists , counter - radicalization is focused on the communities that are targeted by terrorists for recruitment .

the aim is to protect , strengthen , and empower these communities so that they become resilient to violent extremism. .

as such , some suggest that it might not be particularly effective to have the same federal agencies responsible for counterterrorism also be the main players in the cve strategy .

the sip rejects this notion stressing that "traditional national security or law enforcement agencies such as dhs , doj , and the fbi will execute many of the programs and activities outlined in the sip. .

the strategy relies on agencies whose enforcement and intelligence missions are undergirded by secretiveness .

as it stands , 19 of the 20 "future activities and efforts" for sip objective 1 , which focuses on community engagement , have doj , dhs , or a national task force headed by doj and dhs as lead agencies .

the lone remaining future activity / effort is headed by the department of treasury and is focused on terrorism financing , an area of enforcement for the department .

the fact that doj , dhs , and treasury are key counterterrorism agencies may make it difficult for community groups to view them as full partners , especially if community confidence in them is shaky to start .

according to a 2011 study , american muslims have less confidence than other faith groups in the fbi — "60% of muslim americans saying they have confidence in the fbi , versus 75% or more of americans of other faiths who say this. .

because of this reality , congress may decide to assess whether there is a need for greater transparency from the administration in its cve efforts .

