broadband deployment is increasingly seen as providing a path towards increased regional economic development and , in the long term , creating jobs .

according to the 2010 national broadband plan , the lack of adequate broadband infrastructure is most pressing in rural america , where the costs of serving large geographical areas , coupled with low population densities , often reduce economic incentives for telecommunications providers to invest in and maintain broadband service .

historically , the federal government has provided assistance to rural telecommunications providers , helping them obtain capital to invest in rural telecommunications infrastructure and to maintain an adequate return on their investment .

the national broadband plan estimated that $24 billion of further federal investment is necessary to bring all of rural america up to an adequate level of broadband service .

currently , there are two ongoing federal vehicles which direct money to fund broadband in rural areas: the broadband and telecommunications programs at the rural utilities service ( rus ) of the u.s. department of agriculture and the universal service fund ( usf ) programs under the federal communications commission ( fcc ) .

while both the rus and usf programs share some of the same goals ( eg , improving broadband availability and adoption in rural areas ) , the two programs differ in their funding mechanism , scope , and emphasis .

the 113 th congress may assess how best to shape the evolution of both the rus and usf broadband programs .

the statute that authorizes the rus broadband loan program will likely be amended by the 2013 farm bill .

meanwhile , the fcc is considering significant reforms of the usf , and congress is currently maintaining an oversight role with respect to those reforms .

in the current climate of budget deficit reduction , congress is examining the different pieces of federal investment in broadband and determining how they can best fit together in order to reach the goal of most efficiently and effectively deploying broadband in rural america .

the rus has a portfolio of telecommunications and broadband programs offering loans , loan guarantees , grants , and loan / grant combinations .

as seen in table 1 , some programs are relatively recent , while others have been operating for over 60 years .

some are specifically and exclusively designed to support broadband infrastructure deployment ( eg , rural broadband loans , community connect grants , broadband initiatives program ) , while others ( eg , telecommunications infrastructure loans ) have historically supported infrastructure for telephone voice service , but have now evolved into support for broadband - capable service provided by traditional telephone borrowers .

additionally , other programs ( eg , distance learning and telemedicine , delta health services grants ) support specific broadband - based applications .

the rus broadband programs and the fcc's universal service fund ( usf ) share a common goal: increasing broadband infrastructure deployment and applications in rural areas .

however , the way that each program addresses these goals is markedly different .

rus grants and loans are used as up - front capital to invest in broadband infrastructure , whereas the usf provides ongoing subsidies to keep the operation of telecommunications — and most recently broadband networks in high - cost areas — economically viable for providers .

these subsidies , in turn , enable providers to invest in upgrading their telephone networks to make them broadband - capable .

aside from the distance learning and telemedicine ( dlt ) program , rus telecommunications programs address broadband infrastructure deployment , which is intended to increase the availability of broadband in rural america .

the usf , while also addressing broadband availability ( through the high cost program and the connect america fund ) , also addresses end - user broadband adoption through the low income program .

regarding the health and education applications , the principal difference between rus programs ( distance learning and telemedicine ) and the usf programs ( schools and libraries program , rural health care program ) is that rus funds end - user equipment , while usf funds connectivity .

dlt grants serve as initial capital assets for equipment , instructional programming , technical assistance , or instruction for using eligible equipment ( eg , video conferencing equipment , computers ) that operate via telecommunications to rural end - users of telemedicine and distance learning .

dlt does not fund the telecommunications that connects that equipment .

by contrast , the usf schools and libraries program supports the conduit or pipeline for communications using telecommunications services and / or the internet , and includes four categories of service: telecommunications services , internet access , internal connections , and basic maintenance of internal connections .

similarly , the rural health care program provides discounts for rural non - profit health care providers by providing connectivity .

finally , the rus programs are funded through annual appropriations and are subject to the annual congressional budget process .

by contrast , usf is not funded through annual appropriations , but is funded by mandatory contributions from telecommunications carriers that provide interstate service .

congress is seeking ways to best leverage federal programs to ensure that the goals of the national broadband plan — including universal broadband service by 2020 — are met to the greatest extent possible .

with the september 30 , 2010 , conclusion of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) broadband grant and loan awards , the rus broadband programs and the usf programs remain the only ongoing federal vehicles to provide financial assistance for rural broadband deployment .

with both programs currently at a pivotal point , an issue for the 113 th congress is how best to shape those programs as they go forward .

the statute authorizing the rural broadband loan and loan guarantee — section 601 of the rural electrification act of 1936 — was significantly modified in the 2008 farm bill , and is being addressed once more in the 2013 farm bill .

typically a new farm bill is developed every five years , principally by the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry .

the appropriations committees in the house and senate both have a major role to play as well , as each considers annual appropriations for the rus broadband programs through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act .

meanwhile , the usf is undergoing a major and unprecedented transition through a series of reforms being implemented by the fcc .

congress has largely adopted an oversight role and a "wait and see" posture with respect to the fcc's usf reforms .

while numerous members have written letters to the fcc urging various modifications in the reform package , there was no comprehensive legislation introduced into the 112 th congress that addressed the fcc's usf reforms .

the house energy and commerce committee , the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee , and the house committee on natural resources continue to assess the impact of the reforms , and the fcc's progress in their implementation .

to the extent that various constituencies and interest groups ( whether it be small rate - of - return carriers , large price - cap carriers , competitive providers , state utility regulators , or broadband providers and consumers ) feel they are disadvantaged by the reforms , and to the extent that programmatic inefficiencies or waste , fraud , and abuse come to light ( as they have in the past through gao reports , for example ) , congress always has the prerogative in the future of formulating and considering legislation that could modify those reforms by amending the 1934 communications act .

given that the rus and usf broadband programs share the goal of deploying broadband to rural america , congress may also wish to assess how these two programs can best fit together .

are they effectively targeted towards providing broadband to the most unserved areas of the nation , while at the same time minimizing adverse impacts on private incumbent providers ? .

are they the most cost - effective way for congress to fund rural broadband development ? .

to what extent are the two programs complementary and to what extent do the two programs overlap ? .

and finally , how will changes made to the usf program affect the viability of broadband loans made under the rus programs ? .

