coal combustion residuals ( ccrs ) are the inorganic material that remains after pulverized coal is burned .

to establish consistent national standards to address potential threats to human health and the environment associated with improper management of ccrs destined for disposal , on june 21 , 2010 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed for public comment two regulatory options applicable to the material .

under the first proposal , epa would reverse previous regulatory determinations to exempt ccrs from regulation as a hazardous waste and list the material as a "special waste" pursuant to its authorities under subtitle c of the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ; 42 u.s.c .

§6901 et seq. ) .

under subtitle c , epa has broad authority to regulate wastes it identifies as "hazardous," from its generation to its ultimate disposal ( i.e. , from "cradle to grave" ) .

under its subtitle c option , epa would require ccrs destined for disposal in a landfill or surface impoundment to be managed in accordance with requirements or standards applicable to hazardous waste generators ; owners and operators of hazardous waste treatment , storage , and disposal facilities ( tsdf ) ; and tsdf permit programs .

the subtitle c option would create federal standards enforceable by epa , but likely adopted and implemented ( and ultimately enforced ) by individual states .

under the second proposal , epa would promulgate national standards applicable to landfills and surface impoundments that receive ccrs , in accordance with its authority regarding the management of non - hazardous solid waste under subtitle d of rcra .

if this option were selected , the standards would be similar to those applicable to municipal solid waste ( msw ) landfills , but would take into consideration issues specific to the management of ccrs , particularly controls necessary to address the accumulation of liquid wastes in surface impoundments .

in contrast to its subtitle c option , epa has no authority to enforce the standards it proposes under the subtitle d option .

epa is authorized to promulgate federally enforceable waste management criteria only for msw landfills and no other facilities that may receive non - hazardous solid wastes .

instead , epa could finalize the proposed subtitle d standards , but they would be enforced by states that choose to adopt and apply them to owners and operators of ccr landfills and surface impoundments .

epa's proposal drew comments from industry groups , environmental and citizen groups , state agency representatives , individual citizens , and some members of congress .

concerns over the subtitle c proposal relate to its ultimate impact in terms of implementation costs to both industry and states , energy prices , and ccr recycling opportunities .

with regard to the subtitle d proposal , the primary concerns stem from epa's lack of authority to enforce them .

given the argument by many states that the material is being managed sufficiently under current state regulatory programs , environmental and citizen groups have expressed doubts over the degree to which all states would adopt them , resulting in the promulgation but not implementation of any new requirements necessary to ensure protection of human health and the environment .

commenters have proposed various legislative options in response to the varied concerns over epa's proposed regulatory options .

possible legislative options that have been debated include an explicit directive to epa to regulate or prohibit ccr regulation under subtitle c or subtitle d. another legislative option , the coal residuals reuse and management act ( h.r .

2273 ) , was passed by the house on october 14 , 2011 , and introduced in the senate ( s. 1751 ) on october 20 , 2011 .

the proposal would amend subtitle d of rcra by adding section 4011 , management and disposal of coal combustion residuals .

that amendment would create a coal combustion residuals permit program , defined as "a permit program or other system of prior approval and conditions that is adopted by or for a state for the management and disposal of coal combustion residuals to the extent such activities occur in structures in such state. .

legislative provisions largely identical to those in the coal residuals reuse and management act are included in legislation that would extend the authorization of federal funding for surface transportation programs administered by the department of transportation ( dot ) .

specifically , title v of h.r .

4348 ( passed in the house on april 18 , 2012 ) includes language identical to h.r .

2273 and s. 1751 .

on april 24 , 2012 , the senate agreed by unanimous consent to an amendment that struck the house - passed language from h.r .

4348 and substituted the language of the senate - passed bill to reauthorize dot programs ( s. 1813 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act , or map - 21 ) .

the senate subsequently asked for a conference and appointed conferees .

as a result , provisions of the proposed coal residuals reuse and management act are being debated in the conference over the transportation reauthorization legislation .

this report provides background information concerning the provisions in the proposed section 4011 of rcra in h.r .

2273 , s. 1751 , and title v of h.r .

4348 .

in particular , it identifies issues associated with potential state adoption and implementation of the proposed ccr permit program .

unique to the proposal would be the creation of a permit program in federal statute , absent the promulgation of related federally enforceable standards .

requirements applicable to the program's adoption and implementation would be those created within the amendment to rcra .

it would not authorize the agency with jurisdiction over rcra's implementation ( epa ) to promulgate regulations detailing permit program requirements or regulations applicable to facilities that may be expected to obtain a permit pursuant to the program .

instead , requirements applicable to the proposed statutory ccr permit program would draw upon selected existing regulations promulgated pursuant to subtitle d applicable to the management of municipal solid waste ( msw ) .

it would also draw from selected elements of epa's june 2010 subtitle d proposal to regulate ccr landfills and surface impoundments .

considering their influence on the potential adoption and implementation of a ccr permit program , this report identifies relevant elements of proposed and existing regulatory requirements under subtitle d. in particular , the report distinguishes between epa and state agency authorities in regulating nonhazardous solid wastes under subtitle d , including epa's role in developing and individual state roles in enforcing those requirements .

the report also summarizes selected msw landfill regulations and standards proposed by epa in june 2010 under subtitle d. finally , with regard to the legislative proposals that would amend subtitle d , the report summarizes provisions in the proposed section 4011 of rcra ; identifies potential issues associated with implementing a statutory permit program ; and compares details of the regulatory requirements applicable to msw landfills , on which the legislative proposal is based , to comparable elements of the proposed ccr permit program .

as noted above , the focus of this report is the legislative proposal to amend subtitle d of rcra and the ccr permit program that would be created pursuant to the proposed amendment .

analysis specific to epa's june 2010 proposal and details regarding the options it proposed under subtitles c and d of rcra are discussed separately in crs report r41341 , epa's proposal to regulate coal combustion waste disposal: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

in 2010 , 45% of the electricity generated in the united states used coal as its source of fuel .

pulverized coal burned for electricity production generates a tremendous amount of residual inorganic material .

in 2010 , industry estimates that as much as 130 million tons of ccrs were generated , making it one of the largest waste streams in the united states .

disposal of ccrs on - site at individual power plants may involve decades - long accumulation of waste — with hundreds of thousands , if not millions , of tons of dry ash ( in a landfill ) or wet ash slurry ( in a surface impoundment pond ) deposited at the site .

on december 22 , 2008 , national attention was turned to risks associated with managing such large volumes of ccrs when a breach in a surface impoundment pond at the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) kingston , tn , plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry , covering more than 300 acres , damaging or destroying homes and property .

tva estimates that cleanup will continue into 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion .

the incident at kingston , as well as smaller incidents that resulted from improper ccr management , drew attention to the potential for a sudden , catastrophic release related to the structural failure of a surface impoundment .

however , epa has determined that a more common threat associated with ccr management is the leaching of contaminants likely present in the waste , primarily heavy metals , resulting in surface or groundwater contamination .

the kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the management of ccrs is essentially unregulated at the federal level .

the proposed ccr permit program would draw from certain waste management standards promulgated or proposed by epa pursuant to subtitle d: specifically , existing regulatory standards applicable to the management of municipal solid waste ( msw ) and selected proposed standards applicable to ccr landfills and surface impoundments .

to understand the provisions in the proposed amendment to rcra , it is useful to understand the requirements from which the legislative proposal would be drawn .

the legislative proposal to amend subtitle d of rcra would add a section 4011 , management and disposal of coal combustion residuals .

under that section , a permit program for the management and disposal of ccrs would be created .

among its reasons for proposing national standards applicable to ccr accumulation and disposal facilities , epa identified the need to ensure that both new and existing facilities would operate in a way that minimized potential contaminant leaching ( primarily through the use of composite liners ) and that would monitor groundwater to determine if such leaching has occurred .

epa has determined that states do not consistently require such protective measures , particularly at existing ccr surface impoundments .

to address those concerns , when considering epa's proposal under subtitle d and legislative proposals to amend rcra , the most relevant question may be "would either approach change current state practices ? .

the answer is not clear .

neither proposal would apply federally enforceable standards to owners and operators of ccr landfills or surface impoundments .

epa's proposal would apply national standards to those facilities , but they would not be directly enforceable by epa .

instead , it would be up to individual states to determine the degree to which they may adopt , implement , and enforce the standards .

for example , a state may choose to apply epa's standards to new ccr disposal facilities , but not necessarily to existing facilities — those that epa has identified as being more likely to operate without necessary protections .

the legislative proposal to amend rcra would create a ccr permit program that would give states broad discretion in determining how , when , and to which facilities they may apply new regulatory standards .

in comments submitted by state agencies in the wake of epa's june 2010 proposal , most state agency officials argued that their own regulatory programs sufficiently address ccr management .

it would seem unlikely that , absent an explicit federal directive to do so , a state would choose to implement a ccr permit program that would vary significantly from its current waste management program .

appendix a .

comparison of existing and proposed disposal facility criteria the first and second columns in table a - 1 list existing regulatory criteria applicable to msw landfills in 40 c.f.r .

258 and comparable standards , proposed by epa to be added under 40 c.f.r .

part 257 , applicable to ccr landfills and surface impoundments .

listed under each column are individual requirements specifying location restrictions , operating criteria , design criteria , groundwater monitoring and corrective action , closure and post - closure care , and financial assurance .

table cells with an asterisk indicate the lack of a corresponding requirement between the two standards .

when individual requirements are largely similar , only the regulatory heading is included .

when there is a significant difference between two requirements , additional information is provided to clarify that difference .

broadly , the most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surface impoundments .

for example , requirements that would provide protections specific to the disposal of liquids are not included in part 258 because bulk disposal of liquids is prohibited in msw landfills .

in comparison , epa's june 2010 subtitle d proposal includes various requirements intended to address issues unique to the management of ccrs , particularly the accumulation of liquids in surface impoundments — with regard to both the higher potential risk of a catastrophic release associated with a structural failure and contaminant leaching from those units .

the third column lists ccr permit program specifications included under the "minimum requirements" and "revised criteria" that would apply to the permit program in the proposed section 4011 of rcra .

as discussed previously , by creating a permit program , the proposed amendment to rcra does not attempt to create standards applicable to owners and operators of ccr landfills and surface impoundments .

for example , the following provision is included under the program minimum requirements: "the specifications described in this subsection for a coal combustion residuals permit program are as follows: ( a ) the revised criteria described in [proposed section 4011 ( c ) ( 2 ) ] shall apply to a coal combustion residuals permit program . .

further , those revised criteria / msw landfill criteria would apply to a ccr permit program except as a state may determine that one or more are not needed for the management of ccr in that state and decline to apply it .

information included under the third column in table a - 1 is intended to identify permit program specifications that , if a state chose to apply them to owner / operators of ccr structures , would be similar to or distinctly different from epa's june 2010 proposal applicable to ccr landfills and surface impoundments .

appendix b .

an "adequate" msw permit program compared to the proposed ccr permit program given the discretion allowed to states to apply the proposed section 4011 permit program specifications directly to ccr structures , it is unclear whether or to what degree a state's ccr permit program would be comparable to an approved msw permit program ( as defined under current law ) .

if a state did choose to apply those criteria to owners and operators of ccr structures , implementation of a ccr permit program would still likely be significantly different compared to an msw permit program .

state adoption and implementation of a ccr permit program would also likely differ from an msw permit program as a result of the significantly different roles and responsibilities allowed for epa .

key differences between the existing msw and proposed ccr permit programs can be seen by comparing "requirements for state permit program determination of adequacy" to provisions applicable to a ccr permit program in the proposed section 4011 amendment to rcra .

table b - 1 lists selected , relevant requirements in 40 c.f.r .

part 239 and comparable elements of the proposed ccr permit program .

broadly , few requirements included under part 239 are included in the proposed section 4011 .

as a result , the identification of comparable provisions that are not included among the requirements applicable to the permit program proposed in statute would likely not apply to a state's program or may be applied at its discretion .

