china is a major global producer of many raw materials , and , in some cases , a dominant producer .

particular concern has been raised in the united states and elsewhere over china's near - monopoly in the production of "rare earths" — a group of 17 elements whose unique properties make them critical in a variety of advanced technologies .

due to their special properties of magnetism , luminescence , and strength , rare earths are widely used in high - technology and clean energy products , as well as in military weapon systems .

according to one analyst , rare earth elements "are critical to hundreds of high tech applications , many of which define our modern way of life .

without rare earth elements , much of the world's modern technology would be vastly different , and many applications would not be possible. .

the chinese government has made the development of its rare earth resources a top priority since the 1980s .

in 1992 , chinese leader deng xiaoping reportedly said , "china's rare earth resources can be likened in importance to the middle east's oil .

they have immense strategic significance and we must certainly deal with rare earths issues with care , unleashing the advantages they bring. .

in 1999 , chinese president jiang zemin reportedly wrote: "improve the development and applications of rare earth , and change the resource advantage into economic superiority. .

government support for the rare earth industry , low labor costs , and lax environmental standards enabled china to become the world's dominant producer of rare earths , estimated to be the source of over 97% of the global supply .

in recent years , china has been restructuring its domestic rare earth industry while putting more restrictions on rare earth exports , which has greatly affected the price and quantity of rare earths available in the global market .

this has caused concern among businesses and foreign governments about potential business risks and geopolitical implications .

such concerns became more acute when china reportedly suspended shipments of rare earths to japan , due to a months - long diplomatic crisis with japan in september of 2010 .

china's rare earth policies have raised concerns among many in congress because rare earths are important to a number of u.s. industries , including high technology ( such as advanced electronics and medical equipment ) and green technology ( such as hybrid cars and wind turbines ) .

in addition , u.s. defense industries rely on rare earths for a variety of weapon systems .

china's export restrictions over the past two years have disrupted supplies and sharply raised prices for rare earths outside china .

some members contend that china's export restrictions on rare earths are intended to give domestic chinese downstream users a competitive advantage ( because of the secured access to rare earth supply and the significant disparity between domestic and external rare earth prices ) over foreign competitors , and / or to induce foreign users of rare earths to move their production facilities to china .

members have also expressed concerns that china's virtual monopoly of rare earths may impact u.s. economic and security interests because it makes many u.s. commercial and defense industries vulnerable to supply shortages and higher prices as a result of future chinese restrictions that could occur for economic , as well as political , reasons .

several bills have been introduced in congress to address these concerns , including h.r .

618 , h.r .

952 , h.r .

1314 , h.r .

1388 , h.r .

1540 , h.r .

2011 , h.r .

2184 , h.r .

2284 , s. 1113 , and s. 1270 .

in the house , a congressional caucus on rare earths was established in late 2011 to push for reestablishing a domestic rare earth supply chain in order to reduce u.s. dependence on china .

this report provides an overview of the u.s. dispute with china over its restrictions of rare earth exports .

it examines the level of u.s. rare earth trade with china , how chinese policies have affected rare earth prices for u.s. firms , possible motivations behind china's restrictions of rare earth exports , and how the united states and other major users of rare earths have responded , including a wto dispute settlement case brought by the united states , japan , and the eu in march 2012 against china over its rare earths restrictions .

in addition , the report also examines china's rare earth industry and government policies — their evolution , recent developments , and effectiveness in meeting the government's goals ( such as consolidating production , addressing pollution , and halting illegal mining ) .

this report does not provide extensive discussion of rare earths from a resource supply chain perspective , nor from a national defense angle .

for additional information on these topics , see crs report r41347 , rare earth elements: the global supply chain , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r41744 , rare earth elements in national defense: background , oversight issues , and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

contrary to the name , rare earths are not "rare. .

rather , they are relatively abundant in the earth's crust .

at the same time , however , they are highly scattered and are usually found mixed together in other deposits , which makes it difficult to find rare earths in a concentration high enough to be mined and separated economically .

when rare earths are extracted from the mine , the ore containing the rare earths must go through complex separation processes to produce each individual element .

it is the separation process that largely drives the cost of rare earth production .

the 17 rare earth elements are often divided into two groups: light and heavy rare earth elements .

two of the largest rare earth mines outside china , namely , mountain pass in the united states and mount weld in australia , contain mainly light rare earths .

many electronic products require heavy rare earths to perform more efficiently .

currently , china is the only country that can supply a significant amount of both light and heavy rare earths , and is likely to remain the major supplier of heavy rare earths in the near future .

rare earth deposits often contain radioactive elements , which means separating the metals requires costly and strenuous processes that produce a number of toxic pollutants and hazardous waste material .

when the mountain pass mine in the united states was operating at full capacity in the 1990s , it produced as much as 850 gallons of salty wastewater per minute , which also contained radioactive thorium and uranium .

the hazardous materials built up as scale inside the pipe that delivered the wastewater to evaporation ponds 11 miles away .

several times in the 1990s , cleaning operations caused the pipeline to burst , spilling hazardous waste into the desert .

molycorp , then a unit of the oil company unocal , was ordered by the state of california to clean up the waste .

in 2002 , the already struggling molycorp ran out of space to store its waste and failed to secure a permit to build a new storage facility .

as a result , the mine shut down .

chevron's acquisition of unocal in 2005 and other developments will be discussed later in this report .

the list of rare earth applications is extensive and these applications can be found in many industries .

rare earths are used in petroleum refining and as diesel additives in the oil industry ; they are important to the automotive industry because of their wide application in catalytic converters , hybrid vehicle batteries , motors , and generators ; they are used by the electronics industry to make hard disk drives and cell phones ; and they are used in powerful magnets in wind turbines ( see figure 1 ) .

while rare earth applications in high - tech have existed for decades , it is their application in clean energy technologies and defense systems that has brought global attention to rare earths .

rare earth metals' super magnetic strength allows for extraordinary miniaturization of components , which have important military applications .

for example , the fins that steer precision bombs have samarium - cobalt permanent magnet motors ; the solid - state lasers used to designate targets use neodymium .

china has become the world's dominant producer , user , and exporter of rare earth elements .

china's trade data indicate that the value of its rare earth exports in 2011 was $3.4 billion .

according to the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , china currently accounts for an estimated 97.3% of global mine production of rare earth elements ( compared to 27% in 1990 ) .

the united states , like many other countries , has become dependent on china for rare earth materials , from oxides , metals , and alloys to permanent magnets and finished products , as illustrated by the following data and figures: as indicated in figure 2 , japan was by far china's largest export market for rare earth exports in 2011 ( according to chinese trade data ) , based on value ( at 66% of total ) , followed by the united states ( 7% ) , france ( 6% ) , germany ( 5% ) , hong kong ( 4% ) , and south korea ( 3% ) .

according to the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) , the value of u.s. rare earth imports from the world totaled $860 million in 2011 , up from $94 million in 2002 , an 815% increase ( see figure 3 ) .

the value of u.s. rare earth imports from china in 2011 was $523 million , which was 0.13% of total u.s. imports from china .

from 2002 to 2011 , the value of u.s. rare earth imports from china rose by 1,376% .

from 2010 to 2011 , the value of u.s. rare earth imports from china increased by 305% .

the u.s. dependence on china for its rare earth imports is significant when measured by quantity ( i.e. , kilograms or metric tons ) .

from 2002 to 2011 , the quantity of u.s. rare earth imports from china as a percent of total u.s. rare earth imports averaged 78.3% .

the share of u.s. rare earth imports from china fell from 79.1% in 2010 to 53.5% in 2011 .

this was largely the result of a 50.8% drop in the level of u.s. rare earth imports from china and a 107.6% increase in the quantity of u.s. rare earth imports from japan .

the quantity of u.s. rare earth imports from china has fallen sharply in recent years , from a high of 24,513 metric tons in 2006 to 6,884 metric tons in 2011 — a 71.9% drop ( see figure 4 ) .

from 2010 to 2011 , total u.s. imports of rare earths dropped from 17,707 metric tons to 12,911 metric tons ( a 27.1% drop ) , while imports of rare earths from china fell from 14,005 metric tons to 6,884 metric tons ( a 50.8% drop ) .

rising prices of imported chinese rare earths and the lingering effects of the global economic slowdown , including in the united states , were likely the main causes of the drop in u.s. rare earth imports .

prices for imported chinese rare earths have risen significantly over the past few years .

as seen in figure 5 , the average u.s. customs value per metric ton of rare earth imports from china rose from $3,111 in 2002 to $76,239 in 2011 , a 2,432% increase .

the increased prices for rare earth imports from china were particularly acute in 2011 , when average prices jumped 723% in one year .

the united states was the leading producer of rare earths from the 1940s to the mid - 1980s , when it provided the majority of rare earth minerals to the rest the world from the mountain pass mine in california .

during the 1990s , chinese rare earths production increased drastically and , according to jeffery a .

green flooded the market by more than tripling the previous world supply of the materials .

during this time , chinese rare earth - producing firms were largely unprofitable but were allowed to survive through direct and indirect support by the chinese government .

this backing enabled china's rare earth industry to continue to mine and export these materials at prices far below the actual costs of production .

with the additional industrial advantage of a low labor cost , questionable environmental standards , and export taxes , the impact of these efforts were swift and dramatic: within 20 years china went from producing roughly one - third to nearly all of the world's supply of rare earths .

mines in the united sates and elsewhere , unable to remain profitable against cheap chinese exports , went out of business .

the chinese government has introduced and implemented a series of policies to regulate rare earth production , stabilize prices , and control exports — some policy measures seem to be aimed at more internal control ; some have more to do with influencing global supply and prices ; while other policies seem to have long - term goals which are in line with china's overall industrial policy goal .

chinese export quotas , duties , and license requirements have caused considerable concerns worldwide because these restrictions not only distort global trade of raw materials but also grant chinese companies easier and cheaper access to rare earths , among other raw materials .

in 2006 , china began decreasing rare earth exports , citing internal demand and environmental concerns .

this generated supply uncertainties among key industries worldwide , such as automotive and electronics , and caused significant price increases throughout 2009 , 2010 , and during the first three quarters of 2011 .

as a result , industries have been forced to raise prices ; some have chosen to relocate to china for a cheaper and more reliable supply of rare earths ( see "technology for resources" ) .

china has increasingly used a number of export restrictions ( including export taxes , quotas , licenses , and prohibitions ) on a wide range of products , particularly raw materials .

according to the united states geological survey ( usgs ) , china is a major global producer and , in some cases , a dominant producer of many raw and processed materials .

for example , in 2010 , china accounted for more than 80% of global production of antimony , magnesium metal , rare earths , and tungsten .

it also accounted for between 50% and 80% of global production of over a dozen other materials .

china was the largest global producer of 37 out of the 80 mineral commodities tracked by the usgs .

a 2010 wto review of china's trade policies states , "export restrictions , explicit or implicit , are a major feature of china's trade regime. .

for example , in 2009 , china's trade regime applied export quotas to 173 tariff lines , export licensing requirements to 231 lines , and export taxes to 353 tariff lines ( 258 of which were interim taxes ) .

the wto review stated: whether intended or not , export restraints for whatever reason tend to reduce export volumes of the targeted products and divert supplies to the domestic market , leading to a downward pressure on the domestic prices of these products .

the resulting gap between domestic prices and world prices constitutes implicit assistance to domestic downstream processors of the targeted products and thus provides them a competitive advantage .

insofar as china is a major supplier of such a product , export restraints may also shift the terms of trade in china's favour .

china's increased use of export restraints and other discriminatory measures on rare earths has led stakeholders ( especially in the united states , japan , and the eu ) to call for trade action against china .

one of the first efforts in the united states to address china's rare earth policies occurred in september 2010 .

chinese restrictions on rare earths were included in a section 301 petition ( dealing with unfair trade practices ) that was filed in september 2010 with the ustr by the united steel , paper and forestry , rubber , manufacturing , energy , allied industrial and service workers international union , afl - cio clc ( usw ) .

the petition sought to address a number of china's policies and practices affecting trade and investment in green technologies .

the main export restrictions on rare earths identified by the usw petition included export duties , quotas , and licensing procedures .

the usw stated that "china's reliance on wto - inconsistent export restraints to dominate the world market in rare earth and other minerals not only nullifies and impairs benefits accruing to the united states under the wto agreement , it fundamentally distorts trade and competition in the green technology sector , among others. .

the ustr decided to narrow its investigation to include only chinese grants ( subsidies ) given to domestic wind turbine manufacturers that agreed to use key parts and components made in china rather than purchasing imports , and in december 2010 , it brought a wto dispute resolution case against china .

in february 2011 , china agreed to remove the discriminatory subsidies .

many analysts have raised concerns that china sees its control over rare earths as a potential bargaining chip that can be used to gain political and economic advantages over other countries .

for example , on september 8 , 2010 , a collision occurred between a chinese fishing boat and two japanese coast guard vessels in disputed waters claimed by both countries .

the arrest of the chinese captain by japanese authorities resulted in a major diplomatic dispute between the two countries .

china cut off high - level exchanges with japan and reportedly threatened to take "strong countermeasures. .

on september 22 , 2010 , the new york times reported that china had begun halting exports of rare earths to japan .

on september 24 , japan agreed to release the chinese captain .

however , on october 19 , 2010 , the new york times reported that china's embargo of rare earth exports to japan appeared to be still in effect and was possibly extended to some rare earth shipments to the united states and the european union , although china denied such reports .

on november 19 , 2010 , the new york times reported that china's rare earth exports to japan had resumed , although with some delays .

chinese trade data show that its rare earth exports to japan in october and november 2010 were down sharply from previous months in 2010 , but rose sharply in december 2010 ( see figure 10 ) .

china's alleged efforts to use its control of rare earths as a bargaining chip have prompted concern in the west .

in an october 17 , 2010 , editorial , paul krugman stated that the temporary chinese embargo of rare earth exports to japan: shows a chinese government that is dangerously trigger - happy , willing to wage economic warfare on the slightest provocation... .

couple the rare earth story with china's behavior on other fronts — the state subsidies that help firms gain key contracts , the pressure on foreign companies to move production to china and , above all , that exchange - rate policy — and what you have is a portrait of a rogue economic superpower , unwilling to play by the rules .

in an october 7 , 2010 , speech , chinese premier wen jiabao stated: we haven't imposed , and will not , impose an embargo on the industry .

we are pursuing a sustainable development of the rare earth industry , not only to meet the demand of our own country , but also to cater to the needs of the whole world .

we not only need to accommodate the current demand , but also , more significantly , need to take a long - term perspective .

it is necessary to exercise management and control over the rare earth industry , but there won't be any embargo .

china is not using rare earth as a bargaining chip .

we aim for the world's sustainable development .

at least 14 bills have been introduced in congress that would attempt to address the availability of rare earths ( and other materials and elements ) for u.s. industries ( including defense - related industries ) and lessening u.s. dependence on china , through such measures as promoting the research and development ( r&d ) of rare earth resources and related industries in the united states .

in november 2011 , representatives hank johnson and mike coffman announced the formation of a congressional rare earth caucus .

according to representative coffman , "with the establishment of this caucus , i am confident we will be able to build awareness on capitol hill about the critical threat china's trade policies of restricting rare earth exports pose to both the economic and national security of the united states. .

a march 2011 letter written by senators casey , schumer , stabenow , and whitehouse urged the obama administration to instruct the u.s. executive director at each multilateral bank , including the world bank , to oppose the approval of any new financing to the chinese government for rare earth projects in china , including rare earth mining , smelting or separation , or production of rare earth products .

the letter also urged the administration to impose the same types of restrictions on chinese investment in mineral exploration and purchases in the united states as china imposes on foreign investment in rare earths in china .

during his state of the union address on january 24 , 2012 , president obama announced plans to create a trade enforcement unit that will be "charged with investigating unfair trade practices in countries like china. .

in february 2012 , representative mike coffman and nine other members sent a letter to president obama noting the wto panel's and appellate body's rulings on china's restrictions on raw materials , and stating that: the similarity between chinese raw material exports and rare earth exports suggests that rectifying the rare earth situation should be among the first efforts undertaken in any new focus on trade equality .

we urge you to point the new trade enforcement unit at various restrictions , quotas , and de facto embargos used by china in the rare earth market .

many of us have also urged a wto case against china due to their rare earth practices , and we renew that request with you as well .

in 2010 and 2011 , the department of energy issued a critical materials strategy report , which examines the role that rare earth metals and other key materials play in clean energy technologies .

the 2011 report found that several clean energy technologies , including wind turbines , electric vehicles ( evs ) , photovoltaic ( pv ) thin films , and fluorescent lighting , use materials at risk of supply disruptions in the short term ( present - 2015 ) , although those risks are expected to decrease in the medium and long terms ; and that supply challenges for five rare earth metals ( dysprosium , neodymium , terbium , europium , and yttrium ) may affect clean energy technology deployment in the years ahead .

other elements , including cerium , indium , lanthanum , and tellurium , were estimated to be near - critical between the short and the medium term ( 2015-2025 ) .

the report further states that doe's strategy for addressing critical materials challenges is based on three pillars , including ( 1 ) the development of diversified global rare earth supply chains ( including mining , extraction , processing , and manufacturing in the united states and abroad ) in order to reduce supply risks that occur from china's position as the dominant producer of rare earth supplies ; ( 2 ) the development of substitutes , including through government - sponsored research ; and ( 3 ) recycling , reuse , and more efficient use of rare earths .

in addition , doe has indicated that it has organized a number of workshops with the european union , japan , australia , and canada to identify possible r&d collaboration efforts .

an april 2012 report by the department of defense ( dod ) provided a relatively optimistic assessment of the ability of u.s. defense industries that use rare earths to meet their supply needs .

of the seven rare earth materials identified as the most prevalent among defense consumption for the purposes of procurement ( dysprosium , erbium , europium , gadolinium , neodymium , praseodymium , and yttrium ) , dod determined that by 2013 , u.s. production of rare earth materials could satisfy u.s. consumption required to meet defense procurement needs , with the exception of yttrium .

the report stated that market forces in the united states and globally have led to falling prices , increased investments and domestic supply of rare earth materials , corporate restructuring within the supply chain , and technical advances , which , as a result , are "trending positive for a market capable of meeting future u.s. government demand. .

to many observers , china's rare earth restrictions are representative of a series of government interventionist policies that have been implemented in recent years that attempt to pick winners and losers in the marketplace , often occurring , it is argued , at the expense of the economic interests of other countries .

such critics contend that china's policy to sharply limit rare earth exports is intended to make chinese domestic firms the dominant producer and supplier of global renewable energy products and / or to induce foreign firms to move production to china and to transfer technology to chinese firms as the price for a reliable supply of rare earths .

many contend that such policies violate china's wto obligations and argue that more wto dispute settlement cases should be brought against china to challenge such practices .

the wto case against china's rare earth policies that was jointly filed by the united states , the eu , and japan appears to indicate a degree of cooperation among some of the world's largest economies , which also constitute china's largest trading partners .

some might argue that such a united front might convey to china the seriousness with which such countries view china's rare earth restrictions , and that they might also cooperate to take other actions against china's rare earth policies beyond the scope of the wto case .

the wto case against china's rare earth restrictions raises a number of questions: if the wto ruled largely in the favor of the united states , eu , and japan and found that the restrictions that were cited are inconsistent with china's wto obligations , would china implement those findings in a timely manner ? .

would china implement the "spirit" of the wto's ruling to remove such restrictions ( such as export duties and quotas ) or would it seek to implement other restrictions that would be more complicated to challenge in the wto ? .

even if the united states , eu , and japan prevailed in the dispute , would china's compliance with the wto's findings be implemented in a timely manner or would it try to delay changes to its rare earth export regime ? .

are there alternatives for dealing with china's rare earth export restrictions apart from the current wto dispute resolution case ? .

for example , could the chinese government be induced to allow foreign companies to mine rare earths in china if such firms helped to improve environmental mining conditions in china ( which china claims is a major factor behind its rare earth policies ) in exchange for a guarantee that a certain quantity of rare earths could be exported ? .

the wto case on certain raw materials that was brought against china by the united states was initiated in june 2009 .

in july 2011 , a wto panel issued a report of its findings .

china then appealed , and in january 2012 , a wto appellate body issued its findings .

as of the time of this writing , china has not indicated how and when it intends to implement the appellate body's findings .

this has led some to contend the wto case against china on rare earths may have come too late for u.s. firms that are currently dealing with relatively high rare earth prices , and thus , it is argued , the wto case may do little to prevent u.s. high tech firms ( as well as those in japan and the eu ) from moving their production to china .

other analysts argue that , while there has been anecdotal evidence that some rare earth users may have established or expanded operations in china , there is no evidence of a large - scale flight of foreign firms to china because of chinese rare earth policies .

other analysts note that china's restrictions on rare earths may have backfired somewhat because such restrictions led to a sharp decline in global demand for rare earths and thus caused a sharp decline in prices during the second half of 2011 and the first few months of 2012 .

the timing issue has also been raised regarding the development of alternative sources of rare earths , including those mined in the united states , australia , and elsewhere .

many analysts argue that it could take years to make a significant dent in china's near monopoly of rare earths .

others contend that mining rare earths is not enough as long as china is the dominant processor of rare earth elements and a major manufacturer of rare earth products , such as magnets .

some have suggested that certain types of heavy rare earths can only be processed in china .

this creates a potential scenario where a u.s. firm that mines or obtains certain heavy rare earths from non - chinese sources must send its rare earths to china , where , ironically , they would be subject to chinese export restraints .

yet , it is not clear what market conditions ( eg , prices and supply ) would make it commercially viable for non - chinese firms to engage in downstream sectors that would generate a rare earth supply chain independent of china .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , rebuilding a u.s. rare earth supply chain could take up to 15 years and is dependent on several factors , including securing capital investments in processing infrastructure , developing new technologies , and acquiring patents , which are currently held by international companies .

this has further raised questions as to what role the federal government should play ( if any ) in leading and possibly financing efforts to reestablish a u.s. rare earth supply chain , and / or to support efforts through r&d to help u.s. firms that are downstream users of rare earths to improve the efficiency of their use , recycle , or develop alternative materials as a way to lessen u.s. dependence on china for these materials .

