the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) has been the cornerstone for transatlantic security and defense cooperation since its founding in 1949 .

as nato continues to evolve to confront emerging regional and global security challenges , the 112 th congress could play an important role in determining the future direction of the alliance and u.s. policy toward it .

this includes addressing key issues that are expected to be discussed at nato's upcoming summit in chicago .

issues of importance to congress could include ongoing nato operations in afghanistan , off the horn of africa , and in the balkans ; the development of allied military capabilities and a nato territorial missile defense system ; nato's nuclear force posture ; nato's relations with non - nato members ; and implementation of nato's 2010 strategic concept .

since the last nato summit in lisbon , portugal , in november 2010 , the alliance has recorded some important achievements and faced considerable challenges in pursuit of its agreed strategic goals .

in lisbon , the allies adopted a new strategic concept in an effort to clarify nato's role in the 21 st century security environment .

the new nato blueprint outlined three core tasks: collective defense ; crisis management ; and cooperative security .

on the issue of collective defense , the allies have committed to maintaining an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional forces to defend alliance territory and to developing a ballistic missile defense capability based largely on the u.s. european phased adaptive approach ( epaa , discussed in more detail below ) .

some issues remain divisive , however .

for example , some allies continue to question the utility of u.s. non - strategic nuclear weapons deployed in europe , while others have argued that a continued focus on large - scale "out - of - area" operations and unconventional security threats could compromise the alliance's ability to defend the territory of nato member states .

with respect to crisis management , ongoing operations in afghanistan and the balkans as well as the alliance's 2011 operation in libya demonstrated nato's capacity to respond simultaneously to multiple security crises .

at the same time , each of the missions also exposed significant shortfalls in allied military capabilities .

calls from some allies for an accelerated transition away from combat operations in afghanistan and the fact that no more than 14 of 28 allies participated in the libya operation have also prompted many observers to question alliance solidarity and to express doubts about the appetite for future "out - of - area" operations , particularly on the scale of the afghan mission .

on the issue of cooperative security , nato has sought to enhance its relations with non - nato member states and other multilateral institutions to allow for stronger regional political and military cooperation and increased partner participation in alliance operations .

however , nato's relations with some key partners , including russia , continue to be marked by disagreement and deadlock .

the global economic downturn and ongoing european debt crisis and the budgetary constraints facing many allied governments on both sides of the atlantic may pose one of the biggest challenges to alliance capabilities and solidarity .

most european allies have enacted far - reaching budget cuts , including to what had already been declining national defense budgets in most cases .

some observers worry that alliance members will be unable or unwilling to contribute and develop the military capabilities necessary to meet allied security objectives and that this , in turn , could lead to a diminished ability to meet nato's collective security goals .

others argue that current fiscal constraints only heighten the importance of pooling scarcer resources at the alliance level and cooperating to realize common defense and security objectives .

in any case , most observers agree that the current transatlantic burden - sharing situation , with the united states accounting for over two - thirds of alliance defense spending , could be unsustainable .

far - reaching defense budget cuts in the united states and the planned withdrawal of two of the u.s. army's four brigade combat teams based in europe have also raised questions within the alliance about future u.s. commitments to european security .

nato's 2012 summit of alliance heads of state and government is scheduled to take place in chicago on may 20-21 .

u.s. and nato officials have outlined what they expect to be the summit's three main agenda items: defining the next phase of formal transition in afghanistan and shaping a longer term nato commitment to the country after the planned end of combat operations by the end of 2014 ; securing commitments to maintain and develop the military capabilities necessary to meet nato's defense and security goals , including through a new "smart defense" initiative ; and enhancing nato's partnerships with non - nato member states .

the allies also plan to consider the results of an ongoing deterrence and defense posture review ( ddpr ) , for which they called at the lisbon summit .

although nato is not expected to issue membership invitations to any of the four countries currently seeking nato membership , they could reaffirm their commitment to do so in the future .

congress has played an important role in guiding u.s. policy toward nato and in shaping nato's post - cold war evolution .

members of the 112 th congress have expressed interest in each of the key agenda items to be discussed in chicago and , to varying degrees , have called on the administration to advance specific policy proposals at the summit .

proposed companion legislation in the house and the senate — the nato enhancement act of 2012 ( s. 2177 and h.r .

4243 ) — endorses nato enlargement to the balkans and georgia , reaffirms nato's role as a nuclear alliance , and calls on the u.s. administration to seek further allied contributions to a nato territorial missile defense capability , and to urge nato allies to develop critical military capabilities .

in recent months , other members of congress have also called on the u.s. administration and nato to enhance efforts to bring bosnia and herzegovina , georgia , macedonia , and montenegro into the alliance .

in march 2012 , a bipartisan group of 54 members of the house signed a letter to president obama urging him to ensure that macedonia receives a formal invitation at the chicago summit to join nato .

in april 2012 , representative carolyn maloney introduced legislation apparently aimed at cautioning against formally inviting macedonia before it resolves an ongoing dispute with greece over macedonia's name ( h.res .

627 ) .

in the run - up to and aftermath of the chicago summit , congress may want to consider a range of questions relating to nato's current operations and activities and its longer term mission .

these include the following .

nato's commitment to afghanistan , both during the ongoing transition away from a primary emphasis on combat and after the transition .

some allied leaders — notably new french president françois hollande — have indicated a desire to accelerate the withdrawal of forces from afghanistan .

congress may want to consider the implications of such decisions for nato and u.s. security interests in afghanistan .

the allied commitment to sustaining the afghan national security forces after 2014 could have particularly significant security implications for the united states , as could the extent of nato's presence in the country after 2014 .

allied military capabilities and burden - sharing within the alliance .

in june 2011 , then - u.s. secretary of defense robert gates lamented that many european allies are "unwilling to devote the necessary resources or make the necessary changes to be serious and capable partners in their own defense. .

congress may want to consider the immediate and longer - term effects on alliance security of the continuing downward trend in european defense spending .

of particular concern could be the extent of the allied commitment to pooling and sharing resources in the framework of nato's "smart defense" initiative and the extent to which european governments are consulting and coordinating with other allies when pursuing cuts to national defense budgets .

in addition , if current trends in european defense spending and capabilities development continue over the medium term , how would this affect u.s. perceptions of nato and the transatlantic security partnership ? .

how would this affect u.s. pursuit of its security interests around the globe ? .

future nato operations and allied military readiness .

some analysts assert that nato member states would not support another "out of area" operation on the scale of the afghanistan mission .

congress may want to consider the types of future military operations in which the alliance should be preparing to engage .

what steps are being taken to ensure alliance readiness and interoperability ? .

what effect will the planned withdrawal of two u.s. army brigade combat teams from europe have on allied interoperability and alliance solidarity more generally ? .

nato's conventional and nuclear force posture .

nato allies continue to express divergent views on the appropriate force posture for the alliance .

congress may want to consider the implications for u.s. security interests of this ongoing debate within nato .

in particular , what role should u.s. non - strategic nuclear weapons play in alliance force posture ? .

do these weapons currently play an important deterrent role or is their presence primarily a symbol of u.s. commitment to nato ? .

what are the benefits of nato's evolving territorial missile defense capability ? .

what is the european allied commitment to that capability ? .

nato's relations with non - nato member states and international organizations .

allied leaders and u.s. officials emphasize the importance of enhancing and expanding nato's partnerships both within and outside the euro - atlantic region .

the evolution of nato's partnership policy could have significant political and operational implications for the alliance , including on its decision - making procedures and its force projection capabilities .

congress may want to consider the appropriate role of non - nato members in the alliance's political structures and in allied operations .

how would the increased participation of partners affect broader u.s. strategic interests ? .

should nato seek to develop and / or enhance defense and security cooperation with the governments of libya , tunisia , egypt , and other countries in the mediterranean and broader middle east region ? .

prospects and conditions for future nato enlargement .

successive u.s .

administrations and some members of congress have emphasized the importance of nato's "open door" membership policy .

congress may want to consider the possible implications of further nato enlargement for u.s. and nato security interests .

what have been the costs and benefits of nato's post - cold war enlargement and what are the potential costs and benefits of possible future enlargement ? .

should there be a limit to nato's "open door" policy ? .

should the alliance consider offering russia the possibility of nato membership ? .

the u.s. administration and some members of congress continue to view nato as the world's preeminent military alliance and the cornerstone for transatlantic security cooperation .

as nato has evolved to confront a range of new and emerging security challenges , it has recorded some important achievements and faced considerable challenges .

on the one hand , ongoing military operations in afghanistan , the balkans , and off the horn of africa demonstrate nato's capacity to respond simultaneously to multiple security crises .

on the other hand , severe budgetary constraints currently facing allied governments on both sides of the atlantic have caused some to question nato's ability to continue to sustain such an operational tempo .

these budget constraints and public opposition in many european countries to military operations in afghanistan could play a key role in shaping the scope of future nato operations .

as the alliance moves forward after the chicago summit , allied responses to these and the other challenges outlined above could be important factors in determining nato's ability to meet and refine its strategic objectives .

