this report provides current and historical labor force information about young people ages 16 to 24 .

in general , youth have a lower rate of labor force participation , and those who are in the labor force are less likely to gain employment than older workers .

both labor supply and demand factors drive this pattern .

on the labor supply side , young people are making greater investments in education by enrolling in and completing high school and college in greater numbers .

they are less likely to be attached to the labor force due to their limited availability ( eg , only able to work full - time during the summer if they attend school ) and their relatively weaker connections to employers .

labor demand also plays a role .

youth are less desirable in some ways than adult workers because they are less experienced ; have fewer skills and education ; and are potentially short - term hires , which can be costly to employers .

the report focuses on trends from 2000 to 2018 .

this period has included two recessions ( march to november 2001 and december 2007 to june 2009 ) and a decline in jobs requiring only a high school diploma .

many workers were still struggling to find work in the years immediately following the more recent recession .

the recession exacerbated challenges that workers have faced in securing and retaining employment since 2000 .

against this backdrop , young people ages 16 to 24 experienced their steepest decreases in labor force participation and employment ; however , in recent years employment levels have steadily been recovering .

some studies have found that early labor market experiences and outcomes have lasting impacts on employability and wages .

given the current and future challenges that young people can experience in the labor market , this report may be of interest to congress in the contexts of workforce development , education , unemployment insurance , youth policy , or macroeconomic policy ; however , the report does not discuss specific programs or policy implications .

the report begins with a brief discussion of current employment and education pathways that young people can pursue .

following this is a description of the labor market data used in the report , which includes the labor force participation rate , employment - population ratio , and unemployment rate .

the report then discusses these data for the post - world war ii period , with a focus on trends since 2000 , comparing labor force outcomes based on age , sex , and race / ethnicity .

the report concludes by exploring the factors that influence the extent to which youth participate in the labor force and their prospects for employment .

the last section also discusses the potential short - and long - term effects of young people's labor market experiences .

the appendix includes supplemental tables and figures on youth employment trends .

declines in the shares of young people participating and working in the labor force is probably due , in part , to growing enrollment in high school and postsecondary education , which is likely a result of a growing need for higher levels of educational attainment to secure employment .

the department of labor's ( dol's ) bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , which measures labor market activity , predicts that the fastest growing occupations between 2016 and 2026 will require some postsecondary education .

the figures and tables in this section and the appendix display labor force data over the period following world war ii ( starting in 1948 , when the data first became available ) based on age , sex , and race / ethnicity .

the figures also plot the 11 periods when the country was in recession .

table a - 1 , table a - 2 , figure a - 1 , and figure a - 2 in the appendix show broader labor force trend data for teens and young adults , respectively , from 1948 through 2017 .

the labor force situation has generally been improving for youth since the last recession ended in june 2009 .

nonetheless , their employment - population ratios have only recently recovered to pre - recession levels .

multiple variables likely affect labor market outcomes for youth .

this section provides a brief summary of some of these factors .

one major factor is that youth have less education and experience relative to older workers .

in general , firms are more likely to hire workers with greater experience .

youth may also face increased competition for jobs that require less education .

further , a growing number of young people are enrolled in school , particularly post - secondary education , and therefore may be out of the labor force .

teens are especially likely to report that they are not in the labor force because they are attending school .

as with experience , firms are more likely to hire workers with greater availability .

the effects of decreasing labor force participation and employment among youth have not been fully explored in the research literature .

some studies addressing these trends have focused on the individual outcomes for youth and not , for example , on societal or economic outcomes such as reduced gdp .

the studies found that on average , early youth unemployment has serious negative effects on income but not as strong of effects on future unemployment .

other studies show that youth entering the labor force during a downturn in the economy have poorer labor market outcomes in the long run .

these studies are discussed briefly below .

using data from the national longitudinal survey of youth ( nlsy ) , researchers estimated the long - term effects of youth unemployment on labor market outcomes .

they examined the employment status of young men in the sample when they were in their 20s and nearly 10 years later .

the study found that their average level of education and training increased over time , but also that early unemployment affected both wages and future unemployment .

it projected that a six - month spell of unemployment at age 22 would result in a 2% to 3% lower wage rate in their early 30s .

other research has examined how young workers fare when entering the labor market during a weak economy .

one study pooled data from the nlsy and other sources to estimate short - and medium - term effects of graduating from college during a recession at some point between 1974 and 2011 .

the study found that graduating during a recession reduced earnings , on average , by 10% .

the loss of earnings persisted , with average earnings loss of 1.8% per year over the first 10 years .

this decrease is driven in part by an inability to obtain hours of work and a loss in earning power .

other research has found that young people's experiences in the job market since 2000 have been less favorable than in prior years .

an analysis by the federal reserve examined unemployment from 1990 through early 2013 for 22 to 27 year olds with at least a bachelor's degree .

its analysis found that securing employment tended to be more difficult for those just out of college at any point over this period .

the study also found that unlike their earlier counterparts , a greater share of young people graduating from college since the early 2000s were working in low - wage jobs ( eg , bartender , food server ) as opposed to other non - college jobs with higher wages ( eg , electrician , hygienist ) .

this report provides an overview of the youth labor force situation .

it shows that teens and young adults were withdrawing from the labor force over the time periods discussed , and those in the labor force were less likely to be employed than older workers .

several factors influence these trends .

for example , school enrollment means less supply of young workers .

the characteristics of young workers — their relative lack of work experience , lower levels of education , and frequent movement in and out of the labor force — also play a role .

perhaps most striking is that the employment - population ratio for youth , especially for teens , has eroded over the past decade — even in years when the economy was growing .

the teen employment - population ratio has been below 40% in each year since 2002 .

this illustrates a decline in long - term employment ratios that began in the early 2000s , likely due , in part , to youth withdrawing from the labor force to pursue educational opportunities .

while the employment - population ratio trend line for 20 to 24 year olds has been higher and more stable , the employment gains for this population have dipped since the early 2000s .

nonetheless , the employment - population ratio for young adults was higher in 2017 ( about 66% ) than it was in 1948 ( about 60% ) .

additional research is needed on the effects of recent long - term youth unemployment .

such research could focus on how the current generation of young workers compares in terms of employment and wages to past generations of young workers who entered the labor force during downturns in the economy .

