while hunting and fishing are permitted on the majority of federal lands , some believe that those recreational activities are unnecessarily restricted by the planning processes of federal land management agencies , such as the bureau of land management ( blm ) , the forest service , the national park service ( nps ) , and the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) .

additionally , some believe courts have misinterpreted the purposes of those lands and impeded recreation .

the sportsmen's heritage act of 2012 ( h.r .

4089 ) would "open" almost all federal lands and waters to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting , and establish criteria for land management agencies to close lands to those activities .

opponents of the bill assert that it would adversely affect wilderness areas and create additional , sometimes contradictory , steps for land management agencies in their already complex planning processes .

titles i and ii establish a uniform system for land management agencies to determine whether federal lands should be closed to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting .

titles iii through vi of h.r .

4089 address issues related to hunting , fishing , or federal lands , such as issuing permits to allow the import of polar bear parts by certain applicants ; continuing the use of lead shot and lead sinkers ; opening the kisatchie national forest in louisiana for dog - deer hunting ; and limiting the president's ability to establish national monuments under the antiquities act of 1906 .

in general , states manage hunting and fishing within their boundaries , and federal laws regulating these activities are a series of exceptions to this general rule .

exceptions include regulating migratory birds , protecting species under the endangered species act , or regulating hunting and fishing on federal lands .

federal land managers work with state managers in regulating the time , place , manner , or quantity of animals to be taken .

in short , the delineation of these responsibilities may be summarized as the federal government regulates the habitat , and the state regulates the take .

hunting and conservation have been linked since the advent of federal wildlife legislation , such as the lacey act of 1900 or the migratory bird treaty act of 1918 .

as one supporter of h.r .

4089 stated: the conservation movement was started by american sportsmen a century ago and since then almost all of our most successful wildlife conservation programs have been associated with recreational hunting and fishing .

species that were once rare , such as wild turkeys , deer , bear and wood ducks are now plentiful as a result of private efforts by sportsmen and scientific management by state fish and game departments .

even so , controversy exists about exactly what hunting , fishing , or shooting sports currently are allowed on federal land and when .

some believe federal land planning processes , which include analyses under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , are an obstacle to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting .

others point to recent court decisions favoring wilderness protection over recreation as restricting statutorily guaranteed recreational access .

opening more lands to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting should be balanced against good game management , public safety , resource management , and the statutory purposes of the lands .

these are a few of the issues addressed in h.r .

4089 .

the bill is supported by groups including the u.s. sportsmen's alliance , national rifle association , safari club international , and other organizations .

opponents include wilderness watch , backcountry hunters and anglers , humane society , and others .

wilderness watch described the bill as "a thinly disguised measure to gut the 1964 wilderness act and protections for every unit of the national wilderness preservation system. .

however , one of the supporters of h.r .

4089 , u.s. sportsmen's alliance , describes the bill as clarifying "that hunting , fishing and recreational shooting are legitimate uses of federal public lands and that these lands are open , as a matter of law , to these traditional activities. .

according to safari club international , the lack of access is a "primary reason" that hunters and anglers stop using federal lands for those activities .

however , it is not clear whether those goals will be achieved by h.r .

4089 .

to the extent that "access" means physical access , rather than regulatory , the bill does not provide any funding for road or trail expansion or maintenance .

it is also possible that the bill could slow the planning process ; it appears to add steps to the land management processes already in place , such as new criteria , reporting requirements , and public notices .

h.r .

4089 is silent as to when implementation is required , which could be interpreted as leading to land agencies having to revise all land management plans at the same time .

additionally , the bill proposes different criteria for different types of lands and different types of activities , potentially making application by land management agencies difficult .

finally , in some cases , particularly lands withdrawn for a particular purpose , such as wilderness areas or blm national monuments , the bill favors activities over the conservation values for which those lands were designated .

the federal government owns and manages approximately 635 million - 640 million acres of land .

about 95% of this land is owned and managed by four federal land management agencies — blm , forest service , nps , and fws .

the current land management practices for the four agencies regarding hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting are provided in the appendix .

in general , each agency is required by law to prepare a plan for land management approximately every 15 years , considering public input in the plan's development .

among other determinations , these plans describe what lands are open for activities including hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting , and any restrictions on those activities , such as locations and seasons .

each agency must balance statutory mandates regarding use and conservation in the plans .

the plans may be amended or revised as circumstances warrant .

a memorandum of understanding among the forest service , fish and wildlife service , blm , and dozens of sporting organizations provides for increased communication in planning and implementing projects and activities related to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting on federal lands .

in addition to the specific statutes and regulations of each agency , all federal agencies must comply with the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , which requires agencies to assess the environmental consequences of a proposed action before making a final decision , and sections 106 and 110 of the national historic preservation act , which require federal agencies to evaluate the effects of their actions on historic and cultural properties before acting .

both laws require public consultation prior to decision making .

title ii more narrowly addresses recreational shooting on blm national monument lands .

like the provisions in section 104 ( d ) , it requires that lands be open for that activity , unless certain justifications are met .

however , it does not include the reasons for which the lands were designated as monuments as a basis for limiting recreational shooting .

the closures are limited to six months , unless congress passes a law extending the term .

title ii prohibits blm from closing the same area more than once for the same reasons , potentially posing an internal contradiction when the reasons for closing land are statutory or based on national security or public safety .

additionally , title ii imposes different reporting duties on blm than under title i. monuments are established either by congress or by presidential proclamation under the antiquities act to preserve federal lands with historic or scientific interest .

management of each monument is unique , with circumstances dictated by either the presidential proclamation or the legislation creating the monument .

for any monument , current practice is that blm land management planning would have to find that recreational shooting is consistent with the values for which the land was preserved .

title iii would amend the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ) to authorize between 41 and 44 hunters with legally hunted polar bear remains from canada to import those trophies to the united states .

s. 1066 would do the same .

before may 15 , 2008 , when the esa listing of polar bears as a threatened species took effect , it had been legal to import polar bear trophies from canada .

the law would apply only to bears legally killed prior to may 15 , 2008 .

permit fees of $1,000 for each trophy would be available for a u.s. - russia polar bear conservation fund to support polar bear conservation activities .

fws contends that once the proposed rule to list polar bears as a threatened species was published in january 2007 , an extensive campaign was conducted by fws to alert hunters to the potential impact of esa listing on the ability to import polar bear trophies .

however , despite this warning , fws continued to authorize the import of polar bear trophies under existing law until the esa listing became final .

the permitting process was truncated by court order making the listing effective immediately rather than after 30 days .

fws does not oppose legislation allowing hunters who both applied for an import permit and completed their legal hunt prior to esa listing .

fws originally declined to support another version of this provision ( h.r .

991 , as introduced ) because the introduced version would have allowed hunters to import polar bear trophies regardless of whether the hunter had applied for the permit prior to the esa listing .

h.r .

991 was amended to address fws concerns before it was reported by the house committee on natural resources on december 1 , 2011 .

others oppose title iii of h.r .

4089 , believing it would encourage hunting of species whose listing was imminent .

the humane society of the united states testified that allowing polar bear imports "would roll back polar bear conservation efforts and set a dangerous precedent for gutting the protections provided under the marine mammal protection act and the endangered species act. .

the dissenting views to the house committee report , for example , pointed to the "extensive outreach by the fish and wildlife service that a prohibition would be placed on polar bear trophy imports if a listing occurred" as reason not to provide a legislative waiver .

a federal court upheld the permit ban , finding that there was no procedural flaw in blocking permits as of the day the bear was listed as threatened .

title iv of h.r .

4089 would exempt lead shot , ammunition , and sinkers from provisions of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) .

it is identical to h.r .

1558 , and s. 838 .

title iv appears to seek legislative certainty for a denied citizen petition to force the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers .

on august 27 , 2010 , epa denied one portion of the petition relating to the production of lead for use in ammunition , stating that the agency did not have legal authority to regulate ammunition under tsca .

epa continued to evaluate the petition with respect to fishing tackle and accepted public comments until september 15 , 2010 .

epa denied that portion of the petition on november 4 , 2010 .

on april 30 , 2012 , a lawsuit challenging the denial was dismissed .

on june 7 , 2012 , a suit was filed challenging epa's 2012 denial of a new petition to regulate lead shot under tsca .

h.r .

4089 would prevent federal regulation through tsca , but not through other statutory authorities: lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act .

title iv does not appear to preempt state laws that ban use of lead .

for example , new hampshire , new york , and vermont prohibit sale and / or use of lead sinkers .

delaware prohibits killing deer with lead shot , and pennsylvania and california prohibit taking big game with lead ammunition .

title v , added by h.amdt .

1009 , prohibits the forest service from restricting the use of dogs in deer hunting activities on the kisatchie national forest in louisiana .

this title would vacate the 2012 decision by the forest service that dog - deer hunting is not appropriate on the kisatchie national forest .

the forest service reached that conclusion after conducting an environmental analysis and reviewed more than 1,300 public comments about this activity's effects on public safety , impacts on adjacent private lands , and the potential loss of this type of hunting opportunity .

section 501 would allow restrictions only if they were limited to the "smallest practicable portions" of the forest and were "necessary to reduce or control trespass" onto adjacent lands .

the bill does not include an evaluation of the impacts of dogs on the resources of the forest , or on public health or safety .

section 601 would end the authority of the president to establish a national monument unilaterally .

this title was added by h.amdt .

1012 .

the antiquities act authorizes the president to protect areas of federal lands having historic or scientific interest by issuing a proclamation .

this authority has been challenged virtually since enactment , but has been limited only for the states of wyoming and alaska .

under section 601 , a president could still identify lands for protection , but the proclamation would not become valid until both the governor and legislature of the affected state approved .

according to the bill , the monument designation could not restrict any public use of the area until the secretary of the interior allowed an "appropriate review period. .

it appears that the secretary of the interior would conduct the review despite whether the department of the interior would be the managing agency of the land .

bureau of land management management for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting the bureau of land management ( blm ) manages approximately 245 million acres of public lands that contain diverse resources , attributes , and opportunities .

the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ) required blm lands to be managed for diverse uses , which are sometimes conflicting , ranging from mineral extraction to wildlife conservation .

some lands are restricted from one or more uses or managed for a predominant use .

blm allows fishing , hunting , and shooting sports on public lands in accordance with state laws , unless specifically prohibited .

overall , blm estimates that more than 95% of its lands are open to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting .

blm regulations address the general authority of states to regulate these activities .

they note that except as otherwise provided by federal law or regulations , "state and local laws and ordinances shall apply and be enforced by the appropriate state and local authorities .

this includes , but is not limited to , state and local laws and ordinances governing: ... ( b ) hunting and fishing ; ( c ) use of firearms or other weapons. .

management of game populations is the responsibility of the state fish and game departments , and blm manages wildlife habitats to sustain or improve wildlife populations while allowing for other sustainable uses of public lands .

fishing , hunting , and recreational shooting on blm lands may be restricted in a number of ways .

some blm regulations may limit these activities on a site - specific basis .

for example , the discharge or use of firearms or other weapons in developed recreation sites and areas is prohibited , unless specifically authorized .

likewise , hunting could be limited under a blm regulation that prohibits activities that create a risk to other persons .

blm may administratively close areas to a particular activity either permanently or temporarily .

an area might be closed for reasons including health , safety , and resource protection .

among other procedures , blm may close an area through the land use planning process or through a closure order .

blm officers are authorized to issue an order to close or restrict the use of designated public lands to protect people , property , public lands , and resources .

further , restrictions on other activities may limit hunting , fishing , or recreational shooting indirectly .

for example , hunting might be limited through restrictions on travel or motorized access .

blm has testified that its lands are open to hunting "virtually everywhere the individual states allow it," while the agency "must occasionally restrict recreational target shooting in extremely limited circumstances. .

blm further testified that recreational shooting closures typically occur to comply with state and local public safety laws and ordinances , and have occurred in areas with administrative sites , campgrounds , and other developed facilities ; intensive energy , industrial , residential , or community development ; and significant and sensitive natural or cultural resources .

blm land management planning pursuant to flpma , blm develops resource management plans for its land , which "provide the basis for every blm management action. .

these plans establish land and resource goals and objectives and the actions needed to achieve them , and identify which lands are open , restricted , or closed to particular uses .

flpma requires blm to "develop , maintain , and , when appropriate , revise land use plans which provide by tracts or areas for the use of the public lands. .

the law specifies criteria for the development and revision of plans , including that blm use and observe the principles of multiple use and sustained yield , use a systematic interdisciplinary approach to integrate scientific and other information , weigh long - term public benefits against short - term benefits , consider present and potential land uses , and consider the relative scarcity of the values involved and the availability of other means and sites to realize those values .

flpma contains various provisions on public participation in the planning process .

one provision calls for public involvement in the development and revision of land use plans .

another provides for public involvement , such as hearings where appropriate , to give federal , state , and local governments and the public "notice and opportunity to comment upon and participate in the formulation of plans. .

still another creates resource advisory councils to be involved in land use planning .

in addition , other provisions direct blm to coordinate planning efforts with other federal , state , local , and tribal planning activities .

other laws , regulations , and executive orders govern public participation in blm planning as well .

blm land management plans generally are intended to govern management of agency lands over a 10- to 15-year period .

they are to be revised or amended as new issues arise or conditions change .

a plan revision replaces an existing plan , and is undertaken when a major portion of a plan or the entire plan no longer serves as a useful guide to land management .

a plan amendment typically changes one or more of the terms , conditions , or decisions of an existing plan .

beginning in fy2001 , blm intensified efforts to update plans that were out of date , due to increased demands for energy resources , a rise in the use of off - highway vehicles , new listings of species under the endangered species act , or a need to mitigate the effects of wildfires .

further , blm has been developing new land use plans for additions to the national landscape conservation system .

the agency estimates that since fy2001 , 67 plans have been updated , while 48 are currently being updated and 44 need revision or amendment to meet changing demands and conditions .

forest service management for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting the forest service of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) administers the national forest system ( nfs ) , which consists of 193 million acres in 44 states and the commonwealth of puerto rico , including national forests ( 155 ) , national grasslands ( 20 ) , and a tallgrass prairie .

approximately 2.9 million acres are officially designated as national recreation areas , 36.2 million acres as national wilderness areas , and 2.9 million acres as national game refuge and wildlife preserve areas .

roughly 21% of lands within the boundaries of nfs lands are lands that are not federally owned or administered by the forest service .

those lands — sometimes referred to as inholdings — can cause difficulties for forest service land management because the agency does not regulate the development and use of the inholdings , and for hunters who may not know the boundaries between public and private property .

the majority of nfs lands are open to hunting , shooting , fishing , and other recreational activities , although federal and state regulations and game limits apply .

nfs lands are open to those activities unless specifically closed at the unit level .

a few forest service sites are not open to hunting , as restricted by congress when designating the area .

while the forest service does not keep track of how much land is open to those activities , visitation data show that 7.6% and 8.2% of annual nfs recreational visitors list hunting or fishing , respectively , as their main activity .

state agencies manage the hunting , shooting , and fishing that occurs on nfs lands .

hunting , shooting , or fishing on inholdings require permission from the landowner and follow state laws .

forest service land management planning forest service management goals for the national forests have evolved over time .

the first management goals were established in 1897 , when congress stated that the forest reserves were "to improve and protect the forest ... for the purpose of securing favorable conditions of water flows , and to furnish a continuous supply of timber for the use and necessities of the citizens of the united states. .

management goals were further defined in section 1 of the multiple use - sustained yield act of 1960 ( musya ) , which states that forests will be administered for "outdoor recreation , range , timber , watershed , and wildlife and fish purposes" in addition to the purposes established in 1897 .

musya directs land and resource management of the national forests for the combination of uses that best meets the needs of the american people .

forest service planning and management are guided primarily by the forest and rangeland renewable resources planning act ( rpa ) of 1974 , as amended by the national forest management act ( nfma ) of 1976 .

nfma requires the forest service to prepare a comprehensive land and resource management plan for each nfs unit , coordinated with the national rpa planning process .

planning regulations were first issued in 1979 , and most recently revised in 2012 .

under the planning regulations , the forest service will develop unit plans , known as land management plans , that describe resource management and projects and activities .

plans are subject to nepa .

a plan must be revised at least every 15 years .

however , a plan may be revised sooner than the 15-year mark upon a determination that conditions have changed significantly .

a plan may be amended at any time .

the forest service reports there are 127 land management plans for nfs lands , 68 of which are past due for revision .

most of the past due plans were developed between 1983 and 1993 and should have been revised between 1998 and 2008 .

the forest service reports that efforts to produce a new planning rule over the past decade contributed to the delay in plan revisions .

national park service management for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting the national park service ( nps ) manages lands within the national park system .

the park system includes 84 million acres of land in 397 designated units , including 58 national parks and 75 national monuments .

other types of park units include memorials , battlefields and military parks , historic sites and parks , lakeshores and seashores , recreation areas , reserves , preserves , rivers and trails , and other designations .

sixty - one nps units are open to hunting , and 200 units allow fishing .

nps has the often contradictory mission of facilitating access and serving visitors while protecting and preserving unimpaired for future generations the natural , historic , and cultural integrity of the lands and resources it manages .

nps typically has specific management direction in the statutory authorization for each unit .

while each park may have more specific provisions based on its statutory authorization , nps regulations establish general management guidelines for all park units .

park superintendents have the authority to close areas of the park to specific uses consistent with federal law and administrative policy .

fishing , generally , is allowed in national park units "in accordance with the laws and regulations of the state within whose exterior boundaries a park area or portion thereof is located. .

like other public uses , fishing is allowed to the extent it is an appropriate use , meaning it is "suitable , proper , or fitting for a particular park , or to a particular location within a park. .

nps regulations prohibit hunting and trapping except in park areas where specifically authorized by federal law .

hunting is not defined in the regulations .

additionally , even where authorized , hunting may take place only after nps has determined that the activity is an appropriate use and is "consistent with public safety and enjoyment , and sound resource management principles. .

some park units where federal law allows hunting include fire island national seashore , lake chelan cascades national recreation area , delaware water gap national recreation area , big cypress national preserve , and bighorn canyon national recreation area .

the nps regulations do not address recreational shooting specifically .

however , the regulations restrict special events , which reasonably could include war reenactments , field trials , or shooting competitions , to those that have "a meaningful association between the park area and the events , and the observance contributes to visitor understanding of the significance of the park area , and a permit therefor has been issued by the superintendent. .

a permit may be denied for events that would: injure or damage park resources ; be contrary to the purposes of the park , such as unreasonably interfere with the peace and tranquility maintained in wilderness , natural , historic , or commemorative zones ; unreasonably interfere with park administration ; substantially impair the operation of concessioners ; present a clear and present danger to the public ; or result in significant conflict with other existing uses .

thus , park units appear to be the only types of federal lands where uses such as recreational shooting may be restricted due to noise .

nps land management planning nps management is directed by three main statutes: the organic act of 1916 , the general authorities act of 1970 , and the national parks and recreation act of 1978 .

under the national parks and recreation act , nps must prepare management plans for park units .

goals and practices for management are within the nps management policies .

nps prepares general management plans ( gmps ) , "a broad umbrella document that sets the long - term goals for the park," for overall park unit management .

these are prepared every 10 to 15 years , but may be updated earlier if circumstances warrant .

implementation plans are prepared for specific projects or resources .

nps is required to identify and document the environmental impacts of its land management planning decisions pursuant to its guidelines implementing nepa .

of the 397 park units , 375 have gmps .

approximately 50 new or revised gmps are in development .

all units are expected to have a gmp , except for one unit on an indian reservation , which site is closed to the public .

fish and wildlife service management for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting the national wildlife refuge system ( refuge system ) is administered by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) of the department of the interior .

the refuge system has 149.0 million acres ; a small fraction of the refuge system ( 3.5 million acres ) consists of waterfowl production areas ( wpas ) , managed for breeding habitat of waterfowl .

in addition to the refuge system , fws manages another 157.1 million acres , consisting largely of marine national monuments established under the antiquities act .

of the 594 wildlife refuges and wpas , 365 are open to some form of hunting .

hunting closures occur for reasons including human safety , species conservation , and lack of huntable species .

all fws lands are managed primarily for the conservation of animals and plants .

other uses in the refuge system — hunting , fishing , recreation , timber harvest , grazing , etc. — are permitted to the extent that they are compatible with the purposes for which the refuge was created .

the refuge system resembles the forest service or blm lands in allowing some commercial uses , but in certain cases , other uses ( eg , public access ) can be substantially more restrictive than for nps lands .

the national wildlife refuge system improvement act of 1997 addressed overarching refuge management controversies facing fws .

a key provision of this law designated "compatible wildlife - dependent recreational uses involving hunting , fishing , wildlife observation and photography , and environmental education and interpretation as priority public uses of the refuge system. .

it also required that priority public uses must "receive enhanced consideration over other general public uses in planning and management within the system. .

the law continued to provide that activities that are not wildlife - dependent ( eg , grazing , growing hay , etc. ) .

may be permitted , provided they are compatible with wildlife .

recreational shooting is not considered a wildlife - dependent activity and therefore is not a priority use of refuge lands .

fws wildlife refuge planning the statutory basis for refuge system planning is section 4 of the national wildlife refuge system administration act ( refuge act ) .

hunting is on the short list of wildlife - dependent recreation activities and therefore is a priority use of a refuge .

section 4 requires refuge managers to document and describe "existing and potential opportunities for wildlife - dependent recreation" in their land management planning , which includes creating a comprehensive conservation plan ( ccp ) .

explicit directives for ccp development are contained in the fws service manual , which states that ccps must prepare goals for "compatible wildlife - dependent recreation" and also map desired future conditions for such activities .

to an extent , the planning requirements of h.r .

4089 appear to be congruent with the analysis already undertaken by fws .

however , because the refuge act does not define hunting or fishing , h.r .

4089 might expand the scope of a ccp by ( 1 ) including trapping and field trials under its definition of hunting ; ( 2 ) not clearly excluding commercial fishing from recreational fishing ; and ( 3 ) adding recreational shooting ( as defined ) as an activity to be analyzed in such plans .

the ccps process includes developing background information , preparing alternatives , and specifying one alternative as preferred , all subject to public notice and comments .

fws responds to comments about the draft plans , and issues a final plan .

all refuge plans are to be completed within 15 years of when the refuge act was amended — by october 9 , 2012 — and revised at least every 15 years thereafter or as warranted .

as plans are being prepared , fws must publish a notice in the federal register of the opportunity for public comment .

in addition , individual refuges post planning documents and notices on their websites .

of the 554 units in the refuge system at the time the refuge act was amended , 429 have completed ccps .

there are 109 plans under development ; 16 ccps have not yet begun the planning process , but are expected to begin soon .

it is expected that all but 50 or so of the units will be completed by the october 9 , 2012 , deadline .

