the debates and discussions among u.s. government officials and outside stakeholders about the use of partnership in support of national security are inchoate , but a number of facets of the debates are discernible , including worldview ; goals ; effects ; priorities ; resourcing ; assessments ; roles and responsibilities ; and risk .

these issues are variously addressed in recent strategic guidance documents .

key unclassified guidance documents include the 2006 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) report , and its follow - on building partnership capacity ( bpc ) roadmap ; the 2010 national security strategy ( nss ) ; the 2010 qdr report ; the 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) ; and the 2012 defense strategic guidance ( dsg ) .

in addition , a wealth of internal dod guidance reportedly addresses partnership—in particular the guidance for the employment of the force ( gef ) as well as planning and programming guidance documents under their various names .

yet the treatment of "partnership" by these documents is both inconsistent and partial—not all documents address all the major facets of strategy ; some , such as resourcing , are barely treated ; and in many cases the thrust of the guidance has changed over time .

this section describes each facet of partnership strategy , analyzes its treatment in recent guidance , and raises questions that may be germane to congressional oversight .

in general , a state's national security strategy is likely to derive from some worldview—a set of assumptions about the nature of the world order and the exercise of power within it , together with a view of that state's role on the world stage .

that worldview , in turn , is likely to shape how a state defines its national interests .

in any partnership strategy , these starting points are likely to affect what effects are desired , how efforts are prioritized , and how results are assessed .

while worldview may not be explicitly stated , identifying its influence on u.s. strategy , including the role of partnership within that strategy , may be helpful to rigorous oversight .

recent strategic guidance documents vary significantly in both the extent to which worldview is explicitly stated , and the nature of their respective worldviews: the 2006 qdr went to great lengths to justify the whole idea of partnership .

partnership was depicted less as a given than as a new necessity , driven by two new realities in the global arena: the urgent threat of terrorism that required actions in new places ; and the long - term , large - scale contingency operations in iraq and afghanistan that required more hands .

in turn , the 2006 qdr ascribed to partnership a relatively linear causal logic: the united states would help build partners' capabilities , and then those partners would employ those capabilities in accordance with u.s. strategy .

a basic—and in some ways remarkable—assumption of the 2006 qdr was that partners' decisions and actions would largely follow u.s. intent .

the 2010 qdr adopted the worldview of the 2006 qdr , that partnership as a rule requires a rationale , as well as a similar view of the global security context .

as a result it largely echoed the counter - terrorism ( ct ) - driven rationale for partnership from the 2006 qdr .

the 2010 nss , in contrast , is explicitly based on a worldview in which collective action in the service of common interests is taken as a given—the default way of doing business in general , and thus not an approach that needs to be justified in each case .

that view , solidly echoed in the 2010 qddr , may be contrasted with a more instrumental approach to partnership , in which specific partners are recruited , when circumstances so require , to help accomplish specific ends .

furthermore , the 2010 nss adopts from the institutionalist school of international relations theory the premise that shared norms help shape outcomes in the international system ; so part of the causal logic in the 2010 nss is that the united states fosters shared norms through partnership efforts , and those norms in turn shape choices by other international actors .

the 2012 dsg reflects the 2010 nss worldview—that partnership is the default way of doing business .

it also reflects a perception of the global security context that is very different from those described by the 2006 and 2010 qdrs .

the dsg underscores that the large - scale contingencies in iraq and afghanistan are no longer the top u.s. defense priorities , and the sense of urgency about fostering partners with the kinds of capabilities required for those contingencies has disappeared .

the dsg's fundamental "shift toward the future" underscores concern with a broad range of security challenges , in contrast to the almost singular focus on ct as a driver for partnership in 2006 .

with partnership as the default starting point , the dsg indicates that any or all of these challenges might be addressed in part through partnership .

key questions concerning worldview might include the following: what assumptions about the nature of the world order undergird proposed partnership initiatives ? .

how powerful a role does u.s. leadership play in partnership activities—to what extent does strategy assume that partners will participate , and then act , based on u.s. intent ? .

should partnership be the default starting point for engagement on the world stage ? .

or does the choice to pursue partnership—given its inherent frictions and opportunity costs—require justification in each case ? .

what role if any do shared norms play in shaping outcomes ? .

and to what extent if any can the u.s. government shape shared norms ? .

in principle , worldview and national interests shape national security strategy , which in turn articulates goals .

one fundamental , unresolved tension in the debates about the use of partnership in support of national security concerns the fundamental goal of partnership .

one possible logic argues that the global security context today presents a greater or more complex array of challenges than it did in the past , so partnership , including greater participation and contributions by partners , is now essential in order to meet those challenges .

another possible logic argues that partnership generates savings—as u.s. partners assume greater responsibilities , the united states can do less .

those two logics are not mutually exclusive , but different choices about their respective importance could have different implications for prioritizing and resourcing partnership efforts .

recent strategic guidance has tended to suggest that both logics apply without clarifying their relative importance: in the mid - aughts , both logics were powerfully alive in the pentagon debates that shaped the 2006 qdr and other decision - making .

in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 , and amidst attention - grabbing cyber attacks , officials underscored that the 21 st century presented a much broader array of security challenges than ever before .

the 2006 qdr called for building international partners' capabilities in order to meet those broader challenges .

for example , counter - terrorism ( ct ) would require new , highly local approaches—and many of them—designed to cut off initial manifestations of terrorism , wherever in the world it might take root .

the 2006 bpc roadmap argued more pointedly that without partnership at home and abroad , "the nation's strategic objectives are unattainable. .

in other words , alone—we fail .

at the same time , the 2006 bpc roadmap , more explicitly than any other guidance , also invoked the idea of savings: "the department's efforts to build the planning and operational capabilities of partner agencies and international partners have the potential to reduce the length of u.s. force deployments , minimize the range of circumstances in which u.s. forces are called upon , and preserve the department's financial resources. .

what the roadmap did not do was square the circle by addressing how partnership could achieve savings in the face of a larger overall requirement .

the 2010 qdr echoed the 2006 qdr's concern with an increased span of challenges as well as its premise that partnership was an important tool for addressing them .

in addition , the 2010 qdr noted one way in which partnership could generate savings—by rendering some actions unnecessary or reducing the u.s. share of the burden if action were required .

by "strengthening relationships" abroad , it argued , the united states would become better at averting crises altogether or—if needed—at working with others to respond to them .

the 2012 dsg , in turn , seems to skew in the direction of savings .

it states that partnership "remains important for sharing the costs and responsibilities of global leadership. .

also , dod official communications associated with the dsg have frequently stressed that partnership is one pillar of its plan to mitigate risk in the context of constrained resources .

key questions concerning the fundamental goals of partnership might include the following: what is the fundamental goal of partnership in support of national security ? .

is the logic to save money , as u.s. investments pay off over time in terms of things the u.s. government no longer has to do ? .

is the logic to meet a greater array of global security challenges by working by , with , and through partners—challenges that the united states would simply not have time or resources to meet on its own ? .

to the extent that both goals apply—meeting challenges and generating savings—what is the appropriate balance between these goals in driving decisions about prioritization and resourcing ? .

in theory , partnership might be used to help achieve any of a wide array of ends that support national security: enabling partners to do specific things ( at home , abroad , or as part of multilateral efforts ) ; giving the united states better situational understanding ; ensuring u.s. access ; and shaping partners' perceptions and decision - making .

moreover , many specific partnership activities may aim at multiple effects—digging a well might build local good will for further tactical - level cooperation but may also develop capabilities that host nation forces could apply at home or abroad , foster effective host nation civil - military collaboration , deepen u.s. ability to work with host nation partners on a range of issues , and / or demonstrate u.s. commitment as part of a broader , orchestrated bilateral relationship .

clearly establishing the strategic logic that links interests to desired effects , and effects to activities , is widely viewed by strategists as essential for prioritizing efforts , producing effective assessments , and providing accountability .

recent strategic guidance tends to describe desired effects omnivorously—after all , most potential effects of partnership sound desirable—without clarifying the interests - effects - activities logic trail: the 2006 qdr and its bpc roadmap , reportedly driven by a keeping - us - up - at - night view of global terrorism , were relatively specific and distinctly ambitious concerning the desired effects of partnership .

the 2006 qdr helped propagate the view that effective counter - terrorism called for "going local"—countering the precursors to terrorism wherever it might take root .

that approach , in turn , required working closely with interior as well as defense ministries of partners around the world .

it also required a transformative approach toward state and society in partner countries: "improv[ing] states' governance , administration , internal security and the rule of law in order to build partner governments' legitimacy in the eyes of their own people and thereby inoculate societies against terrorism , insurgency , and non - state threats. .

this 2006 view did clearly link desired effects with u.s. interests , but that list of "effects" was unwieldy , because it failed to separate the essential from the merely desirable .

particularly from a 2012 vantage point—steeped in both emerging lessons from iraq and afghanistan , and a deeply austere fiscal context—the 2006 aspiration to "inoculate" may sound strikingly maximalist , and the view that the u.s. government can foster such inoculation , highly optimistic .

the 2010 qdr largely echoed the ct - driven rationale for the use of partnership from the 2006 qdr , as well as its scope and high level of ambition regarding partnership's desired effects .

for example , it explained that since terrorists exploit ungoverned and under - governed areas as safe havens , dod would help strengthen the ability of local forces to provide internal security and would work with other u.s. agencies to strengthen civilian capacity .

it also made an adjustment to the strategic logic of partnership by naming "building the security capacity of partner states" as one of its six key missions .

while that move may have been intended to emphasize further the importance of partnership , it opened the door to confusion by suggesting that partnership was an "end" rather than a set of instruments for pursuing other ends .

the 2010 nss calls for the use of whole - of - government partnership approaches , including roles for a number of u.s. departments and agencies , to help achieve a wide array of desired effects in support of u.s. national security interests .

in the nss , the effects of "invest[ing] in the capacity of strong and capable partners" include everything from countering violent extremism and stopping proliferation , to helping sustain economic growth and fostering shared norms .

geographically , the nss calls for pursuing those effects very broadly—with traditional allies , emerging centers of influence , and new partners .

whether or not the objectives are all laudable and the proposed categories of partners appropriate , the expansiveness of both categories raises questions about which effects are most essential for protecting u.s. interests .

the 2010 qddr uses the term "partnership" to refer to the full spectrum of u.s. engagement with other states and multilateral organizations , which makes the desired effects of partnership largely coterminous with those of u.s. foreign policy .

it affirms that one major component of that partnership is security - focused , and it states broadly that "the united states is investing in the capacity of strong and capable partners and working closely with those partners to advance our common security. .

within that security category , it describes a wide range of the desired effects of partnership—from improving justice sectors , to countering violent extremism , to curtailing criminal networks , to strengthening fragile states , to ending conflicts , to supporting the environment—a range that far exceeds the narrow ct focus of the 2006 and 2010 qdrs .

the qddr does not articulate how the application of partnership approaches yields specific effects , or which applications are most important for protecting u.s. interests .

the 2012 dsg provides the least clarity , among the recent defense guidance documents , about the specific desired ends of partnership .

that reflects both the worldview of the 2010 nss , in which partnership is simply the way to do business , and the dsg's broader - spectrum view of future security challenges compared to previous defense guidance .

in stressing the importance of partnership activities including rotational deployments of u.s. forces , and bilateral and multilateral training exercises , the dsg describes a long array of potential pay - offs including ensuring access , reinforcing deterrence , building capacity for internal and external defense , strengthening alliances , and increasing u.s. influence .

but such a laundry list of desired effects does not indicate how specific activities generate specific effects , does not provide clear guidelines concerning which of the effects are most important for protecting u.s. interests , and does not convey the strategic logic , if any , by which some effects generate others .

key questions concerning effects might include the following: how exactly does building the capacity and capabilities of u.s. partners lead to outcomes that help protect u.s. national security interests ? .

by what logic exactly do partnership activities generate their desired effects ? .

how and under what circumstances might some partnership effects help generate others ? .

opportunities for partnership in support of national security are theoretically unbounded , so prioritization is essential both to focus effort and to conserve resources .

in theory , priorities—always based on advancing and protecting u.s. interests—might be based on geography ; or on functional concerns such as ct , countering weapons of mass destruction , and preventing or mitigating conflict ; or on qualities of a potential partner such as its willingness to participate , its existing capabilities , and its general importance on the world stage aside from the dynamics of its bilateral relationship with the united states .

these three possible rationales are likely to drive decision - making in quite different directions .

it makes sense for partnership strategy to provide some mechanism for adjudicating among and sensibly synchronizing these three sets of concerns .

published strategic guidance documents are generally short on prioritization , while internal guidance reportedly has not settled on a single approach toward prioritization: the 2010 nss and qddr cast the broadest net , using "partnership" to refer to the full spectrum of u.s. government engagement around the world , providing exhaustive lists of the geographic areas ripe for partnership , the substantive arenas in which partnership should be applied , and the categories of potential partners .

not surprisingly , dod's publicly available strategy documents do not include detailed guidance for prioritizing the use of partnership .

the dsg stresses the growing importance of the asia pacific region and the continued importance of the middle east , but it does not cross - walk those broad geographical priorities with functional or partner - characteristic concerns .

reportedly , dod's internal guidance regarding partnership is more forthcoming , but the logic of prioritization that it uses has varied over time and the thinking remains unrefined .

some earlier guidance reportedly emphasized cultivating "willing and capable" partners .

yet some of the most important engagements from a u.s. strategic perspective may be precisely with those states that are not fully willing , or do not yet have all the capabilities required .

these might include weak states facing significant internal turmoil that could grow into a threat to u.s. interests ; or states that may take a skeptical view of the united states but whose geographic proximity to sources of u.s. concern could offer important access .

while having willing and able partners might in theory be welcome , investing in all of them , and only in them , might not yield the biggest pay - offs in terms of protecting u.s. interests .

reportedly , more recent internal dod guidance has recognized multiple potential rationales for partnership beyond the simple "willing and capable" formulation .

but the use of multiple rationales has led to long lists of designated partners—each designated perhaps for a different combination of reasons .

without an agreed mechanism for rationalizing the major logics that might drive prioritization , and without some appetite suppressant on the overall scope , such guidance may provide little basis for making tough choices .

key questions concerning prioritization might include the following: by what mechanism should priorities for partnership be determined ? .

how might concerns with specific geographic regions , with specific kinds of threats and challenges , and with key characteristics of potential partner states best be reconciled to produce a coherent approach to prioritization ? .

to what extent and in what ways should a sense of the overall requirement drive decision - making about priorities ? .

to the extent that partnership efforts in support of national security may include states , multi - lateral organizations , non - governmental organizations , and societies writ large , how can partnership strategy best prioritize among unlike partners ? .

the broad partnership debates often seem to assume that partnership yields savings over time .

to the extent that savings is part of the desired ends , it may be helpful for partnership strategy to outline the curves of investment and expected pay - off over time , including when and how both curves will be reflected in budget requests .

as a rule , strategic guidance concerning partnership broadly intimates that partnership eventually produces savings without demonstrating how that is expected to occur .

the 2006 bpc roadmap went further than other strategic guidance by recognizing a range of ways in which partnership might generate savings over time .

it also required that dod officials include "assessments of the fiscal impact" in future internal deliberations about partnership .

key questions concerning resources might include the following: to what extent , if any , does partnership , given the initial costs of investment , eventually yield savings ? .

in what ways , and according to what broad timeline , are savings generated by partnership efforts expected to be reflected in budget requests ? .

to what extent if any does , and should , anticipated savings drive the relative prioritization of proposed partnership activities ? .

one potential fundamental challenge to congressional oversight of administration partnership efforts in support of national security is the lack of a clear assessment model for gauging the impact of partnership efforts .

a common but generally unhelpful approach is to assess easily quantifiable "outputs" rather than "effects"—for example , assessing a bilateral exercise as successful because the exercise did indeed take place , rather than gauging the immediate and cumulative impact of relationship - building and capabilities - fostering on protecting u.s. interests .

in theory , rigorous assessment requires as a starting point a clear and specific articulation of desired ends , together with a clear logic for assessing progress toward those ends .

the realm of partnership complicates assessment in two ways .

first , partnership efforts may be aimed at achieving multiple effects simultaneously—ranging from immediate , concrete results to longer - term , less tangible outcomes such as stronger u.s. influence that shapes a partner's decision - making .

second , some effects may be achieved partially , along a spectrum , rather than in the binary terms of success or failure .

as a rule , strategic guidance regarding partnership has been vague about desired effects , and it has not addressed the balance among qualitatively different kinds of effects .

if anything , guidance tends to imply , without stating so , that accomplishing a tactical - level mission will naturally also yield an array of tangible and intangible benefits at the operational and strategic levels .

assessments depend on unambiguous statements of expected results .

among the recent guidance , only the 2006 bpc roadmap explicitly recognized the need to be able to assess return on u.s. investment , but it did not outline how to do so .

key questions concerning assessments might include the following: how can the effects of partnership efforts , and their role in protecting u.s. interests , best be assessed ? .

how might an assessments process consider partnership efforts designed to generate multiple , tangible and intangible , discrete effects ? .

how in particular can the growth and impact of u.s. influence best be weighed ? .

how can an assessments process best account for the fact that the effects of partnership efforts may depend in significant part on decisions and actions by u.s. partners ? .

what qualities must partnership strategy have in order to facilitate effective assessment ? .

observers have suggested that in an ideal world , the u.s. government would closely integrate all of its partnership efforts in support of national security—in diplomacy , development , and defense—not only so that these efforts do not contradict each other , but also so that they actively leverage each other and , as a whole , reflect u.s. priorities .

furthermore , the u.s. government would have a clear internal division of roles and responsibilities for partnership—among departments , and among key components within departments—in order to prevent confusion , mitigate friction , and allow effective and efficient preparation and execution by each entity .

that clear division of labor would be reinforced , in turn , by congressional oversight .

in general , strategic guidance tends to be strong in calling for integration of effort , though usually without prescribing mechanisms for achieving that integration ; and weak in calling for , let alone clarifying , a clear division of roles and responsibilities: at the systemic level , the 2010 nss calls resoundingly—in a three - page section—for whole - of - government approaches , noting that "we must update , balance , and integrate all the tools of american power. .

it broadly describes the focus of each major component of u.s. effort—defense , diplomacy , economic , development , homeland security , and intelligence .

but it does not assign roles and responsibilities to specific agencies .

at dod , the most ambitious guidance documents in this regard were those issued in 2006—the qdr and its follow - on bpc roadmap .

at that time , the term "building partnership capacity" was applied ambitiously to all potential dod partners including other u.s. agencies , non - governmental organizations , and the private sector , as well as international partners .

the 2006 guidance documents recognized the need for both integration of effort and clarification of roles and responsibilities across these stakeholders .

to that end , the guidance called for the use of national security planning guidance ( nspg ) —internal , classified guidance , issued by the white house to all agencies with a national security role , which would confirm specific priorities , and clarify and assign roles and responsibilities .

the bpc roadmap argued in support of the nspg proposal that if the u.s. government is at cross purposes internally , partnership will cost more and be less effective .

the 2010 qdr echoed its predecessor in portraying close interagency integration as necessary to successful partnership .

the 2010 qdr also did something singular in terms of the internal dod division of labor on partnership matters , by calling to "strengthen and institutionalize general purpose force ( gpf ) capabilities for security force assistance. .

such a boost for the role of gpf might suggest the need for an updated rationalization of the respective contributions of gpf and special operations forces ( sof ) to partnership efforts .

key questions concerning integration of effort and division of labor for partnership efforts in support of national security might include the following: how can the u.s. government best establish , and refine as needed , shared overall priorities for partnership efforts in support of national security ? .

how can it best ensure that overall priorities for partnership efforts also support u.s. foreign policy goals writ large ? .

what is the proper distribution of roles and responsibilities for partnership in support of national security among u.s. government departments and agencies ? .

what would be the best mechanism for regularly updating systemic - level guidance to departments and agencies about their roles in undertaking partnership efforts in support of national security ? .

how can the u.s. government best ensure that the distribution of authorities and resources among agencies corresponds to the most appropriate division of labor ? .

how can the partnership roles of all stake - holding departments and agencies , once clearly defined , best be integrated ? .

given that many different departments and agencies are likely to share responsibility for partnership in support of national security , and that many individual programs require various combinations of participation , funding , and consent from multiple agencies , how can congress best provide effective oversight ? .

many potential benefits of partnership are seemingly obvious—to the extent that they are rarely spelled out .

but partnership efforts carry potential risks as well as rewards .

for example , partners may , tacitly or otherwise , come to depend on u.s. assistance in lieu of fostering their own fully sustainable systems .

partners may deliberately slow their growth of capabilities , or perpetuate a negative security climate , in order to justify requests for continued assistance .

partners may accept u.s. assistance but then choose not to apply their new capabilities toward u.s. strategic objectives .

or partners may apply the skills , education , and / or weaponry gained through partnership toward ends that contradict u.s. policy , such as carrying out human rights violations and staging a coup against a legitimate government .

key questions concerning risk might include the following: what safeguards are in place to help ensure that partners appropriately assume responsibility over time ? .

how and to what extent can the united states best encourage partners to apply new capabilities toward achieving shared objectives ? .

what safeguards are in place to help ensure , at the very least , that partners do not misapply the benefits of their partnership with the united states ? .

how much u.s. due diligence is enough to mitigate such risks ? .

