congressional interest in small business access to capital has increased in recent years because of concerns that small businesses might be prevented from accessing sufficient capital to enable them to start , continue , or expand operations and create jobs .

some have argued that the federal government should provide additional resources to assist small businesses .

they argue that in recent years many financial institutions have tightened their small business lending standards in reaction to higher loan default rates and higher percentages of loans in arrears resulting largely from relatively weak economic conditions in many parts of the nation .

they also assert that the federal government should intervene because it is relatively difficult for many small businesses , including some with excellent credit histories , to access the capital they need to expand their operations .

others worry about the long - term adverse economic effects of spending programs that increase the federal deficit .

they advocate business tax reduction , reform of financial credit market regulation , and federal fiscal restraint as the best means to assist small businesses and create jobs .

during the 111 th congress , p.l .

111-240 , the small business jobs act of 2010 , provided the small business administration ( sba ) additional funding , authorized several sba pilot programs , and enhanced several of the sba's lending programs in an effort to assist small businesses access capital .

the act also authorized the secretary of the treasury to establish and administer a $30 billion small business lending fund ( sblf ) , in which $4.0 billion was issued to encourage community banks with less than $10 billion in assets to increase their lending to small businesses , and a $1.5 billion state small business credit initiative ( ssbci ) .

the act limited treasury's role in administrating the ssbci program to seven years from enactment ( september 27 , 2010 ) .

as a result , treasury role in administering the program sunset on september 27 , 2017 .

the ssbci provided funding , allocated through a statutorily created formula and distributed in one - third increments ( called tranches ) , to states , the district of columbia , eligible territories , and eligible municipalities ( hereinafter states ) to expand existing or create new state small business investment programs , including capital access programs , collateral support programs , loan participation programs , loan guarantee programs , and venture capital programs .

in most instances , states received their initial tranche in fy2011 , with more than $366 million in ssbci funds transferred to states .

at that time , treasury anticipated providing another $859 million in ssbci funds to states in fy2012 .

however , because it took states longer than anticipated to expend , transfer , or obligate their first tranche of ssbci funds , treasury transferred less ssbci funding to states in fy2012 than in fy2011 ( $187 million , for a total of $553 million ) .

treasury transferred $364 million in ssbci funds to states ( totaling $917 million ) in fy2013 , $229 million in fy2014 ( totaling $1.146 billion ) , $216 million in fy2015 ( totaling $1.362 billion ) , and $50 million in fy2016 ( totaling $1.412 billion ) .

as of december 31 , 2016 , treasury had disbursed $1.43 billion , or about 98% , of the $1.45 billion available to states ( $1.5 billion minus treasury's administrative costs ) .

as of december 31 , 2016 , all 57 participants had received their first tranche , 56 had received their second tranche , and 53 had received their third tranche .

states were expected to leverage their ssbci funds to generate new small business lending that is at least 10 times the amount of their ssbci funds ( a leverage ratio of 10:1 ) .

as of december 31 , 2016 , ssbci participants had leveraged $8.95 in new financing for every $1 in ssbci funds .

there are 57 participants: 47 states ; american samoa ; the district of columbia ; guam ; the northern mariana islands ; puerto rico ; the u.s. virgin islands ; anchorage , alaska ; two consortiums of municipalities in north dakota ; and a consortium of municipalities in wyoming .

during congressional consideration , advocates argued that the sblf and ssbci will promote economic growth and job creation by enhancing small business access to capital .

opponents argued that the sblf and ssbci did not address the need to stimulate demand for credit by small businesses , which , in the opponents' view , is the core issue affecting the role of small business in job creation .

they argued that "the solutions to america's economic problems do not lie in more taxpayer - funded bailouts" and advocated small business tax reductions as a more effective means to stimulate job creation and economic growth .

for additional discussion of these different approaches to stimulate job creation and economic growth , see crs report r40985 , small business: access to capital and job creation , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report r42045 , the small business lending fund , by [author name scrubbed] .

it is difficult to determine the full extent of the ssbci's effect on small business lending .

as of december 31 , 2016 , states had spent or obligated about 88% of the $1.45 billion available ( $1.27 billion of $1.45 billion ) , which is sufficient to provide an indication of the program's impact on small business lending .

however , determining the program's influence on small business lending is likely to be more suggestive than definitive because differentiating the ssbci's effect on small business lending from other factors , such as changes in the lender's local economy , is methodologically challenging , especially given the relatively small amount of financing involved relative to the national market for small business loans .

the ssbci's $1.5 billion in financing represents about 0.24% of outstanding non - agricultural small business loans .

treasury has reported that ssbci funds supported more than 21,000 loans and investments in small business amounting to over $10.7 billion , with more than 80% of the funds and investments made to small businesses with 10 or fewer full - time employees .

treasury has also reported that small business owners indicated that the funds helped them to create or retain 240,669 jobs ( 79,193 new jobs and 161,476 retained jobs ) .

the obama administration recommended in its fy2015 , fy2016 , and fy2017 budget requests that another $1.5 billion round of funding take place .

under their proposal , $1 billion would have been competitively awarded to states "best able to target local market needs , promote inclusion , attract private capital for start - up and scale - up businesses , strengthen regional entrepreneurial ecosystems , and evaluate results," and $500 million awarded "by formula based on economic factors such as job losses and pace of economic recovery. .

legislation containing provisions similar to the obama administration's proposal was introduced during the 113 th congress ( h.r .

4556 , the small business access to capital act of 2014 , and s. 2285 , its companion bill in the senate ) , the 114 th congress ( s. 1901 , the small business access to capital act of 2015 , h.r .

5144 , the jumpstart housing opportunities utilizing small enterprises act of 2016 , and h.r .

5672 , the small business access to capital act of 2016 ) , and the 115 th congress ( s. 1897 , the small business access to capital act of 2017 ) .

this report examines the ssbci and its implementation , including treasury's response to initial program audits conducted by the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) and treasury's office of inspector general ( oig ) .

these audits suggested that states generally met the statute's requirements but that there were some compliance problems .

they also indicated that treasury's oversight of the program could have been improved and that performance measures are needed to assess the program's efficacy .

on january 27 , 2010 , president obama announced in his state of the union address that because "financing remains difficult for small business owners across the country , even those that are making a profit," he would send congress several legislative proposals designed to enhance small business access to capital , including a proposal to establish a $30 billion sblf .

on may 7 , 2010 , the obama administration sent congress draft legislation to establish the sblf and the ssbci .

on may 13 , 2010 , representative ( now senator ) gary peters introduced h.r .

5302 , the state small business credit initiative act of 2010 .

the bill would have authorized a $2 billion ssbci modeled on the president's ssbci proposal .

that same day , then - representative barney frank , then - chair of the house committee on financial services , introduced h.r .

5297 , initially titled the small business lending fund act of 2010 .

based on the president's sblf proposal , the bill was designed to encourage lending to small businesses by creating a $30 billion sblf to make capital investments in eligible community banks with total assets of less than $10 billion .

on may 18 , 2010 , the committee on financial services held a hearing on h.r .

5297 and , the following day , approved the bill , 42-23 , as amended .

perhaps the most significant amendment approved was an amended version of the $2 billion state small business credit initiative act of 2010 .

it was approved by a vote of 39-23 .

sblf and ssbci advocates argued that the programs were necessary because "many companies , particularly small businesses , claim that it is becoming harder to get new loans to keep their business operating and that banks are tightening requirements or cutting off existing lines of even when the businesses are up to date on their loan repayments. .

in their view , the sblf and ssbci would promote economic growth and job creation by enhancing small business access to capital .

the house committee on financial services' republicans indicated in the report accompanying h.r .

5297 that they "were unanimous in our opposition to this misguided legislation. .

they argued that the sblf and ssbci did not address what they considered to be the core issue affecting small business job creation during the economic recovery — the need to stimulate demand for credit by small businesses .

they argued that the bill would fail to help small businesses or create jobs , would succeed only in adding billions of dollars to the national debt , and concluded that "the solutions to america's economic problems do not lie in more taxpayer - funded bailouts. .

instead of supporting federal spending programs to enhance small business access to capital , they advocated an extension of a series of small business tax credits as a more effective means to stimulate small business job creation and economic growth .

on june 14 , 2010 , the house committee on rules issued a rule for h.r .

5297 ( h.res .

1436 ) that provided that "in the engrossment of h.r .

5297 , the clerk shall add the text of h.r .

5486 , as passed by the house , at the end of h.r .

5297 and that h.r .

5486 shall be laid on the table. .

h.r .

5486 , to amend the internal revenue code of 1986 to provide tax incentives for small business job creation , and for other purposes , included several tax incentives for small businesses and several revenue - raising provisions designed to offset the costs of the tax incentives .

also , at that time , the house committee on rules posted on its website legislative language for a proposed amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

5297 , as reported , which included a proposed $1 billion small business early - stage investment program .

on june 17 , 2010 , the house passed h.r .

5297 , by a vote of 241-182 .

the engrossed bill , retitled the small business jobs and credit act of 2010 , also included the language in h.r .

5486 and the small business early - stage investment program , as well as the $30 billion sblf and $2 billion ssbci .

the arguments presented in the house report accompanying the bill , both for and against the bill's passage , were also presented during house floor debate .

for example , advocates argued that the ssbci would "increase small business lending which will retain and create jobs. .

opponents argued that the bill "is repeating the same failed initiatives that have helped our national debt grow to $13 billion in the past two years" and did not address what they viewed as the top problem facing small businesses — "the lack of sales and demand. .

the house - passed version of h.r .

5297 was placed on the senate legislative calendar on june 18 , 2010 .

following a series of votes on motions to invoke cloture on several amendments in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

5297 and the august recess , the senate passed an amended version of the bill ( s.amdt .

4594 , an amendment in the nature of a substitute for h.r .

5297 ) on september 16 , 2010 , by a vote of 61-38 .

the senate - passed version of the bill , which included the ssbci but funded at $1.5 billion instead of $2 billion , was passed by the house on september 23 , 2010 , by a vote of 237-187 .

the enrolled bill , retitled the small business jobs act of 2010 , was signed into law ( p.l .

111-240 ) by president obama on september 27 , 2010 .

the arguments presented during senate floor debate , both for and against the bill's passage , were similar to those presented during house floor debate .

one difference was a greater emphasis by the bill's advocates in the senate on the ssbci's support of state loan collateral programs .

several senators argued that the ssbci's support of state loan collateral programs was needed because , as one senator pointed out , "just as the recession has battered the value of our homes , it has also battered the value of business property such as real estate , factories , and equipment .

that has damaged the ability of small businesses to get bank financing because it has lowered the value of property they can offer as collateral. .

the ssbci provided funding to expand existing or create new state small business investment programs , including capital access programs , loan participation programs , loan guarantee programs , collateral support programs , venture capital programs , and any other small business credit or equity support program that meets the ssbci's program requirements .

p.l .

111-240 appropriated $1.5 billion to the department of the treasury for the ssbci program , including the "reasonable costs of administering the program. .

the 50 states , american samoa , the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , the northern mariana islands , the u.s. virgin islands , and , in some instances , municipalities were eligible for funding , with the amount available to each state , territory , and municipality determined by a formula contained in the act ( described later in this section ) .

p.l .

111-240 required treasury's oig to conduct , supervise , and coordinate audits and investigations into the use of ssbci funds .

the act also required gao to perform an annual audit of the ssbci program .

p.l .

113-188 , the government reports elimination act of 2014 , eliminated this requirement .

treasury's oig released its first evaluation report of treasury's implementation of the ssbci on august 5 , 2011 , and its first audit of a state's use of ssbci funds ( california ) on may 24 , 2012 .

it has completed audits of 24 participants' use of ssbci funds ( california , montana , vermont , michigan , texas , massachusetts , delaware , new jersey , alabama , missouri , washington , kansas , florida , west virginia , illinois , south carolina , american samoa , north carolina , idaho , indiana , tennessee , the north dakota mandan consortium , rhode island , and new york ) .

gao released annual audits of the ssbci program on december 7 , 2011 , december 5 , 2012 , december 18 , 2013 , and december 11 , 2014 .

the ssbci was enacted as part of a larger effort to enhance the supply of capital to small businesses .

advocates argued that the ssbci would help to address the recent decline in small business lending and create jobs .

opponents were not convinced it would enhance small business lending and worried about the program's potential cost to the federal treasury .

it is difficult to determine the full extent of the program's effect on small business lending .

as mentioned earlier , as of december 31 , 2016 , states had spent or obligated about 88% of the $1.45 billion available ( $1.27 billion of $1.45 billion ) , which is sufficient to provide some insight .

for example , as mentioned earlier , treasury has reported that ssbci funds supported more than 21,000 loans and investments in small business amounting to over $10.7 billion , with more than 80% of the funds and investments made to small businesses with 10 or fewer full - time employees .

treasury has also reported that small businesses indicated that ssbci funds helped them to create or retain 240,669 jobs ( 79,193 new jobs and 161,476 retained jobs ) .

but , as treasury has also noted , determining the ssbci's influence on small business lending is likely to be more suggestive than definitive because differentiating the ssbci's effect on small business lending from other , exogenous factors , such as changes in the lender's local economy and changes in the demand for small business loans , is methodologically challenging , especially given the relatively small amount of financing involved relative to the national market for small business loans .

as mentioned previously , the ssbci's $1.5 billion in financing represents about 0.24% of outstanding non - agricultural small business loans .

treasury's oig's audits of 24 states' implementation of their ssbci programs suggest that many states experienced difficulty reaching full compliance with the program's administrative requirements , which were designed to reduce the likelihood of loan defaults , investment losses , and fraudulent use of funds .

the release of treasury's "ssbci national standards for compliance and oversight" document on may 15 , 2012 , proved useful because it helped states become more familiar with , and accustomed to , the ssbci's rules and regulations .

however , given the relatively large number of new small business investment programs receiving ssbci funding , the relatively large number of entities involved in the program ( state officials , hundreds of lenders and investment companies , and thousands of small businesses ) , and the termination of treasury's role in ssbci administration , ssbci program oversight is likely to remain a congressional interest .

