as congress continues to examine various aspects of the tax code in the context of potential tax reform , the tax deduction for charitable contributions may come under scrutiny .

congress has long been concerned with ensuring that contributions for which tax deductions are claimed directly benefit charitable activities .

certain organizations that support charitable activities , however , may receive tax deductible charitable contributions today , but may not be required to use those funds for charitable purposes within any specific time frame .

thus , taxpayers may be claiming tax deductions for donated funds that are not immediately serving charitable purposes .

certain types of organizations are given preferred tax status for supporting charitable activities , even if the organization is not directly involved in providing charitable goods or services .

private foundations , for example , make grants to charities but generally do not directly provide charitable goods and services .

grants are paid out of earnings on donated assets held by the foundation .

donor advised funds ( dafs ) are another type of organization that serves to facilitate charitable giving , but are not directly involved in the provision of charitable goods and services .

like foundations , charitable contributions made directly to dafs are tax deductible .

unlike foundations , dafs are not subject to minimum payout requirements .

dafs have become increasingly popular in recent years , partly due to commercial fund sponsors ( eg , fidelity and vanguard ) with limited traditional charitable interests .

foundations , dafs , and other organizations that invest contributed funds confer an additional tax benefit in the form of a tax exemption .

this tax exemption allows organizations to accumulate assets without paying tax on earnings .

during normal years ( before the asset collapse during the recession ) estimates suggested that the revenue loss from this tax benefit was even larger than that associated with charitable contributions deductions .

if charitable contributions were spent quickly , this benefit would be minimal .

if contributions are held as assets and invested , the tax exemption may confer significant financial benefits .

congress moved to impose greater restrictions on organizations that support , but are not directly involved in providing , charitable goods and services in the pension protection act of 2006 ( ppa ; p.l .

109-280 ) .

notably , certain types of supporting organizations were subject to a minimum payout ratio of 5% of assets under provisions enacted as part of the ppa .

dafs , however , were not subject to payout requirements .

the ppa did impose additional reporting requirements on dafs , and requested a treasury department study of dafs along with supporting organizations .

the treasury department's study was released in 2011 .

the treasury report was criticized by senator chuck grassley , chairman of the senate finance committee in 2006 , as being "disappointing and nonresponsive. .

this report reviews the findings of the treasury study with respect to dafs and provides additional analysis of payout behavior of dafs ( one of congress's primary concerns when requesting the study ) using data from the 2008 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) public use file for tax - exempt organizations .

donor advised funds allow individuals to make a gift to a fund in a sponsoring organization .

sponsoring organizations are charities that are allowed to receive tax - deductible donations .

the gift is irrevocable , as in the case of a gift to a foundation or any other charity .

the donor does not legally oversee the payment of grants to charities from the fund , which is determined by the sponsoring organizations .

donors make recommendations for grants ( hence donor advised ) , and there is general agreement that these recommendations determine , with few exceptions , the contributions .

for example , the treasury report indicated that all respondents providing public comments reported no conflicts with their donor's advice and agreed that the donor's recommendations are generally followed .

dafs first appeared in the 1930s , largely sponsored by community foundations and involving relatively large contributions .

over time , these dafs continued to be largely sponsored by community foundations , and , to a lesser extent , religious organizations .

however , in the early 1990s , investment firms began to set up charitable organizations to sponsor dafs .

fidelity established a daf sponsoring organization in 1992 , and other financial institutions quickly followed .

currently , numerous commercial daf sponsors operate , with fidelity , schwab , and vanguard being the largest in terms of asset size .

the rapid growth in dafs is associated with the appearance of commercial daf sponsors which now control roughly one - third of daf assets .

community foundations account for 43% of daf assets and religious organizations 15% .

commercial dafs tend to allow relatively small contributions and do not have a direct charitable interest , as is the case for the other daf sponsors , such as community foundations , religious organizations , education , health , or other charitable organizations .

dafs may be used to hold funds temporarily , which may be useful for year end planning , and distributions out of the contributions may be made quickly .

they also may be used in the same way as private foundations: with a large contribution to the fund , which is then used to generate income and make grants largely out of income .

in cases where dafs' advisor status can be inherited , such funds can exist in perpetuity , just as most foundations do .

not only can this treatment , compared to ordinary charitable giving , confer additional tax benefits by allowing fund earnings to accumulate tax free , it can facilitate the contributions of appreciated property .

a daf can permit the contribution of a large indivisible appreciated property such as real estate .

when property is not divisible , the contribution cannot be spread across many charitable donors or donated over time .

contributions of property can be made to a daf , sold without tax consequences , and the proceeds used to make smaller subsequent contributions to multiple recipients or donations over time .

donors receive another tax benefit when they donate appreciated property , because they do not have to pay capital gains tax on the appreciation , while at the same time deducting the charitable gift at market value in most cases .

in mandating the study of dafs and supporting organizations , congress specifically asked four questions of the treasury department: 1 .

are existing charitable deductions ( which have more generous limits and deduction amounts than those for private foundations ) appropriate considering the use of contributions ( type , extent , and timing ) or the use for the benefit of the donor ? .

2 .

should dafs be subject to a payout ratio ? .

3 .

is an advisory role in the investment or distribution of donated funds consistent with a completed gift ? .

4 .

do these issues apply to other charitable gifts ? .

the remaining sections examine the first three questions as they relate to dafs , how treasury answered them , and what further policy options might be considered .

the analysis presented below uses data from the 2008 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) form 990 public use file ( see appendix a for more information ) .

this dataset contains information as reported by a sample of tax - exempt organizations on the form 990 , which is an informational return .

the 2008 return asks organizations to provide information on donor advised funds , including the number of funds maintained , contributions to and grants from dafs , and the total value of daf assets .

since 2005 , the irs has been gathering information on dafs on the form 990 informational returns filed by tax - exempt entities .

prior to 2005 , the primary resource for information on dafs was an annual survey of daf sponsoring organizations conducted by the chronicle of philanthropy .

the data reported on the irs form 990 is an improvement over the survey - generated data that was previously available .

nonetheless , the form 990 data has limitations .

one of the primary limitations of the irs form 990 data is its aggregate nature .

data on dafs is reported at the sponsoring organization level , and not at the individual daf account level .

thus , for organizations that sponsor more than one daf , information on contributions , grants , and payout rates per individual daf are not available .

the 2011 treasury report was the first comprehensive report on sponsoring organizations and dafs that used data as reported on the irs form 990 .

the treasury report used data from the 2006 form 990 informational returns .

the analysis below uses information as reported on 2008 form 990s .

in a number of instances , the results presented below are compared to the results as reported in the 2011 treasury report .

comparisons between the treasury report and the analysis below should be viewed with caution for a number of reasons .

first , the irs form 990 was redesigned in both 2006 and 2008 .

given that these forms were unfamiliar to filers , there is greater risk that the reported information may contain errors .

second , while on the 2008 form 990 daf - related information is reported in a separate section , this was not the case in 2006 .

finally , the analysis here is based on a sample of returns as reported in the public use file .

thus , all reported statistics are estimated population totals based on this sample .

the more observations with reporting errors , particularly those with high sampling weights , the less accurate the population estimates .

perhaps the most important policy issues are those initially posed by congress to the treasury department , including whether minimum distribution requirements should be imposed , whether rules restricting charitable contributions that apply to foundations should be imposed on dafs , and whether contributions made to dafs should be treated as completed gifts .

in addition , a number of proposals were made in invited comments , including stricter treatment of commercial dafs or national dafs , limits on the duration of advisory rights or the lifetime of the daf , prohibitions on retention of options or other rights , delays in deducting appreciated property until that property is sold , and limits on management fees .

in addition , policies relating to additional reporting might be considered .

the treasury report's position on minimum distribution requirements was that it was premature to make a recommendation based on only one year of data .

the analysis of 2008 data presented in this report , however , shows results that are generally similar to those found by treasury in their analysis of the 2006 data .

in sum , both 2006 and 2008 data indicate a payout ratio in the aggregate that was higher than that of foundations , but a great deal of variability in payout ratios across sponsoring organizations .

further , a substantial fraction of sponsoring organizations made no payouts or payouts less than the foundation minimum of 5% in both 2006 and 2008 .

the 13.1% overall payout ratio found in the 2008 data was somewhat higher than the 9.3% rate treasury found .

this higher rate might reflect some overstatement of payouts in the data , as treasury found for the 2006 sample , or it may have reflected the decline in asset values in 2008 .

dollar weighted payout ratios prepared by the national philanthropic trust show a slight rise in payout rates in the years after 2006 , but a decline between 2009 and 2010 .

the treasury report stated that "compared to private foundations , the mean payout rates for aggregate dafs in tax year 2006 appear to be high for most categories of daf sponsoring organizations. .

this statement seems to imply that observing an overall payout rate higher than that for foundations is a rationale for not imposing a minimum payout requirement .

however , as noted earlier , there is ample reason to reject the notion that an aggregate payout ratio higher than that of private foundations provides a good rationale for not imposing such requirements on a per account basis .

this point is clearly illustrated by the distribution of daf sponsoring organizations with only one sponsor .

for sponsoring organizations maintaining a single daf account , the average payout rate was 10.6% ( twice that required of private foundations ) .

however , amongst sponsoring organizations that maintained a single daf account , over half made no distribution and over 70% made a distribution of less than 5% .

can characteristics of sponsoring organizations with only one daf be generalized to larger daf sponsoring organizations maintaining multiple accounts ? .

larger daf sponsoring organizations tend to have somewhat higher aggregate payout rates ( the payout rate in 2008 for sponsoring organizations with only one account was 10.6% in 2008 , compared to 16.0% for organizations with 100 or more individual accounts ) .

however , the different objectives of daf accounts ( year to year tax planning versus accumulating assets in the nature of a private foundation ) that likely gave rise to the differential payout rates amongst daf sponsoring organizations maintaining a single account also occur within sponsoring organizations with multiple accounts .

thus , there is likely to be substantial variation in payout rates at the individual account level across all sponsoring organizations .

some additional aspects about payout ratios arise from the data analysis .

some of the public comments indicated that a 5% payout requirement would be acceptable if imposed on the overall sponsor rather than the individual account .

the analysis of the 2008 data indicates that a minimum payout imposed on a per sponsor basis would be relatively meaningless .

out of the daf sponsors with 100 or more accounts , covering 87% of accounts , only 3.6% fell below a 5% pay out rate .

this approach would leave the vast majority of daf accounts with no effective restrictions , while imposing requirements on the relatively few in daf sponsors with a small number of dafs .

it would also create an incentive for donors who wished to accumulate funds and maintain endowments while paying little or nothing in grants to move to the larger daf sponsors , including commercial dafs .

finally , although sponsors claimed that ensuring payout rates of their daf accounts would be costly , their own comments indicated that they monitored their accounts for inactivity in many cases .

the most straightforward approach would be to shift daf account funds into a general fund that immediately made charitable distributions for accounts that did not meet the minimum requirements as the year end approaches .

this approach is , as noted above , already used by the community foundation whose website was quoted above , although measures were only taken after long periods of inactivity .

note also that a variation would be to impose the minimum distribution over a period of time , for example , equivalent to an annual percentage distribution over the past five years .

this approach would allow some accumulation if desired to make a large gift , or to adjust for economic cycles ( for example , smaller payouts when the economy is performing at full employment and larger ones during downturns when needs may be greater ) .

as noted below , some comments suggested applying minimum distributions only to commercial daf sponsors or national dafs in general , applying higher distribution requirements to them , or exempting traditional daf sponsors ( such as community foundations ) from distribution requirements .

some comments suggested that a minimum distribution amount might be perceived as a guideline and would lower overall distributions , given that private foundations tend to grant around 5% .

however , since some daf individual account objectives include short term charitable giving management , a comparison with private foundations may be inappropriate .

the treasury report rejected stricter rules that apply to foundations for dafs on the grounds that the legal control of the fund is in the hands of the sponsoring organizations , a public charity .

donors do not legally control contributions from these accounts or the investment .

these benefits include the ability to donate larger shares of income in cash gifts and gifts of appreciated property , the ability to deduct the fair market value of non - traded appreciated assets , and exemption from excise taxes on investment income .

as discussed previously , donors appear to have actual control of grant making because sponsoring organizations typically follow their advice , as indicated in web sites of sponsoring organizations and reinforced by the commentary received and reported in the treasury report .

in many cases they effectively have investment control as well .

in that sense , donors , who are presumably concerned about the use of their own accounts and not about the sponsoring organization , have the same control , in effect , of the most important aspect , the recipient of charitable gifts .

in considering this issue , one question is whether the restricted legal rights of the donor or actual practice should determine the appropriate treatment .

although the treasury report also concluded that donations to daf accounts were completed gifts , just as a gift to a foundation is , commentators questioned whether the gift was complete if there were options ( options to buy or sell the gifted property at a future date ) related to the use of gifts of property .

some comments suggested that puts or calls , or other option retentions with respect to property be explicitly disallowed .

suggestions were also made that deductions for a gift of appreciated property not be allowed until the property is sold .

comments expressing concern about the lack of a charitable purpose for commercial dafs or even for national dafs , as compared to community foundations , and daf sponsors with religious , educational , and other charitable purposes led to some suggestions for tighter regulations and greater restrictions for these daf sponsors .

some noted a tension , especially with the commercial daf , between the needs of charitable organizations to restrict contributions and the incentive to maintain large investment accounts .

these proposals could include only applying minimum distributions requirements to these dafs , applying higher distribution requirement , or exempting traditional sponsors .

some comments proposed that the duration of daf accounts be restricted either by limiting the period of years advisory rights would be effective , or limiting the life of a daf account ( for example , by not allowing future generations to inherit the advisory role ) .

presumably if such limits were imposed the daf sponsor would be required to pay out the entire amount in the account over a specified period .

this approach would be an alternative or perhaps addition to a payout requirement to insure that the amounts in daf accounts are used for charitable purposes in some reasonable time period .

objections to these restrictions might come from donors who wish to establish the tradition of philanthropy in their families ; some donors purposefully include their children as advisors .

some comments also suggested that limits be imposed on charges related to daf account maintenance and investments .

program expenses for some daf sponsors were high but may have included direct charitable activities .

in general , relatively little is known about the costs of maintaining and investing daf funds .

one obvious constraint in analyzing issues associated with dafs is that all reporting is done at the aggregate daf sponsor level , which means there is information only by inference concerning the shares of accounts that have low or no payout ratios .

requiring reporting on individual daf accounts is an option that could improve understanding of how dafs operate and provide better oversight .

consolidated reporting may mean there are fewer organizations for the irs to monitor and fewer forms to process .

others disagreed .

to quote the treasury report: "one claimed that under current law , dafs are 'virtually invisible to tax authorities and nonprofit regulators' and expressed concern that the ppa had done nothing to alleviate this 'problem. .

another respondent described dafs as 'a world of hidden philanthropy that merits significantly updated disclosure' and stressed that 'without individual level reporting , there will be no adequate way for the irs to determine' if a charitable purpose is being pursued and if the dafs' managers are complying with the law. .

several pieces of information would be helpful in providing a better understanding of daf payout information .

useful information that could be provided by daf sponsors could include the share of their daf accounts that made no distributions , the share that made distributions of less than 5% , or a general distribution of accounts across different payout intervals .

information on investment fees and administrative costs of managing the dafs , separated from other costs , could also be useful .

additional information could help policymakers evaluate whether giving through dafs is achieving charitable giving policy goals .

in some ways , the fundamental policy issue about how freely to allow donors to make contributions that are not immediately used for charitable purposes is whether such arrangements increase charitable giving per dollar of cost or decrease it .

allowing for contributions to accumulate and earn a tax free return increases the benefit to the donor and thus may increase contributions to funds or foundations , albeit at an additional cost .

such arrangements can also reduce current charitable giving by encouraging fund accumulation , a concern that presumably motivated the minimum distribution rules for private foundations .

dafs differ from foundations in some ways , including the legal technicalities , but in practice , are very similar .

one concern that remains for both foundations and dafs is how soon donations are put to charitable use .

appendix a .

description of data the data used in this report come from the 2008 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) form 990 public use file .

the irs soi exempt organization file contains information on 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) through ( c ) ( 9 ) organizations that filed the form 990 informational return .

the dataset is based on a stratified random sample .

for larger organizations , the sampling rate is 100% .

thus , all large tax - exempt organizations filing the form 990 are included in the sample .

sampling weights are used to adjust for sampling rates of smaller organizations .

tax - exempt organizations are asked on the 2008 form 990 informational return if they maintained any donor advised funds ( dafs ) .

if an organization indicates that dafs were maintained , they are advised to complete schedule d , part 1 ( see figure a - 1 ) .

on schedule d , daf sponsoring organizations are asked to provide information on the total number of dafs held , contributions to and grants from dafs during the year , and the aggregate value of daf assets at the end of the year .

in the 2008 irs soi form 990 public use file , 599 sampled organizations either 1 ) answered "yes" to the questions asking if the organization maintained any dafs , or 2 ) reported that at least one daf was held on schedule d. this sample of 599 organizations represents a population of 2,158 daf sponsoring organization .

before further evaluating the data , the data were further cleaned to eliminate observations with clear reporting errors .

five observations were dropped for having reported nonsensical values for the total number of dafs held .

another fifty - one observations were dropped that indicated dafs were maintained , but then reported having zero dafs and zero daf assets at the end of the year .

another two observations were dropped that reportedly maintained daf accounts , but did not report any daf contributions , grants , or daf assets .

after dropping observations with clear reporting errors , the sample contained 541 observations representing a population of 1,828 daf sponsoring organizations .

other adjustments were made to collect for clear reporting errors .

the resulting sample is the basis for the summary statistics presented in this report .

summary statistics are presented in appendix b .

a separate examination of commercial dafs is also provided .

a total of 21 commercial funds were identified in the sample .

 ( some of these may be national dafs that are not commercial. ) .

several of these funds had a weight that was greater than one .

thus , these 21 observations represent a total population of 31 sponsoring organizations .

summary statistics for commercial dafs , based on the information as reported on the 2008 irs form 990s of these 21 organizations , are reported in appendix b .

appendix b .

data summary statistics summary statistics for information on dafs reported on 2008 irs form 990s are provided in table b - 1 .

a description of the data can be found in appendix a .

further discussion and interpretation of these summary statistics is provided in the main body of this report .

