in the wake of the worst u.s. financial crisis since the great depression , congress passed and the president signed into law sweeping reforms of the financial services regulatory system through the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , p.l .

111-203 .

title x of the dodd - frank act is entitled the consumer financial protection act of 2010 ( cfp act ) .

the cfp act establishes the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb or bureau ) within the federal reserve system ( frs ) with rulemaking , enforcement , and supervisory powers over many consumer financial products and services , as well as the entities that sell them .

the cfp act significantly enhances federal consumer protection regulatory authority over nondepository financial institutions , potentially subjecting them to comparable supervisory , examination , and enforcement standards that have been applicable to depository institutions in the past .

the act transfers to the bureau much of the consumer compliance authority over larger depositories that previously had been held by banking regulators .

the law also transfers to the bureau the primary rulemaking authority over many federal consumer protection laws that , with one exception , were enacted prior to the dodd - frank act .

these "enumerated consumer laws" include the truth in lending act and the real estate settlement procedures act of 1974 .

the cfp act has proven to be one of the more controversial portions of the dodd - frank act .

the 113 th congress has been actively involved in conducting oversight of the implementation of the cfp act .

the 113 th congress also has considered bills that would either eliminate the cfpb altogether or significantly alter the structure of the bureau by , for example , making the cfpb's primary funding subject to the traditional appropriations process , converting the cfpb's leadership structure from a sole directorship to a commission , or allowing the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) to overturn cfpb - issued regulations with a simple majority vote , as opposed to the current supermajority vote .

this report provides an overview of the regulatory structure of consumer finance under existing federal law before the dodd - frank act went into effect and examines arguments for modifying the regime in order to more effectively regulate consumer financial markets .

it then analyzes how the cfp act changes that legal structure , with a focus on the bureau's organization ; the entities and activities that fall ( and do not fall ) under the bureau's supervisory , enforcement , and rulemaking authorities ; the bureau's general and specific rulemaking powers and procedures ; and the bureau's funding .

before the cfp act went into effect , which largely occurred on july 21 , 2011 ( called the "designated transfer date" ) , the authority to write rules to implement the majority of the federal consumer financial protection laws , the power to enforce these laws , and the supervisory authority over the individuals and companies offering and selling consumer financial products and services were predominately shared by five different banking regulators , as well as the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

the jurisdiction of these regulators varied based on the type of institution involved and , in some cases , based on the type of financial activities in which institutions engaged .

the authority of the five banking regulators varied based on depository charters .

the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) supervised national banks ; the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( frb ) supervised domestic operations of foreign banks and state - chartered banks that were members of the frs ; the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) supervised state - chartered banks and other state - chartered banking institutions that were not members of the frs ; the national credit union administration ( ncua ) supervised federally insured credit unions ; and the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) supervised federal savings and loan associations and thrifts .

the five banking regulators were charged with the two - pronged mandate of regulating for both safety and soundness , as well as consumer compliance .

safety and soundness regulation , also referred to as prudential regulation , consists of ensuring that institutions are managed in a safe and sound manner so as to maintain profitability and avoid failure .

the focus of consumer compliance regulation , on the other hand , is ensuring that institutions are in compliance with applicable consumer protection and fair lending laws .

to reach these ends , the banking regulators were provided with broad authority to subject banks , credit unions , and thrifts ( which this report will collectively refer to as "depository institutions" or "depositories" ) to up - front regulatory standards , such as maintaining minimum capital levels , through regulations , orders , and guidelines .

these regulators also were given strong supervisory powers , including the authority to perform on - site examinations of depositories , and flexible enforcement powers to rectify problems found during the course of their supervision .

these supervisory powers gave banking regulators at least the potential to catch problems before they caused significant harm to consumers , counterparties , and the depositories themselves .

additionally , consumer compliance issues often were dealt with informally and confidentially as part of the examination process , rather than through public , ex post formal enforcement orders .

the federal trade commission ( ftc ) was the primary federal regulator for nondepository financial institutions , such as payday lenders and mortgage brokers .

unlike the federal banking regulators , the ftc had little up - front supervisory or enforcement authority .

the ftc's powers generally were limited to ex post enforcement .

thus , the ftc did not have the statutory authority to regularly examine nondepository financial institutions or impose reporting requirements on them as a way to proactively ensure they were complying with consumer protection laws .

the ftc also did not have any direct safety and soundness authority over institutions .

instead , nondepository financial institutions were primarily supervised by state regulators .

the powers granted to state regulators and the level of supervision these regulators provided varied considerably from state to state .

in addition to institution - based distinctions , both depository and nondepository financial institutions also were subject to the restrictions of federal consumer financial protection laws .

these federal laws each regulate specific types of consumer products and activities .

for example , the truth in lending act ( tila ) requires disclosures regarding the terms and conditions associated with extensions of consumer credit ; the equal credit opportunity act ( ecoa ) bans certain kinds of discrimination in consumer lending ; the real estate settlement procedures act of 1974 ( respa ) imposes disclosure requirements and fee restrictions associated with home loan settlements ; the truth in savings act ( tisa ) requires disclosures regarding the terms and conditions of consumer deposit accounts ; and the fair debt collection practices act ( fdcpa ) restricts third - party debt collection activities .

individually , these enumerated consumer laws target discrete activities .

taken as a whole , they govern a broad and diverse set of consumer activities and services .

before the dodd - frank act went into effect , the rulemaking authority to implement federal consumer financial protection laws was largely held by the frb .

the authority to enforce the federal consumer financial protection laws and regulations , however , was spread among all of the banking regulators , the ftc , and hud .

in short , the banking regulators held both prudential and consumer compliance supervisory and enforcement powers over depository institutions .

although they had the authority to take ex post enforcement actions , the banking regulators placed a great deal of emphasis on ex ante regulation and supervision .

the ftc was the primary regulator of nondepository financial institutions .

the ftc's authority was much more limited than that of the banking regulators .

its authority was almost exclusively limited to ex post enforcement .

additionally , both depositories and nondepository financial institutions were required to comply with the various federal consumer financial laws and the regulations issued under those laws .

the rulemaking authority under the federal consumer financial laws was predominately held by the frb , but the authority to enforce those laws and regulations was spread among all the banking regulators , as well as the ftc and hud .

the cfp act significantly alters the consumer financial protection landscape by consolidating rulemaking authority and , to a lesser extent , supervisory and enforcement authority in one regulator — the cfpb .

the cfp act empowers the bureau through the transfer of existing consumer protection powers from other federal regulators and the establishment of heightened consumer protection authorities not previously held by federal regulators .

the bureau has jurisdiction over an array of consumer financial products and services , and it serves as the primary federal consumer financial supervisor of many of the institutions that offer these products and services .

however , at least six other agencies — the occ , frb , fdic , ncua , ftc , and hud — will continue to hold some consumer protection powers at the federal level .

the cfp act also imposes certain limitations on the bureau's authority to regulate various types of financial institutions and financial activities .

several fundamental policy questions arose consistently during the legislative debate over proposals that ultimately became the cfp act .

these policy questions seem to be the primary motivations for the exceptions to the consolidation of consumer protection power in the cfpb and the various restraints on the bureau's authorities .

one policy question was how best to balance the safety and soundness regulation of depositories with that of consumer compliance .

there is considerable overlap between prudential and consumer compliance regulation .

for instance , a mortgage that the borrower is unable to fully repay is typically bad for both the borrower and the lender .

the borrower runs the risk of damage to her credit score and the loss of her home .

the lender may suffer from lost interest income and increased costs associated with the foreclosure process .

however , there are some areas in which there can be a conflict between safety and soundness regulation and consumer protection .

when a banking activity is profitable , safety and soundness regulators tend to look upon it favorably because it enables the bank to meet capital requirements and withstand financial shocks .

a consumer protection regulator , on the other hand , may look at such activity less favorably if the profit is seen to have been gained unfairly or deceptively at the expense of consumers .

a related question that surfaced frequently during the legislative debate is the extent to which large and small financial institutions should be treated differently in the regulatory structure .

whereas the largest depository institutions are accustomed to having examiners on - site continuously , examinations may be more disruptive for smaller depositories .

enhanced compliance costs also are likely to more significantly impact smaller depositories , with their lower aggregate revenues , than larger depositories .

similar arguments could be made for large versus small nondepository financial institutions .

additionally , when assessing the causes of the recent financial crisis , many tend to place more blame on this country's large financial institutions than on smaller ones .

thus , one could argue that the larger institutions should be subject to greater , more costly regulation than smaller institutions .

on the other hand , the goal of the dodd - frank act appears to be geared not just toward eliminating the exact causes of the recent financial crisis , but also toward preventing future crises .

another issue that the legislative drafters of the cfp act had to grapple with is that there is not always a clear delineation between financial and nonfinancial goods , services , and providers in the marketplace .

for example , a clothing store's main line of business likely is selling clothes and shoes , so it may seem that a consumer financial regulator would have no regulatory role over it .

however , most clothing retailers do rely on financial services to maintain their businesses .

they usually accept credit cards and debit cards as a form of payment .

many clothing stores team with financial institutions to offer credit cards that provide store rewards for using the card .

clothing retailers also commonly offer electronic gift cards .

additionally , some clothing stores may directly offer financing options for the purchase of their merchandise .

as a result , defining the scope of the bureau's authority required careful consideration .

in some instances , the act uses rigid , bright - line rules that provide considerable certainty as to where the bureau's authorities begin and end .

in other instances , the cfp act imposes subjective standards intended to give the cfpb the flexibility to evolve with consumer financial markets , but that also create the potential that the bureau will overreach by regulating beyond congressional intent .

apparently as a result of the policy considerations outlined above , the act's allocation of regulatory authority among the prudential regulators and the cfpb varies based on institution size and type .

regulatory authority differs for ( 1 ) depository institutions with more than $10 billion in assets ( i.e. , "larger depositories" ) ; ( 2 ) depository institutions with $10 billion or less in assets ( i.e. , "smaller depositories" ) ; and ( 3 ) nondepositories .

the dodd - frank act also explicitly exempts a number of different entities and consumer financial activities from the cfpb's supervisory , enforcement , and rulemaking authorities .

consequently , compliance costs and the extent to which the cost and availability of credit will be affected by the new regulator will depend on the type of institution that is providing consumer financial products and services , as well as exactly how the bureau wields its powers and how aggressively it ( and other state and federal regulators ) enforces consumer protection laws and regulations .

the breadth of the cfpb's supervisory , enforcement , and rulemaking powers is similar to that of the banking regulators .

the banking regulators , however , have held those authorities for decades , thus establishing a degree of certainty in the industry as to how those powers will be exercised .

the fact that the cfpb does not have a similar history , coupled with the bureau's overarching focus on consumers , as opposed to safety and soundness , and its potential to oversee a large number of nondepository financial institutions that largely were unregulated at the federal level have some anxious that the bureau will overreach in exercising its powers and , as a consequence , excessively restrict consumer credit and unduly increase regulatory costs .

the stated goal of the bureau is to: implement and , where applicable , enforce federal consumer financial law consistently for the purpose of ensuring that all consumers have access to markets for consumer financial products and services and that markets for consumer financial products and services are fair , transparent , and competitive .

the bureau is established within the frs , but it has considerable independence from the frb .

for instance , the frb does not have the formal authority to stop , delay , or disapprove of a bureau regulation , nor can it: ( a ) intervene in any matter or proceeding before the director [of the cfpb] , including examinations or enforcement actions , unless otherwise specifically provided by law ; ( b ) appoint , direct , or remove any officer or employee of the bureau ; or ( c ) merge or consolidate the bureau , or any of the functions or responsibilities of the bureau , with any division or office of the board of governors or the federal reserve banks .

the bureau's authorities are concentrated within a single director , rather than in a board or commission .

the director is to be appointed by the president , subject to the advice and consent of the senate , to serve for a five - year term from which he could only be removed for "inefficiency , neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. .

the director has authority to hire the employees necessary to carry out the duties of the bureau and to delegate powers to employees .

this structure insulates the bureau from the office of the president and allows the director to steer the course of the cfpb .

the bureau's structure is similar to that of the occ , which is established within the department of the treasury and is headed by a single individual , the comptroller of the currency .

the law requires the director to establish units within the bureau to focus on consumer financial research ; to provide guidance and technical assistance to traditionally underserved areas and individuals ; and to monitor and to respond to consumer complaints .

the act also requires the establishment of an office of fair lending and equal opportunity ; an office of financial education ; an office of service member affairs directed toward members of the military and their families ; an office of financial protection for older americans to , among other things , "facilitate the financial literacy of individuals who have attained the age of 62 years or more ... on protection from unfair , deceptive , and abusive practices on current and future financial choices" ; and a private education loan ombudsman to , among other things , study and attempt to resolve complaints raised by private education loan borrowers .

the authorities of the bureau fall into three broad categories: supervisory , which includes the power to examine and to impose reporting requirements on financial institutions ; enforcement of various consumer protection laws and regulations ; and rulemaking .

some of these powers are newly established by the dodd - frank act , such as the authority to supervise certain nondepository financial institutions .

a significant portion of the bureau's powers was transferred from other regulators to the bureau , including the authority to prescribe regulations under the enumerated consumer laws .

the bureau's funding does not primarily derive from appropriations , like that of most executive agencies , or assessments on institutions within its regulatory jurisdiction , as is typical of federal banking regulators .

instead , the bureau primarily is funded by a transfer of non - appropriated funds from the federal reserve system's combined earnings , in an amount "determined by the director to be reasonably necessary to carry out the authorities of the bureau," subject to specified caps .

the cap was 10% of the total operating expenses of the frs for fy2011 , 11% for fy2012 , and will be 12% going forward .

the caps are based on the operating expenses as reported in the frs's annual report for 2009 and are to be adjusted for inflation .

the frs's operating expenses for fy2009 totaled $4.98 billion , 12% of which is approximately $598 million .

the bureau's estimated budget is $541 million for fy2013 and is $497 million for fy2014 .

in addition to the transfer of funds from the frs , the act authorizes appropriations if the director "determine[s] that sums available to the bureau [as specified by the caps] under this section will not be sufficient to carry out the authorities of the bureau under federal consumer financial law for the upcoming year. .

upon the bureau's making such a finding and submitting a report to both the house and senate committees on appropriations , the cfp act provides authorization for an appropriation of $200 million per year for fy2010-fy2014 .

to date , the cfpb has not requested appropriated funds nor have any funds been appropriated to the bureau .

the act also establishes a consumer financial civil penalty fund for civil penalties secured by the bureau for violations of consumer financial protection laws .

the bureau is authorized to use the funds to pay victims of such violations , as well as for financial literacy and consumer education programs .

the statutory caps on the funds that may be transferred to the cfpb give the bureau less flexibility than the occ , fdic , and other banking regulators that are able to increase assessments on the institutions within their jurisdiction to raise revenue , as needed to carry out their responsibilities .

on the other hand , because it does not rely on appropriations for funding , the bureau enjoys some degree of insulation from the uncertainties inherent to the congressional appropriations process .

congress does have many other ways of exerting influence over and conducting oversight of the bureau's budget outside of the typical appropriations process .

the cfp act , for example , requires the bureau to submit semi - annual reports to congress that provide , among other things , a justification of its budget requests .

a minimum of twice each year , the bureau director must appear before the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; the house committee on financial services ; and the house committee on energy and commerce .

the bureau also must submit certain financial information for office of management and budget review and is subject to regular audits by the comptroller general .

of course , congress could pass legislation that subjects the bureau's budget to additional congressional scrutiny , including the appropriations process .

the cfp act substantially , though not completely , consolidates in the cfpb federal consumer protection powers that previously were held by seven other regulators .

it has the authority to write rules to implement a broad array of federal consumer financial protection laws , as well as most consumer compliance supervisory and enforcement powers over larger depositories .

however , the cfpb did not acquire from the banking regulators the primary supervisory and enforcement powers over smaller depositories .

the bureau also wields new federal consumer financial protection powers to regulate nondepository financial institutions , which previously were largely unregulated at the federal level .

however , the cfp act wholly exempts certain nondepository financial institutions from the bureau's regulatory reach and curtails the cpfb's authority to regulate others .

although the powers that the cfpb has at its disposal are largely the same or analogous to those that other federal regulators have held for decades , there is a great deal of uncertainty in how the new agency will exercise these broad and flexible authorities , especially in light of its almost exclusive focus on consumer protection and the novel expansion of federal oversight to nondepository financial institutions .

this uncertainty has some anxious that the bureau , in the name of protecting consumers , may excessively restrict consumer credit and unduly increase regulatory costs .

as the bureau continues to exercise its authorities , policy makers will have a performance record on which to evaluate how the cfp act is working and whether amendments might improve consumer protections , increase access to credit markets , reduce the costs of consumer financial products and services , or reduce compliance costs .

