in the midst of national concern over the opioid epidemic and the large number of prescription opioid overdose deaths in the united states , federal and state officials are paying greater attention to the manner in which opioids are prescribed .

prescription opioid - related overdose deaths dramatically increased from 1999 to 2010 in the united states in conjunction with increased opioid prescribing , and overdose deaths involving prescription opioids were five times higher in 2016 than in 1999 .

over the last year , the trump administration , congress , state governments , and the private sector have all taken action to address prescription drug abuse .

initiatives range from state and private health care initiatives , such as limiting the number of pills in a prescription , to major legislation , such as the comprehensive addiction and recovery act ( cara ; p.l .

114-198 ) , which included many provisions to address prescription drug abuse .

in 2016 , an estimated 11.8 million individuals aged 12 or older ( 4.4% of this population ) misused opioids in the past year , including 11.5 million pain reliever misusers and 948,000 heroin users .

prescription painkillers — natural and semisynthetic opioids ( eg , oxycodone , hydrocodone , and morphine ) are involved in more overdose deaths than any other opioid .

of the individuals who used prescription painkillers non - medically in 2016 , more than half ( 53.0% ) received the drugs from a friend or relative either for free , by purchase , or by stealing .

aside from prescription painkillers such as oxycodone , other commonly abused prescription medications include benzodiazepines and amphetamine - like drugs .

some academic and government experts link the crackdown on prescription drug abuse and the comparatively higher cost of prescription pain relievers on the black market to the uptick in heroin abuse .

the number of individuals aged 12 or older currently using heroin ( 475,000 in 2016 ) has nearly tripled since 2002 .

like many prescription pain relievers , heroin is an opioid .

unlike prescription pain relievers , however , heroin is a schedule i controlled substance under the controlled substances act and has no accepted medical use in the united states .

most prescription drugs that are misused are originally prescribed by a physician ( rather than , for example , being stolen from pharmacies ) ; therefore , attention has been directed toward preventing the diversion of prescription drugs after the prescriptions are dispensed .

prescription drug monitoring programs ( pdmps ) maintain statewide electronic databases of dispensed prescriptions for controlled substances .

pdmp information can aid medical professionals and those in law enforcement in identifying patterns of prescribing , dispensing , or receiving controlled substances that may indicate abuse .

for over a decade , the federal government has provided financial support for state - level pdmps .

in 2002 , congress established the harold rogers pdmp grant , administered by the department of justice ( doj ) , to help law enforcement , regulatory entities , and public health officials analyze data on prescriptions for controlled substances .

three years later , congress and the president enacted the national all schedules prescription electronic reporting act of 2005 ( nasper ) requiring the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to award grants to states to establish or improve pdmps .

in 2016 , cara authorized pdmp activity under two grant programs administered by doj and hhs .

congress has demonstrated a particular interest in facilitating interoperability among state - level pdmps , as well as in establishing national programs .

policymakers have focused on enhancing state - level databases and interstate information sharing , and some have suggested establishing a national system .

related issues that policymakers may consider are whether pdmps and their interstate information - sharing platforms adequately protect personally identifiable and related health information , and whether they can ensure that patients with legitimate medical needs have access to prescriptions .

congress may also exercise oversight with respect to the role of pdmps in the administration's efforts to combat the prescription drug epidemic ; policymakers may assess the extent to which the relevant departments and agencies have taken steps to accomplish these pdmp - related goals .

this report provides an overview of pdmps , including their operation , enforcement mechanisms , costs , and financing .

it also examines the effectiveness of pdmps and outlines federal grants supporting pdmps .

finally , this report discusses relevant considerations for policymakers including interstate data sharing , interoperability , protection of health information , and the possible link between the crackdown on prescription drug abuse and rise in heroin abuse .

pdmps maintain statewide electronic databases of designated information on specified prescription drugs dispensed within the states .

data are made available to individuals or organizations as authorized under state law ; these may include prescribers , law enforcement officials , licensing boards , or others .

possible uses of pdmps include identifying or preventing drug abuse and diversion ; facilitating the identification of prescription drug - addicted individuals and appropriate intervention and treatment ; outlining use and abuse trends to inform public health initiatives ; and educating individuals about prescription drug use , abuse , and diversion .

in addition to uses of pdmps aimed at drug abuse and diversion , an explicit goal of pdmps is supporting access to controlled substances for legitimate medical use .

this may best be understood by viewing pdmps in comparison to earlier , paper - based programs called multiple - copy prescription programs .

for example , in 1914 a new york state law required physicians to use state - issued , serialized , duplicate prescription forms for certain drugs .

similarly , california began a multiple - copy prescription program using triplicate forms for specified narcotics in 1939 ; it expanded to monitor all schedule ii narcotics in 1972 and schedule ii non - narcotics in 1981 .

studies of multiple - copy prescription programs found that many prescribers did not order the required prescription forms , rendering them unable to prescribe specified controlled substances even when medically appropriate .

in addition , the ability to check a patient's prescription history using an electronic pdmp might give prescribers more confidence when considering the use of drugs with high risk of abuse and prevent the prescribing of contraindicated medications .

as of february 2018 , 50 states , the district of columbia , and two territories ( guam and puerto rico ) had operational pdmps within their borders .

the available evidence suggests that pdmps are effective in some ways for both law enforcement and health care purposes ; however , research on the effectiveness of pdmps is limited , especially in the area of law enforcement .

experts suggest that pdmps have the potential to be more effective .

the federal government supports state pdmps through programs at the departments of justice ( doj ) and health and human services ( hhs ) .

since fy2002 , doj has administered the harold rogers prescription drug monitoring program , and in fy2017 , doj incorporated this grant program into the new comprehensive opioid abuse program .

hhs programs include the national all schedules prescription electronic reporting ( nasper ) , state demonstration grants for comprehensive opioid abuse response , opioid prevention in states grants , and various pilots and initiatives under the office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) .

in 2011 , in response to the "epidemic" of prescription drug abuse , the obama administration released an action plan .

this plan , from the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) , outlined four primary areas that may reduce the abuse of prescription drugs: educating individuals on the safe use of prescription drugs and risks involved in abusing them ; implementing prescription drug monitoring programs ( pdmps ) in the states and encouraging information sharing ; developing programs for proper drug disposal ; and providing law enforcement with tools to enforce proper prescribing practices and disband "pill mills. .

as part of this plan , the administration outlined actions to improve the functioning of state pdmps and increase interstate pdmp operability and communications .

specific actions offered included working with states to establish effective pdmps by encouraging research on pdmp effectiveness and means to improve pdmp effectiveness ; supporting the nasper reauthorization ; ensuring that the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and the department of defense ( dod ) are authorized to share patient information with state pdmps ; encouraging federally funded health care programs to provide controlled substance prescription information to the state pdmps ( in states where they operate health care facilities or pharmacies ) ; exploring the feasibility of reimbursing prescribers for checking pdmps before writing controlled substance prescriptions to patients covered under insurance plans ; evaluating programs that require certain doctor shoppers or drug abusing individuals to use one doctor and one pharmacy ; evaluating the potential for state pdmps to reduce medicare and medicaid fraud ; issuing a final rule from dea on electronic prescribing of controlled substances ; increasing the use of "screening , brief intervention , and referral to treatment" programs to identify and prevent prescription drug abuse ; identifying how health information technologies can enhance prescription drug information ; testing the usefulness of the centers for disease control and prevention's surveillance system to generate measures of prescription drug abuse ; assessing the use of the drug abuse warning network to better understand prescription drug abuse at the community level ; expanding doj's efforts to enhance interstate pdmp interoperability , particularly though the pmix program ; and evaluating existing databases with information on prescription drug access , use , misuse , and toxicity to improve their utility and as new sources of data .

while this plan was never updated , the obama administration released a fact sheet in october 2015 outlining its public and private sector efforts to address both prescription drug abuse and heroin use .

this fact sheet noted that president obama had issued a memorandum to federal departments and agencies directing two essential elements in combating this problem: prescriber training and improving access to treatment .

it went on to describe private sector efforts , which included the national association of boards of pharmacy enhancing access to pdmp data to thousands more physicians and pharmacists in arizona , delaware , kentucky , and north dakota in 2016 .

it also went on to describe public sector efforts , which included the federal government expanding access to pdmp data throughout federal agencies .

in 2017 , president trump established the president's commission on combating drug addiction and the opioid crisis , which has issued a report outlining recommendations to combat the opioid crisis .

among its recommendations , the commission issued two that were specific to pdmps: 12 .

the commission recommends the administration's support of the prescription drug monitoring ( pdmp ) act to mandate states that receive grant funds to comply with pdmp requirements , including data sharing .

this act directs doj to fund the establishment and maintenance of a data - sharing hub .

13 .

the commission recommends federal agencies mandate pdmp checks , and consider amending requirements under the emergency medical treatment and labor act ( emtala ) , which requires hospitals to screen and stabilize patients in an emergency department , regardless of insurance status or ability to pay .

in regard to recommendation #12 , the prescription drug monitoring act of 2017 ( h.r .

1854 ; s. 778 ) would , if enacted , require states receiving pdmp grant funds from doj or hhs to comply with specified requirements , including a requirement to share their pdmp data with other states .

under the proposed legislation , doj and hhs may withhold grant funds from states that fail to comply .

it also would direct doj to award a grant under the new comprehensive opioid abuse grant program to establish and maintain an interstate data - sharing hub .

supporting pdmps is just one component in the overall federal effort against prescription drug abuse .

research on pdmp effectiveness has yielded sometimes inconclusive results on a number of desired outcomes , though research findings suggest that pdmps may contribute to reduced doctor shopping and prescription drug abuse .

as such , policymakers may want to assess the extent to which federal agencies' pdmp - related efforts have accomplished the administration's goals to reduce illicit prescribing activities and prescription drug abuse .

while establishment and enhancement of pdmps ( such as interstate data sharing and real - time data access ) enjoy broad support , some stakeholders express concerns about health care versus law enforcement uses of pdmp data , particularly with regard to protection of personally identifiable health information .

research has demonstrated that pdmps save law enforcement officials time in investigations , if law enforcement officials have access to pdmp information .

concerns about potential law enforcement uses of pdmp data have been expressed by stakeholder organizations representing prescribers .

the american medical association ( ama ) , a professional association of more than 200,000 physicians , supports the use of pdmps and recommended that pdmps be housed in health - related agencies ( rather than law enforcement agencies ) .

ama further recommends that information from pdmps "be used first for education of the specific physicians involved prior to any civil action against these physicians. .

the american society of addiction medicine ( asam ) , one of several national medical specialty societies under the ama umbrella , likewise expresses concern about the use of pdmp data for purposes other than health care: "[l]aw enforcement , the judiciary , corrections professionals , employers , and others outside of the health care system should not be granted access to pdmp data except via the means available to them to secure access to other personally identifiable health information. .

the fact that pdmps contain personally identifiable health information raises concerns about privacy and data security .

both ama and asam stress the need to subject pdmp information to the same standards applied to other patient records .

in recent years , to investigate violations of the federal controlled substances act ( csa ) , the dea has demanded access to certain pdmp data without a court order or search warrant , a practice that has caused some controversy and been subject to court challenge .

the csa contains a provision , 21 u.s.c .

§876 , that authorizes the dea to issue administrative subpoenas ( without prior court approval ) to obtain documents that the agency finds are "relevant or material" to an investigation involving controlled substances .

the dea may also seek judicial enforcement of such subpoenas "to compel compliance" with the requests for evidence .

in 2012 , the oregon department of justice filed a lawsuit against the dea in federal court seeking a declaratory judgment that , pursuant to state law , the dea must obtain "a valid court order" in order to access patient and physician records contained in the oregon pdmp .

the dea argued that the csa's administrative subpoena provision preempts oregon's statutory requirement .

agreeing with the dea , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit held that the csa preempted the oregon law because the provisions are in "positive conflict ... so that the two cannot consistently stand together. .

in another federal case , a utah district court upheld the dea's exercise of its administrative subpoena power to access the state's pdmp database , despite a utah state law requirement that law enforcement officers may obtain such information only "pursuant to a valid search warrant. .

though the court first observed that the supremacy clause resolves the conflict between the conflicting federal and state laws at issue , utah asserted that the dea's use of the csa's administrative subpoena provision is not a "valid exercise of national power" because the fourth amendment's protections against unreasonable search and seizure require a search warrant to access the pdmp data .

the court disagreed with the state , ruling that the dea's subpoena authority is a valid exercise of national power "that does not offend the fourth amendment" because the pharmaceutical industry is a highly regulated one in which "physicians and patients have no reasonable expectation of privacy from the dea" in the records stored in utah's pdmp .

pdmps have elicited numerous concerns about patient privacy , including issues around the scope and breadth of authorized access to collected health information as well as the potential for unauthorized access or breaches .

while pdmps are seen as a valuable source of information in the effort to address improper prescribing of controlled substances , concerns exist about the potential deterrent effect on timely access to needed medication due to fears that sensitive health information will be shared with pdmps , and may be subsequently legally disclosed or accessed through a breach .

pdmps have varying requirements with respect to the security and authorized use and disclosure of their stored information .

these uses and disclosures are regulated by state law .

pdmps also receive protected health information ( phi ) from pharmacists and other health care providers ( hipaa covered entities ) who are subject to the federal hipaa privacy rule .

in addition , individually identifiable health information that is generated pursuant to treatment at substance abuse facilities is subject to stricter privacy requirements established by the "part 2" rule .

the hipaa privacy rule governs covered entities' ( health care plans , providers and clearinghouses ) and their business associates' use and disclosure of phi .

the rule describes multiple situations in which covered entities may use or disclose phi , while all uses and disclosures of phi by covered entities or business associates that are not expressly permitted under the rule require the individual's prior written authorization .

generally , covered entities may share phi between and among themselves for the purposes of treatment , payment or healthcare operations , with few restrictions ( and specifically , without out the individual's authorization ) .

certain other uses and disclosures ( eg , sharing phi with family members and friends ) are permitted , but require the covered entity to give the individual the opportunity to object or agree to the phi's use or disclosure .

the hipaa privacy rule also recognizes that phi may be useful in other circumstances aside from health care treatment and payment for a given individual .

for this reason , the rule lists a number of "national priority purposes" for which covered entities may disclose phi without an individual's authorization or opportunity to agree or object .

pdmps can receive phi from covered entities under authority of one or more of these exceptions .

relevant exceptions include disclosures required by law — in this case , state pdmp laws ; disclosures for public health activities ; or disclosures for health oversight activities .

a pdmp is not a hipaa covered entity , nor is it generally a business associate as defined by hipaa , and in these cases the hipaa requirements and standards for maintaining the security and privacy of the phi — or for its re - disclosure — that apply to hipaa covered entities would not apply to pdmps .

although hipaa may not apply , privacy and security requirements for pdmps are still enumerated under state law .

stricter privacy requirements — commonly known as the "part 2" rule — apply at the federal level to individually identifiable patient information received or acquired by federally assisted substance abuse programs .

the "part 2" rule allows such programs to disclose information with patient consent or pursuant to exceptions in regulation ; however , in the case of pdmps , it prohibits re - disclosure of information without patient consent .

the requirement for consent may be a logistical deterrent to the submission of this information to pdmps .

in addition , since pdmps are designed to share information with registered users , the "part 2" rule's prohibition on re - disclosure without patient consent discourages federally assisted substance abuse programs from contributing to pdmps' information about controlled substances dispensed for the treatment of opioid addiction ( i.e. , methadone or buprenorphine ) due to concerns that authorized re - disclosures of the data could not be prevented .

federal policymakers have repeatedly emphasized the importance of enhancing interstate information sharing and the interoperability of state systems .

the pdmp component of the obama administration's 2011 action plan to counter prescription drug abuse included efforts to improve the functioning of state pdmps and increase interstate pdmp operability and communications .

in 2013 , hhs published a congressionally mandated report on pdmp interoperability standards for interstate exchange of pdmp information .

in november 2017 , a presidential commission recommended , among other things , that the trump administration support legislation to require doj to fund a "data - sharing hub" and require states receiving federal grant funds to share pdmp data .

in 2014 , then - a ttorney general holder called the rise in heroin abuse "a sad but not unpredictable symptom of the significant increase in prescription drug abuse we've seen over the past decade. .

while then - attorney general holder did not cite increased monitoring of prescription opioids and enforcement activities as a reason for the rise in heroin abuse , others have stated that the crackdown on prescription drug abuse may have led users to turn to heroin , a cheaper alternative to prescription drugs that may be more easily accessible to some who are seeking an opioid high .

policymakers may debate whether increased scrutiny and monitoring of prescription drug activity has unintentionally contributed to the increase in heroin abuse ; and if this is the case , how might the government address this issue , if at all .

