since the 1930s , federal job training and employment programs and policies have sought to connect vulnerable youth to work and school .

generally , these young people have been defined as being vulnerable because they are low - income and have a barrier to employment , such as having dropped out of school or spent time in foster care .

the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) is the most recent federal law to provide job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals , including youth .

wia includes titles that authorize programs for job training and related services for adults , youth , and dislocated workers ( title i ) ; adult education and literacy ( title ii ) ; employment services ( title iii ) ; and vocational rehabilitation ( title iv ) .

all youth job training programs and related services are authorized under title i of wia and are carried out by the department of labor ( dol ) .

these programs include the wia youth activities ( youth ) formula program , job corps , and youthbuild .

under the pilot and demonstration authority in title i , dol has carried out the reintegration of ex - offenders program .

together , these programs make up the federal job training system for youth .

although the programs have distinct activities and purposes , each program seeks to connect youth to educational and employment opportunities , as well as leadership development and community service activities .

wia authorized funding through september 30 , 2003 ; however , wia programs continue to be funded through annual appropriation acts .

in the 112 th congress , policy makers had signaled that the law may be reauthorized in the near future .

this report provides an overview of issues pertinent to the wia youth programs , particularly youth activities and job corps .

it also discusses relevant provisions of two bills: ( 1 ) h.r .

803 , which was reported by the house education and workforce committee on march 6 , 2013 , and passed the house on march 15 , 2013 , and ( 2 ) workforce investment act of 2013 ( s. 1356 ) , which was ordered reported by the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee on july 31 , 2013 .

job training and employment services for youth under wia include wia youth activities , a formula program that includes employment and other services that are provided year - round ; job corps , a program that provides job training and related services primarily at residential centers maintained by contractor organizations ; youthbuild , a competitive grant program that emphasizes job training and education in construction ; reintegration of ex - offenders , a demonstration program for juvenile and adult offenders that provides job training and other services and is authorized under wia's pilot and demonstration authority ; and youth opportunity grants ( yog ) , a multi - site demonstration program funded through fy2003 that created centers in low - income communities where youth could receive employment and other services .

although wia's authorization of appropriations expired at the end of fy2003 , congress continues to appropriate funds , including those for youth job training programs — except for the yog program , which has not been funded since fy2003 .

except for job corps , all of the programs are ( or were ) carried out by the division of youth services in dol's employment and training administration ( eta ) , office of workforce investment .

job corps is administered by eta's office of job corps .

table 1 summarizes key features of youth activities , job corps , youthbuild , the youth component of the reintegration of ex - offenders program , and youth opportunity grants .

each of the programs has a similar purpose of connecting youth to educational and employment opportunities .

all of the programs serve mostly low - income youth who have specific employment barriers .

unlike youth activities and job corps , students in youthbuild must be high school dropouts .

the youth component of the reintegration of ex - offenders program focuses on youth offenders and those at risk of dropping out .

although each of the programs provides employment and educational services , these services are carried out differently and by distinct entities .

for example , under the youth activities program local areas ( local workforce investment boards , wibs ) must provide 10 specific elements , including mentoring and follow - up , to youth in the program .

youthbuild program participants engage in employment and other activities primarily related to housing and other types of construction work .

job corps is the only one of the programs that provides residential services , where youth can live onsite and receive employment and educational services .

the youth component of the reintegration of ex - offenders program activities vary , and can include mentoring , educational services , and reentry services for youth returning from a secure facility to the community .

the programs are also funded somewhat differently .

dol allocates funding for youth activities to states based on a formula , and states in turn distribute the funds to local wibs .

dol enters into competitively awarded agreements with nonprofit and for - profit organizations to operate job corps centers .

dol also enters into cooperative agreements with the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) forest service to carry out job corps programs on usda lands .

youthbuild and the youth component of the reintegration of ex - offenders program competitively awards grants to nonprofit and other organizations and local communities .

for further information about the programs , see crs report r40929 , vulnerable youth: employment and job training programs .

congress has taken steps toward reauthorizing wia since the 108 th congress .

recent hearings and listening sessions have addressed multiple issues regarding the wia youth programs .

during the 111 th congress , the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee held a series of listening sessions in april 2009 to address the positive aspects of wia and to increase understanding of the issues that can be addressed as part of any reauthorization legislation .

one of the listening sessions focused on the youth activities grant program .

youth advocates , researchers , and other stakeholders spoke about the ways the committee could consider refining the law to improve the program .

the senate help subcommittee on employment and workplace safety subsequently conducted a hearing in july 2009 to discuss how wia could be updated to help workers and employers meet the demands of a changing economy .

in october 2009 , the house education and workforce committee held a hearing on declining youth employment .

during the 112 th congress , the house education and workforce subcommittee on higher education and workforce training held hearings on removing inefficiencies in job training programs and modernizing wia on may 11 , 2011 , and october 4 , 2011 , respectively .

the full committee held a hearing on a bill to reauthorize wia , the workforce investment improvement act of 2012 ( h.r .

4297 ) , on april 17 , 2012 .

the committee marked up and favorably reported the bill on june 7 , 2012 .

also during the 112 th congress , the senate help committee released discussion drafts in june 2011 of legislation to amend and reauthorize wia , but it did not receive further action in that congress .

in the 113 th congress , the house committee on education and the workforce has ordered reported h.r .

803 — the supporting knowledge and investing in lifelong skills act ( skills act ) .

this bill was introduced on february 25 , 2013 , by representative virginia foxx of north carolina , the chair of the subcommittee on higher education and workforce training .

a legislative hearing on h.r .

803 was held before the full committee on education and the workforce on february 26 , 2013 .

the committee ordered the bill reported by a vote of 23 to 0 on march 6 , 2013 .

the house passed the bill on march 15 , 2013 , by a vote of 215 to 202 .

in the senate , senators patty murray , lamar alexander , tom harkin , and johnny isakson introduced the workforce investment act of 2013 ( s. 1356 ) on july 24 , 2013 .

the senate help committee held a markup of s. 1356 on july 31 , 2013 , and ordered the bill reported by a vote of 18 to 3 .

issues that have been raised as part of the wia reauthorization process in congress and elsewhere generally include the following: some policy makers have proposed consolidating workforce programs for adults , dislocated workers , and youth .

under such a proposal , states would generally have greater ability to target funds to certain activities and populations .

advocates for consolidation say that it could make the programs more efficient and less costly .

other stakeholders assert that at - risk youth and other groups with barriers to employment could be overlooked if workforce programs were collectively funded .

if youth programs were consolidated , congress may wish to consider the role of one - stop centers and oversight bodies , such as youth councils , to help meet the needs of youth .

another issue is the perceived lack of coordination between the workforce system and other systems that serve youth , such as the education system .

stakeholders have suggested that greater coordination can help meet the varied needs of youth , as intended by wia .

members of congress and others have also continued to inquire about the effectiveness of youth workforce programs in meeting their objectives and serving the most at - risk youth .

to date , only an impact evaluation of job corps has been completed ; however , dol recently awarded a contract to a social policy research organization to conduct an impact evaluation of youthbuild .

in addition to these broader concerns , congress is interested in issues specific to youth activities and job corps: since the start of the youth activities program , as authorized under wia , policy makers and others have discussed the extent to which youth should have to prove their eligibility for the program .

state and local workforce officials have said that income eligibility requirements for the program may exclude some needy youth , and that obtaining proof of income can be challenging for some youth .

still , others assert that the requirements are necessary in order to ensure that vulnerable young people enroll in the program .

a separate concern is how much of an emphasis the program should place on serving older youth .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) temporarily enabled youth ages 22 through 24 to access services under the youth activities program .

whether wia ought to target these older youth , particularly in light of the possible cost of doing so , could be addressed in any reauthorization legislation .

in addition , stakeholders have raised issues about the school status of youth in the youth activities program — specifically , whether the program should focus more on out - of - school youth , including those who are not working .

related to this is the age of youth who ought to be eligible for the program .

congress has considered proposals to provide federal funding for states to operate job corps centers , at state option , or to close centers .

this is due to concerns that the program has had mixed performance outcomes , and that some centers are low performing .

a 2011 report by the government accountability office ( gao ) identified existing federal workforce programs and found that many of the programs overlap because they provide a similar service .

the report also stated that despite this overlap , "the services they provide and the populations they serve may differ in meaningful ways. .

for example , the report discussed the similarities between the youth workforce programs and noted that they have varying models of carrying out program services ( for further information about similarities and differences , see table 1 ) .

gao recommended that the departments of labor and health and human services consolidate administration of selected workforce programs — the employment service ( es ) and employment and training services provided under temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , among other recommendations .

past legislation has sought to consolidate certain workforce programs , including the es with the adult activities and dislocated worker programs , the major workforce programs for adults under title i of wia .

legislation in the 113 th congress to reauthorize wia would consolidate multiple workforce programs , including those that serve youth .

the workforce investment improvement act of 2013 ( h.r .

803 ) would consolidate youth activities , youthbuild , and reintegration of ex - offenders — along with multiple other workforce programs and activities — into a single workforce investment fund ( wif ) that would be allocated to states and local areas to provide required and allowable statewide employment and training activities .

 ( job corps would remain a stand - alone program , and the bill would make substantive changes to the program. ) .

for example , required activities would include providing "work ready services" in the one - stop delivery system .

such work - ready services would include most existing core ( i.e. , assessment of skills and needs and job search assistance ) and intensive ( i.e. , career planning and case management ) services provided at one - stop centers and add other services such as internship and work experience .

the allocation to states would be based on multiple factors , including the relative number of disadvantaged youth in each state .

after setting aside up to 15% of funding at the state level , funding would be distributed to local workforce investment areas based on similar factors .

the bill does not include a separate funding stream for youth workforce training ; however , states would be required to set aside some funding from the wif to establish a competitive grant program for individuals with barriers to employment .

such individuals could include youth: individuals would be eligible if they were ages 16 or older and low - income or members of low - income families .

states could award grants to local boards or nonprofits to provide employment and training services to these individuals .

in addition , as part of their state and local workforce plans , state and local workforce investment boards would be required to describe the strategies and services that would be used in the state and local area to assist at - risk youth and out - of school youth in acquiring the following: ( 1 ) education and skills ; ( 2 ) credentials , including industry - recognized postsecondary credentials and industry - recognized credentials ; and ( 3 ) employment experience for succeeding in the labor market , including training and internships in in - demand industries or occupations important to the state and local economy ; dropout recovery activities designed to lead to the attainment of a high school diploma or its equivalent ; and activities combining remediation of academic skills , work readiness training , and work experience .

the bill would define "at - risk youth" as those ages 16 through 24 who are low - income and high school dropouts , youth in foster care , youth offenders , youth with disabilities , children of incarcerated parents , or migrant youth .

at the march 6 , 2013 , markup of h.r .

803 by the education and workforce committee , chairman kline said that consolidating workforce programs would eliminate and streamline duplicative and ineffective programs , while ensuring accountability .

concerns have been raised by some policy makers and others that fewer youth could be served under the proposed wif , particularly because the bill does not set aside a minimum amount of funding specifically for youth .

in recent years , a combined $900,000 has been appropriated annually to youth activities , youthbuild , and the youth component of the reintegration of ex - offenders program .

s. 1356 would maintain the youth programs .

it would also establish and authorize appropriations for youth innovation and replication grants ( yirg ) , which would provide competitive grants to states and localities to develop and implement strategies and programs ( eg , career pathways ) to improve education and employment outcomes for youth .

another issue concerning youth workforce programs is the perceived lack of coordination between the workforce system and other systems that serve youth , particularly the education system .

wia currently includes provisions that are intended to facilitate coordination between the workforce and education system .

for example , wia requires that local boards have representatives of local education entities , such as school districts and postsecondary education institutions .

in addition , youth councils , in coordinating youth programs at the local level , must "establish linkages with educational agencies responsible for services to participants as appropriate. .

some stakeholders have suggested that greater coordination can help meet the multiple needs of youth , as intended by wia , and that existing wia infrastructure ( one - stop centers and youth councils , which are required under the youth activities program ) can facilitate coordination .

this issue was raised at the senate help committee's listening session on wia and youth .

a 2004 report by the government accountability office on the youth activities program documented some of the ways in which the workforce and education systems have collaborated , and where improvements are needed .

among other items , the report examined the entities that local wibs contract with to provide services to youth .

the report found that about half of all youth received services under the youth activities program through community - based organizations , secondary schools , and colleges or universities .

nonetheless , gao found that education entities in some locations were cautious about partnering .

according to gao , some educators believed wia's vision for providing comprehensive youth development services to at - risk youth was inconsistent with the mission of schools to provide academic services to all youth .

for example , in wisconsin some schools were hesitant to allow wia youth activities to be provided on school grounds because of the perceived stigma associated with wia being targeted to at - risk youth and not all youth generally .

separately , at the july 2009 hearing conducted by the senate help subcommittee on employment and workplace safety , the under secretary of education martha kanter and the then assistant secretary of labor jane oates testified that the department of labor and department of education are committed to working together to better ensure that youth — whether in - school or out - of - school — receive the services and supports they need .

a past example of collaboration between dol and ed on education and workforce activities is the school - to - work ( stw ) program , which authorized a variety of competitive and non - competitive grants .

a joint stw office was administered by both agencies .

the grants supported the development of programs that combined work - based learning in schools , school - based learning in the workplace , and job training .

congress could look to lessons from the stw program to learn more about the successes and challenges associated with partnerships between the school and work systems .

h.r .

803 , the reauthorization legislation that was passed by the house on march 15 , 2013 , includes some provisions that could facilitate coordination of the workforce and education systems , but this coordination is not explicit .

for example , the bill would allow , but not require , local areas to include education officials ( superintendent of a local secondary school system or leaders of a postsecondary educational institution ) on the local workforce investment board .

as part of the local plan under h.r .

803 , local areas would be required to identify the strategies and services used in the local area to assist youth acquiring education and skills needed to succeed in the labor market .

presumably , this could facilitate coordination between the workforce and education systems .

the senate bill to reauthorize wia , s. 1356 , also addresses coordination with the education system to some extent .

it would require states to submit a unified state plan ( usf ) to the secretaries of labor and education every four years that covers the youth activities program and other programs authorized under titles i and ii of wia — the adult activities program , the dislocated workers program , adult education programs , the employment service , and vocational rehabilitation program .

the plan must include elements such as an analysis of state economic conditions and a description of the state's vision and goals for preparing an educated and skilled workforce ( including for youth ) , among other elements .

current law allows states the option of submitting a unified plan , which must cover one or more of wia title i , wia title ii , and activities authorized under the carl d. perkins career and technical education programs .

congress and other stakeholders are concerned about the extent to which youth programs authorized under wia meet their goals and serve the most at - risk youth .

this section provides background on evaluations and performance measures of the three major youth programs — youth activities , job corps , and youthbuild .

few evaluations of these programs have been conducted .

under a common set of performance measures across all three programs , known as the "common measures," the three programs have met or exceeded their goals established by the department of labor .

the appendix includes a discussion of these common measures , and how the three programs have performed under the common measures .

since the start of the youth activities program , stakeholders have considered the extent to which youth should have to prove their eligibility for the program .

they have also raised questions about how much of an emphasis the program should place on serving out - of - school youth and older youth .

under h.r .

803 , the reauthorization legislation that the house passed in march 2013 , states and local areas would be required to have strategies and services to assist at - risk youth , defined as low - income individuals who have a barrier to employment , and out - of - school youth ages 16 through 24 ; however , states and localities would not be required to serve a certain percentage of these young people or allocate a minimum amount of funding for such services , as required under current law .

on january 10 , 2013 , dol published a request for comment in the federal register on its methodology for selecting "a small number of chronically low - performing centers" for closure .

the methodology includes the following three primary criteria: performance rating , weighted 70%: this refers to the overall performance of the center , based on the center report card .

the center report card ranks each center based on three sets of factors primarily related to student outcomes .

on - board strength ( obs ) , weighted 20%: this refers to an efficiency rating that demonstrates the extent to which a center operates at full capacity .

facility condition , weighted 10%: this refers to the condition of residential and learning facilities at the centers .

in addition to the three major criteria , dol would ensure that at least one center remained in each state , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

dol also proposes to exempt certain centers from closure and take into consideration any disproportionate impact that a center closure would have on a certain subpopulation of students .

the notice explains that the closures are part of dol's "ambitious reform agenda" to improve the performance of centers , including federal oversight of operations and performance outcomes for all centers .

while cost does not appear to be cited in the notice as a driving factor for proposing the closures , the notice states that "current budgetary constraints make it even more critical to ensure the program's resources are deployed in a way that maximizes results to students and taxpayers. .

the comment period ended on february 11 , 2013 , and as of february 2014 , dol had not issued further information on the closure proposal .

h.r .

803 , as passed by the house , includes provisions to improve low - performing centers and close such centers that do not improve .

the bill would maintain some of the existing performance measures and add several new ones .

it would require the dol secretary to develop and implement a program improvement plan lasting one year for centers that report less than 50% on certain performance indicators , and includes new provisions to close those centers that are low - performing on certain performance criteria for more than four consecutive years .

the bill would further require that no later than three months after the enactment of h.r .

803 , the dol secretary is to conduct an audit of centers based on the past 10 years of center performance and to rank centers based on performance and incidents of crimes of violence .

the bill directs the dol secretary to submit a report to congress that includes findings and conclusions from the audit , including information indicating the centers that are ranked in the bottom of selected performance indicators .

within 12 months of enactment of h.r .

803 , the dol secretary is to close the centers that are ranked in the bottom quintile — or 25 out of 125 centers .

similar proposals have been put forth in prior congresses .

for example , the reagan administration proposed closing all job corps centers or reducing the capacity of the program by about half to improve the efficiency of the program .

dol was charged with identifying the least efficient centers "in terms of program outcomes , costs , accessibility of client population and other relevant factors. .

the centers were ultimately not closed .

similarly , legislation in the 104 th congress ( h.r .

1617 and s. 143 ) would have directed dol to close 25 underperforming centers based on an audit of centers and criteria related to center performance , incidents of violence or criminal activities , need for rehabilitation and repair , relative and absolute cost , and the level of state and local support for the center .

the proposal also sought to transfer operation of job corps from the federal government to the states based on the belief that states "are in the best position to manage and operate job corps centers that are integrated with their workforce development systems" ; however , states would not be required to have job corps centers .

some members objected to transferring operations from the federal government to the states because states could "significantly decrease the number of students attending a center or shift funds to nonresidential programs" and could "limit applicants' access to centers outside their states that might offer programs better suited to their needs. .

 ( both the house and senate bills passed ; however , a conference committee was not convened to resolve differences between the bills. ) .

these same arguments in favor of and against changing job corps could be relevant to current efforts to scale back or alter the program .

the workforce investment act of 2013 ( s. 1356 ) , which was passed by the senate help committee in july 2013 , would direct the secretary to determine when a center is to be closed and how to carry out such closure .

it would also eliminate the existing indicators of performance and require the dol secretary to establish expected levels of performance based on the indicators of performance for the youth activities program .

it would further require the dol secretary to develop and implement a performance improvement plan ( pip ) and to take other action as required under current law , except that such action would have to be taken within a one - year period .

the common measures are a set of performance metrics developed by the department of labor's employment and training administration ( eta ) and used across multiple workforce programs , including youth activities , job corps , and youthbuild .

the common measures include placement in employment or education , attainment of a degree or education , and literacy and numeracy gains .

in 2003 , eta first implemented a common measures policy for several workforce programs and revised the reporting requirements for wia title i programs in an effort to develop a "single , comprehensive system to collect , record , and report program performance for workforce programs. .

eta introduced three measures for youth ( described in more detail below ) in programs carried out by eta , including youth activities and job corps .

since that time , eta has issued additional policy guidance on the common measures .

eta specifically indicated that the common measures were not to supersede the existing statutory performance reporting requirements for wia and that states would continue to negotiate performance goals for the indicators required under the youth activities program .

in addition to enabling dol to streamline collection of data on performance , the common measures are used to assess program performance under the government performance and results act ( gpra ) , as amended .

gpra , first enacted in 1993 , requires most federal agencies to measure program performance .

table a - 1 , below , includes the goals and outcomes of each of the common measures for the youth activities , job corps , and youthbuild programs .

the table includes data for py2011 and py2012 ; however , the data for youthbuild are based on aggregated program data , beginning with the 2007 grant cycle , through each of those two program years .

the goals for the common measures are established as part of the budget process .

according to dol , the goals are "set at the higher end to be 'ambitious' within the context of prior performance. .

dol also states that program goals apply to the program as a whole and may need to be adjusted for individual grantees to account for different economic or other circumstances .

dol develops the performance targets for the programs using regression analysis , which is a statistical technique for determining the relationship between outcomes ( dependent variables ) and explanatory factors ( independent variables ) .

the regression model for youth activities incorporates several factors to set targets , including program results from the prior year , current labor market conditions , and individual characteristics to correct for the effects of the business cycle and labor market conditions on the outcomes of employment and training programs .

the performance targets for youthbuild are based on the regression analysis used for youth activities .

dol sets the performance targets for job corps similarly .

for example , the target for placement in employment or education is based on economic assumptions , program results , unemployment , and the factors developed for the youth activities regression model .

the common measures are described in more detail below .

each program met or exceeded its goals in both py2011 and py2012 .

placement in employment or education of those youth who were not enrolled in postsecondary education or employed ( including in the military ) when they began the program , this placement measure refers to the share who are enrolled in postsecondary education and / or advanced training or occupational skills training , or are employed ( including the military ) in the first quarter after the exit quarter .

it is calculated by including youth who are in high school at exit but excluding youth who are enrolled in school or employed when they enter the program .

attainment of a degree or certificate of those enrolled in an educational institution or program at the date of participation in the program or at any point during the program , this measure refers to the share of youth participants who attain a diploma , ged , or certificate by the end of the third quarter after the exit quarter .

the term diploma means any credential that a state education agency accepts as equivalent to a high school diploma and other post - secondary degrees , including associate's degrees and bachelor's degrees .

such a diploma may be earned at a secondary school , postsecondary school , adult education program , or any other organized program of study leading to a degree or certificate .

dol specifies that a work readiness certificate does not qualify as a diploma .

youth who are in postsecondary school are excluded from this measure .

literacy or numeracy gains of those youth who are not in school and are deficient in basic skills , this measure refers to the share of youth participants who increase one or more educational functional levels .

this measure is calculated based on youth who have completed a year in the program ( i.e. , one year from the date of the first youth program service ) and youth participants who exit before completing a year in the program .

this measure is only for out - of - school youth .

each youth is initially assessed in reading , writing , and math by a pre - test administered up to six months prior to the date of the first service received under the program .

if prior pre - test scores are not available , youth must take pre - tests within 60 days following the date that they first received a service .

youth are then to be tested at "regular intervals after entering the program" ( but no later than one year after entering the program ) .

individuals who are determined not to be basic skills - deficient are excluded from this measure .

the measure excludes these individuals so that programs can focus on youth who need remediation , and to eliminate the burden of testing on these young people .

additional guidance by dol discusses the types of tests that can be used to assess literacy and numeracy gains , and directs programs to make accommodations for students with disabilities , among other guidance .

