the u.s. department of veterans affairs ( va ) administers several programs that assist individual veterans in purchasing and / or rehabilitating homes .

the specific ways in which the va assists veterans include ( 1 ) guaranteeing home mortgages from private lenders ( through the loan guaranty program , a form of insurance ) to help veterans obtain financing for home purchases , improvements , or refinancing ; ( 2 ) providing direct loans for home purchases to native american veterans and to purchasers of homes that are in the va inventory due to default and foreclosure ; and ( 3 ) extending grants and loans to veterans with service - connected disabilities so that they can adapt housing to fit their needs through the specially adapted housing program .

this report discusses some of the legislative history behind each of these housing programs , and provides details about how the programs currently operate .

there is a separate section on funding for va loan programs , and the final section of the report discusses va efforts to assist borrowers who face default and foreclosure .

while the va also provides housing assistance for homeless veterans , this report does not address these programs .

for more information about homeless veterans and programs that assist them , see crs report rl34024 , veterans and homelessness .

the va loan guaranty program is a mortgage insurance program through which eligible veterans enter into mortgages with private lenders , and the va guarantees that it will pay lenders a portion of losses that may be suffered as a result of borrower default .

va - guaranteed loans are available for the purchase , construction , or repair / rehabilitation of a dwelling — defined to include homes with up to four units , single condominium units , and manufactured homes classified as real property — or a farm and farm residence .

the guaranty is also available to finance the purchase of a manufactured home not classified as real property , and to refinance an existing loan .

the va loan guaranty came about as an alternative to a cash bonus for veterans returning from world war ii , considered less expensive than a bonus , but still a way to provide benefits to veterans .

credit was seen as one of the areas where veterans were at a disadvantage compared to their non - veteran counterparts because they had not had the time to establish a career or credit history that would allow them to obtain a mortgage without a guaranty .

the servicemen's readjustment act of 1944 ( p.l .

78-346 ) created the loan guaranty as part of a package of benefits for returning veterans .

the act also included educational benefits ( the 1944 act introduced the gi bill ) , employment counseling and placement services , and payments for unemployed veterans .

the package of benefits was meant to help veterans reintegrate into the civilian economy .

the law provided that the va would guaranty loans for veterans to purchase or construct a home , purchase a farm or farm equipment , or purchase a business .

the guaranty was limited to the greater of 50% of the loan or $2,000 , and loans could not have an interest rate above 4% .

the va paid the interest on the guaranteed portion of the loan during its first year .

veterans had the greater of two years from the termination of the war , or two years from their date of separation from the military , to apply .

within a year , congress amended the loan guaranty to address some of the aspects of the program that did not seem to be working ( p.l .

79-268 ) .

the maximum guaranty was raised to $4,000 ( prices of homes had risen ) , the maximum maturity was increased from 20 to 25 years ( the shorter maturity period had resulted in higher payments ) , and veterans were given 10 years from the end of the war to apply ( two years had been too short a time frame ) .

over time , the loan guaranty has been expanded to include all veterans who served on active duty from world war ii on , with varying length of service requirements , as well as those who served in the selected reserves ; the amount of the guaranty has grown ; business purchases are no longer eligible and farm purchases have been limited ; and the uses have expanded to include refinancing , energy efficiency improvements , and the purchase of manufactured homes .

this section of the report describes eligibility for the loan guaranty ( " borrower eligibility " ) , ways in which it can be used ( " uses of the loan guaranty " ) , coverage ( " amount of coverage provided by the loan guaranty " ) , and how the va loan guaranty differs from the federal housing administration ( fha ) mortgage insurance program ( " how the va loan guaranty differs from fha insurance " ) .

in addition to the va loan guaranty program , through which the va insures loans made to veterans by private lenders , there are several circumstances under which the va makes loans directly to veterans , as well as occasionally to nonveterans .

the direct loans through the va can be put into two broad categories .

the first category involves loans that are targeted to specific veteran populations: one program was created to address the needs of rural veterans , but has evolved to serve veterans with certain disabilities , and the other program is designed for native american veterans .

the second category involves loans made as the result of borrower default on guaranteed loans — these are referred to as "acquired loans" and "vendee loans. .

both the va direct loan and loan guaranty programs are funded through several sources .

these sources include congressional appropriations , fees paid by borrowers , proceeds from the rental or sale of foreclosed properties , collection of principal and interest payments made by borrowers , and any penalties paid by lenders .

an important aspect of understanding how va loans are funded , apart from the sources of funding , is how loans are accounted for in the federal budget .

in most federally funded grant programs , the cost to the federal budget is the amount appropriated , and federal involvement in funding generally ends after the outlay of funds .

by contrast , the cost of loan programs may involve both an up - front outlay of funds as well as the recoupment of costs through payments of principal and interest , and / or collection of fees and penalties , over the lifetime of the loans .

loan programs may also suffer losses in subsequent years through defaults or lower - than - expected collection of fees .

as a result , it is not always possible to capture the budgetary effects of loans in one particular year .

current government practice , instituted in 1992 , is to determine the net present value of loans over their lifetime and to record this amount in the budget in the year the loans are extended .

 ( see the text box for an explanation of the law implementing this budget process. ) .

the concept of net present value is helpful both in understanding how funds are appropriated for va loans and in reading va budget documents .

the federal funding process is described briefly in the following subsection of this report , " the va budget and congressional appropriations for va loan programs . .

the two subsequent subsections describe loan fees paid by borrowers , and funds obtained through loan payments and property sales .

the specially adapted housing program provides grants to veterans and servicemembers with certain service - connected disabilities to assist them in constructing , purchasing , or remodeling homes to fit their needs .

while specially adapted housing loans are also available ( see discussion in the " the original direct loan for veterans in rural areas , now limited to veterans with disabilities " section of this report ) , the majority of funds are distributed as grants that veterans and servicemembers need not pay back .

the specially adapted housing program , which was introduced in 1948 in p.l .

80-702 , initially targeted veterans with a total service - connected disability causing paralysis in the legs or lower body .

over the years , congress amended the law to expand the range of disabilities eligible for assistance , to make family members' homes eligible for adaptation ( p.l .

109-233 ) , to include active duty servicemembers with service - connected disabilities ( p.l .

110-289 ) , to expand benefits to individuals residing outside the united states ( p.l .

110-289 ) , and to include loans as well as grants ( p.l .

96-526 ) .

within the specially adapted housing program are two grant programs for veterans and active duty servicemembers , which are discussed in separate subsections , below .

the first , sometimes referred to as the specially adapted housing ( sah ) grant ( or section 2101 ( a ) grant , after the section of title 38 of the u.s. code ) , is targeted to veterans with mobility impairments , while the second , sometimes referred to as the special housing adaptation ( sha ) grant ( or section 2101 ( b ) grant ) assists veterans who are blind or who have lost the use of their hands .

the grant limits for the first category of adapted housing are higher than for the second , and both types of adapted housing are available to veterans with severe burn injuries .

a veteran or servicemember may use the sah and sha grants up to three times , as long as total funding does not exceed grant limits .

delinquencies and foreclosures for all categories of loans increased about the same time that the country entered recession ( december 2007 ) .

the housing market began to experience difficulties , with the percentage of all loans past due and the percentage of loans in foreclosure both beginning to grow .

in the first quarter of 2007 , the overall foreclosure rate was 1.28% ; at its peak , in the fourth quarter of 2010 , it reached 4.64% .

while foreclosures for all categories of loans increased after the beginning of the recession , the foreclosure and delinquency rates for va - guaranteed loans were lower than the rates for fha loans , as well as lower than the overall rates .

delinquency and foreclosure rates for va loans were not always lower than fha loans or loans in general .

the va has suggested a number of factors that could contribute to the lower default rates experienced in the aftermath of the recession , including underwriting practices , oversight of lenders , and a robust default servicing program where the va gets directly involved with borrowers and servicers , if necessary .

the increased popularity of subprime loans leading up to the recession may also have contributed to comparably lower rates for va loans by moving veterans away from va loans .

a number of options may exist for veterans who entered into mortgages through the va loan guaranty program and find themselves facing delinquency or foreclosure .

servicer workouts: one way in which the va loan guaranty program attempts to prevent properties from going to foreclosure is to encourage servicers to work out agreements with borrowers .

in cases where veterans are delinquent on va - guaranteed loans , the va may make incentive payments to servicers that are able to work out arrangements with borrowers to prevent foreclosure .

these arrangements , or loss mitigation efforts , include repayment plans , forbearance agreements , loan modifications , sales for less than the amount owed ( "compromise sales" ) , or deeds in lieu of foreclosure .

most of these efforts were introduced when va revised its regulations in 2008 .

under va regulations , a lender may enter into a loan modification with a borrower without prior va approval in circumstances where the borrower is in default , the reasons for loan default have been resolved and are not expected to recur , the borrower is a "reasonable" credit risk , at least 12 payments have been made since the loan closed , and a loan modification would reinstate the loan .

on december 20 , 2011 , the va published a final rule in the federal register modifying these regulations to further help encourage modifications .

in cases where the conditions listed above have not been met , lenders can request approval from the va to modify loans nonetheless .

in addition , maximum interest rates for modified loans will be tied to the freddie mac weekly maximum interest rate ( to make it easier to re - pool and securitize modified loans with loans having similar interest rates ) , and legal fees and foreclosure costs can be added to the principal balance of a modified loan .

va servicing: the va may intervene to assist with loss mitigation efforts if the servicer has been unwilling or unable to work with the borrower , or if the va has determined that the loan servicing is inadequate .

if loss mitigation is unsuccessful , the va may purchase the loan and take over servicing ; however , this occurs rarely , and only if the circumstances causing delinquency were temporary and the veteran is able to resume payments .

"hamp - style" modifications: in 2009 , the obama administration introduced the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) , an initiative to help borrowers who are behind on their mortgage payments .

through hamp , homeowners whose mortgage payments exceed 31% of their incomes ( in general ) , and who face additional hardships that make it difficult to remain current on their mortgages , may work with their loan servicers to modify their loans so that they are affordable .

technically , va loans are not included as part of the hamp program , but the va has issued guidance requiring loan servicers to determine whether borrowers are eligible for "hamp - style" modifications before proceeding with foreclosure or similar alternatives .

where a borrower has missed payments and loss mitigation efforts have been unsuccessful , loan servicers are to evaluate the borrower to see if the loan could be modified through methods such as reduced interest rates or forebearance on principal payments to a point where the payments are at or below 31% of borrower income .

if necessary , the va will adjust its guaranty for larger loan amounts .

unlike hamp ( where loans must have originated on or before january 1 , 2009 ) , any va - guaranteed loan is potentially eligible .

if a lender and borrower enter into a modified loan , unlike hamp , there is no trial period , and any reduced interest rate lasts for the life of the loan .

mortgages that are underwater , but current: in addition to increased foreclosures , the downturn in the economy resulted in situations where some borrowers may have mortgages that exceed the value of their homes , sometimes referred to as being "underwater. .

this makes it difficult to refinance mortgages to take advantage of lower interest rates because lenders generally do not want to lend more than a home's appraised value .

in cases where borrowers are current on their mortgage payments , but owe more than their homes are worth , they may qualify for an interest rate reduction refinancing loan ( irrrl ) through the va , despite the fact that their debt exceeds their homes' values .

because an irrrl does not require an appraisal , it is possible that some lenders may be willing to enter into a refinancing loan even where the loan exceeds the current property value .

agreement between state attorneys general and large mortgage servicers: va borrowers who are delinquent and / or underwater may also be eligible for assistance through an agreement reached between 49 state attorneys general , the attorney general for the district of columbia , and five large mortgage servicers in march 2012 .

under the agreement , $25 billion was made available to assist certain borrowers .

in order to qualify for assistance , loans cannot have been purchased by fannie mae or freddie mac ( and va loans are not purchased by fannie mae or freddie mac ) , and they must be serviced by bank of america , jpmorgan chase , wells fargo , citigroup , or ally financial .

pursuant to the settlement , the servicers must commit a minimum of $17 billion for foreclosure prevention , including principal reduction , and they must commit another $3 billion to assist underwater homeowners .

another $5 billion was awarded to the states , some of which , about $1.5 billion , consists of payments to borrowers who lost their homes to foreclosure .

for more information , see crs report r42919 , oversight and legal enforcement of the national mortgage settlement ( available to congressional clients upon request to crs ) .

servicemembers civil relief act: another potential protection for borrowers may come through the servicemembers civil relief act ( scra ) , which provides financial protections for active duty servicemembers , including home mortgage protections .

the act may assist veterans who entered into mortgages ( including va loans ) prior to being called to active duty , and who are having trouble making their mortgage payments .

in cases where a lender brings an action against a borrower for a mortgage obligation during a period of active duty , or within nine months after , the scra gives courts the authority to stay the proceedings .

in addition , the scra also generally declares invalid any foreclosure or home sale that takes place during this time period .

if arrangements cannot be worked out to avoid foreclosure and properties proceed to sale , in most instances , loan servicers acquire the property at foreclosure sale and , in turn , sell it to the va .

whether a transfer to the va occurs depends on the property value and the amount owed by the veteran borrower ; each of these values is determined prior to the foreclosure sale .

the procedures that the va goes through in order to determine when it will acquire a property , and for how much , were set up to ensure that the va would not spend more than the amount for which the loan was guaranteed .

when a property goes to foreclosure , the va will also pay the lender's claim against the guaranty .

if the total indebtedness has been reduced over the life of the loan , then the guaranty is prorated , and the guaranty is limited to the borrower's total indebtedness minus the va's purchase price .

table 9 , below , shows the number of properties with va - guaranteed loans that are at some point in the foreclosure process , as well as foreclosed properties held in the va inventory over the past decade .

since 2008 , when the housing market began to experience difficulties , the number of homes with va loans in foreclosure has increased , growing from about 4,700 homes in foreclosure in fy2007 to more than 9,000 in fy2008 , 17,000 in fy2009 , and exceeding 20,000 in each year since then with the exception of fy2013 .

once the va has acquired properties through the process of foreclosure , it attempts to resell them .

in doing so , purchasers need not be veterans .

in fy2016 , the average time between va acquisition of a foreclosed property and sale was six months .

for more information about disposition of property , see the earlier section of this report entitled " direct loans resulting from borrower delinquency or default ( acquired and vendee loans ) . .

