carbon capture and sequestration ( or storage ) — known as ccs — is a physical process that involves capturing manmade carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) at its source and storing it before its release to the atmosphere .

ccs could reduce the amount of co 2 emitted to the atmosphere despite the continued use of fossil fuels .

an integrated ccs system would include three main steps: ( 1 )  capturing co 2 and separating it from other gases ; ( 2 ) purifying , compressing , and transporting the captured co 2 to the sequestration site ; and ( 3 ) injecting the co 2 in subsurface geological reservoirs or storing it in the oceans .

as a measure for mitigating global climate change , ccs has attracted congressional interest and support because several projects in the united states and abroad — typically associated with oil and gas production — are successfully capturing , injecting , and storing co 2 underground , albeit at relatively small scales .

the oil and gas industry in the united states injects nearly 50 million metric tons of co 2 underground each year to help recover oil and gas resources ( a process known as enhanced oil recovery , or eor ) .

potentially , much larger amounts of co 2 produced from electricity generation — approximately 2.1 billion metric tons per year , about 40% of the total co 2 emitted in the united states from fossil fuels ( see table 1 ) — could be targeted for large - scale ccs .

fuel combustion accounts for 94% of all u.s. co 2 emissions .

electricity generation contributes the largest proportion of co 2 emissions compared to other types of fossil fuel use in the united states ( table 1 ) .

electricity - generating plants are among the most likely initial candidates for capture , separation , and storage or reuse of co 2 because they are predominantly large , stationary , single - point sources of emissions .

large industrial facilities , such as cement - manufacturing , ethanol , or hydrogen production plants , that produce large quantities of co 2 as part of the industrial process are also good candidates for co 2 capture and storage .

this report is a brief summary of what ccs is , how it is supposed to work , why it has gained the interest and support of some members of congress , and what some of the challenges are to its implementation and deployment across the united states .

several other crs reports cover different aspects of ccs in more detail , such as capture technology , challenges to siting and infrastructure , policy challenges to a comprehensive climate policy , and others .

these are listed in the last section of this report , titled " other crs reports . .

this report covers only ccs and not other types of carbon sequestration activities whereby co 2 is removed from the atmosphere and stored in vegetation or soils , such as forests and agricultural lands .

the first step in ccs is to capture co 2 at the source and produce a concentrated stream for transport and storage .

currently , three main approaches are available to capture co 2 from large - scale industrial facilities or power plants: ( 1 ) post - combustion capture , ( 2 ) pre - combustion capture , and ( 3 ) oxy - fuel combustion capture .

for power plants , current commercial co 2 capture systems could operate at 85% - 95% capture efficiency .

the capture phase of the ccs process , however , may be 80% or more of the total costs for ccs .

a detailed description and assessment of these capture technologies is provided in crs report r41325 , carbon capture: a technology assessment .

pipelines are the most common method for transporting co 2 in the united states .

currently , approximately 4,100 miles of pipeline transport co 2 in the united states , predominately to oil and gas fields , where it is used for eor .

transporting co 2 in pipelines is similar to transporting petroleum products like natural gas and oil ; it requires attention to design , monitoring for leaks , and protection against overpressure , especially in populated areas .

using ships may be feasible when co 2 must be transported over large distances or overseas .

ships transport co 2 today , but at a small scale because of limited demand .

liquefied natural gas , propane , and butane are routinely shipped by marine tankers on a large scale worldwide .

rail cars and trucks can also transport co 2 , but this mode would probably be uneconomical for large - scale ccs operations .

costs for pipeline transport vary , depending on construction , operation and maintenance , and other factors , including right - of - way costs , regulatory fees , and more .

the quantity and distance transported will mostly determine costs , which will also depend on whether the pipeline is onshore or offshore , the level of congestion along the route , and whether mountains , large rivers , or frozen ground are encountered .

shipping costs are unknown in any detail , however , because no large - scale co 2 transport system ( in millions of metric tons of co 2 per year , for example ) is operating .

ship costs might be lower than pipeline transport for distances greater than 1,000 kilometers and for less than a few million metric tons of co 2 ( mtco 2 ) transported per year .

even though regional co 2 pipeline networks currently operate in the united states for enhanced eor , developing a more expansive network for ccs could pose numerous regulatory and economic challenges .

some of these include questions about pipeline network requirements , economic regulation , utility cost recovery , regulatory classification of co 2 itself , and pipeline safety .

three main types of geological formations are being considered for carbon sequestration: ( 1 )  depleted oil and gas reservoirs , ( 2 ) deep saline reservoirs , and ( 3 ) unmineable coal seams .

in each case , co 2 would be injected in a supercritical state — a relatively dense liquid — below ground into a porous rock formation that holds or previously held fluids .

when co 2 is injected at depths greater than 800 meters in a typical reservoir , the pressure keeps the injected co 2 in a supercritical state ( dense like a liquid , fluid like a gas ) and thus it is less likely to migrate out of the geological formation .

injecting co 2 into deep geological formations uses existing technologies that have been primarily developed and used by the oil and gas industry , and that could potentially be adapted for long - term storage and monitoring of co 2 .

other underground injection applications in practice today , such as natural gas storage , deep injection of liquid wastes , and subsurface disposal of oil - field brines , can also provide valuable experience and information for sequestering co 2 in geological formations .

the storage capacity for co 2 in geological formations is potentially huge if all the sedimentary basins in the world are considered ( see discussion below of storage capacity estimates for the united states ) .

the suitability of any particular site , however , depends on many factors , including proximity to co 2 sources and other reservoir - specific qualities like porosity , permeability , and potential for leakage .

for ccs to succeed , it is assumed that each reservoir type would permanently store the vast majority of injected co 2 , keeping the gas isolated from the atmosphere in perpetuity .

the world's oceans contain approximately 50 times the amount of carbon stored in the atmosphere and nearly 10 times the amount stored in plants and soils .

the oceans today take up — act as a net sink for — approximately 1.7 billion metric tons of co 2 ( gtco 2 ) per year .

about 45% of the co 2 released from fossil fuel combustion and land use activities during the 1990s has remained in the atmosphere , while the remainder has been taken up by the oceans , vegetation , or soils on the land surface .

without the ocean sink , atmospheric co 2 concentration would be increasing more rapidly .

ultimately , the oceans could store more than 90% of all the carbon released to the atmosphere by human activities , but the process takes thousands of years .

the ocean's capacity to absorb atmospheric co 2 may change , however , and possibly even decrease in the future .

also , studies indicate that as more co 2 enters the ocean from the atmosphere , the surface waters are becoming more acidic .

another option for sequestering co 2 produced by fossil fuel combustion involves converting co 2 to solid inorganic carbonates , such as caco 3 ( limestone ) , using chemical reactions .

when this process occurs naturally , it is known as "weathering" and takes place over thousands or millions of years .

the process can be accelerated by reacting a high concentration of co 2 with minerals found in large quantities on the earth's surface , such as olivine or serpentine .

mineral carbonation has the advantage of sequestering carbon in solid , stable minerals that can be stored without risk of releasing carbon to the atmosphere over geologic time scales .

mineral carbonation involves three major activities: ( 1 ) preparing the reactant minerals — mining , crushing , and milling — and transporting them to a processing plant , ( 2 ) reacting the concentrated co 2 stream with the prepared minerals , and ( 3 ) separating the carbonate products and storing them in a suitable repository .

a primary goal of developing and deploying ccs is to allow large industrial facilities , such as fossil fuel power plants and cement plants , to operate while reducing their co 2 emissions by 80% - 90% .

such reductions would presumably reduce the likelihood of continued climate warming from greenhouse gases by slowing the rise in atmospheric concentrations of co 2 .

to achieve the overarching goal of reducing the likelihood of continued climate warming would depend , in part , on how fast and how widely ccs could be deployed throughout the economy .

the additional cost of installing ccs on co 2 - emitting facilities is a primary challenge to the adoption and deployment of ccs in the united states , especially in an environment of low natural gas prices and increasing domestic natural gas supplies .

major increases in co 2 capture technology efficiency will likely produce the greatest relative cost savings for ccs systems , but challenges also face the transport and storage components of ccs .

ideally , storage reservoirs for co 2 would be located close to sources , obviating the need to build a large pipeline infrastructure to deliver captured co 2 for underground sequestration .

if ccs moves to widespread implementation , however , some areas of the country may not have adequate reservoir capacity nearby , and may need to construct pipelines from sources to reservoirs .

identifying and validating sequestration sites would need to account for co 2 pipeline costs , for example , if the economics of the sites are to be fully understood .

if this is the case , there would be questions to be resolved regarding pipeline network requirements , economic regulation , utility cost recovery , regulatory classification of co 2 itself , and pipeline safety .

in addition , congress may be called upon to address federal jurisdictional authority over co 2 pipelines under existing law , and whether additional legislation may be necessary if a co 2 pipeline network grows and crosses state lines .

although doe has identified substantial potential storage capacity for co 2 , particularly in deep saline formations , large - scale injection experiments are only beginning in the united states to test how different types of reservoirs perform during co 2 injection .

data from the experiments will undoubtedly be crucial to future permitting and site approval regulations .

in addition , liability , ownership , and long - term stewardship for co 2 sequestered underground are issues that would need to be resolved before ccs is deployed commercially .

some states are moving ahead with state - level geological sequestration regulations for co 2 , so federal efforts to resolve these issues at a national level would likely involve negotiations with the states .

acceptance by the general public of large - scale deployment of ccs may be a significant challenge if the majority of ccs projects involve private land .

some of the large - scale injection tests could garner information about public acceptance , as local communities become familiar with the concept , process , and results of co 2 injection tests .

apart from the question of how the public would accept the likely higher cost for electricity generated from plants with ccs , how a growing ccs infrastructure of pipelines , injection wells , underground reservoirs , and other facilities would be accepted by the public is as yet unknown .

crs reports covering different aspects of ccs are listed below .

crs report r42496 , carbon capture and sequestration: research , development , and demonstration at the u.s. department of energy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41325 , carbon capture: a technology assessment , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40103 , carbon control in the u.s. electricity sector: key implementation uncertainties , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33971 , carbon dioxide ( co2 ) pipelines for carbon sequestration: emerging policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34059 , the carbon cycle: implications for climate change and congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34621 , capturing co2 from coal - fired power plants: challenges for a comprehensive strategy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34601 , community acceptance of carbon capture and sequestration infrastructure: siting challenges , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34316 , pipelines for carbon dioxide ( co2 ) control: network needs and cost uncertainties , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

