to promote commerce and deter labor unrest , congress has established laws regulating unionization and collective bargaining ( i.e. , similar workers negotiating compensation and working conditions as a unit rather than individually ) .

the primary federal legislation that regulates private sector collective bargaining is the national labor relations act ( nlra ) , enacted in 1935 .

in addition to establishing workers' rights to organize and establishing union election procedures , the nlra also permits collective bargaining contracts between employers and labor organizations that require all workers covered by the contract to pay dues to the negotiating organization .

these contract provisions are known as union security agreements .

since the nlra was amended by the taft - hartley act in 1947 , individual states have had the option of enacting laws that prohibit union security agreements .

these state laws supersede the union security provisions of the nlra and are known as right to work ( rtw ) laws .

as of this writing , 24 states have enacted rtw laws .

since the taft - hartley act , changes to federal law relating to unionization and rtw have been limited .

debate on this topic , however , has been ongoing and there have been legislative proposals to both expand and prohibit rtw laws .

supporters of expanding rtw laws claim that they will increase personal freedom and employer flexibility .

conversely , supporters of proposals to eliminate rtw laws emphasize that unions must negotiate on behalf of all workers in the unit , and as such , it is appropriate that all workers pay for that representation .

this report is divided into two parts .

the first part discusses rtw laws themselves .

it provides a brief legislative history on the federal role in the regulation of unions , a summary of the origin and development of rtw laws , a discussion of recent events at the state level , and federal legislation related to rtw .

the second part of the report reviews the varied empirical research on the effects of rtw laws .

specifically , it will discuss the mixed evidence indicating relationships between rtw laws and other economic outcomes .

prior to the passage of the federal labor laws discussed in this report , the regulation of labor and collective bargaining was left to the states .

laws varied , but most states adopted policies of open competition with minimal governmental regulations .

in 1926 , the railway labor act was the first federal law to guarantee collective bargaining rights to a group of workers .

the norris - laguardia act , passed in 1932 , prohibited federal courts from issuing an injunction in any labor dispute .

previously , judges could end a strike if they did not approve of its methods or objectives .

the norris - laguardia act , however , did not guarantee collective bargaining rights ; it merely regulated employer - union relations once they were established .

in rtw states , employers and elected unions may not agree to collective bargaining contracts with union security agreements .

as such , workers who are covered by a collective bargaining contract may choose whether or not to join the representing union and pay corresponding union dues .

states without rtw laws are subject to the union security provisions of the nlra .

these provisions specify that an elected union and an employer can agree to a collective bargaining contract that requires all workers covered by the contract to become dues - paying members within 30 days .

workplaces covered by such an agreement are often called union shops .

in 1963 , the supreme court ruled that , even in a union shop , an employee cannot be required to join a union pursuant to a union security agreement .

instead , the employee may pay dues but decline to become a full union member .

dues - paying nonmembers are referred to as financial core members .

in spite of their name , financial core members are not union members: they may not participate in union activities or even vote on the ratification of the collective bargaining contract that covers them .

financial core members are not subject to union bylaws or union discipline but they are subject to the rights and responsibilities in the collective bargaining contract with their employer .

subsequent decisions have concluded that financial core members only need to pay dues to cover the cost of collective bargaining functions .

these functions include bargaining , contract administration , and grievance adjustment .

financial core members do not have to financially support union functions that are unrelated to collective bargaining such as political activities .

as such , the dues paid by financial core members may be less than the dues paid by full union members .

workers subject to a union security agreement must be informed of the financial core membership option .

an alternative to the union shop is the agency shop .

in an agency shop , workers covered by a collective bargaining contract are required to pay a fee for representation ( an agency fee ) but are not required to join the union .

since union shop agreements must permit covered workers to forego full union membership and only pay a representation fee as a core financial member , union shops and agency shops operate similarly in practice .

in cases where a union security agreement conflicts with a worker's religious beliefs , the objecting worker may donate the equivalent of the agency fee or financial core dues to a non - labor , non - religious charity .

there has been a great deal of debate and research on the economic effects of rtw laws on states that adopt them .

most empirical research has concluded that rtw laws have a negative relationship with unionization rates ( also known as union density ) though the causal effect is debated .

the effects of rtw laws on other economic outcomes , such as job growth and wages , have been studied , though findings have been mixed and there is no broad consensus on the magnitude ( if any ) of the effects of these laws .

the primary issue in the ongoing rtw debate pertains to the rights and expectations of workers who are covered by a collective bargaining agreement but do not wish to pay union dues .

supporters of expanding rtw laws argue that these workers should have a right to choose whether or not to support their representing labor organization .

advocates of union security agreements emphasize that negotiating labor organizations are required to represent all workers in the bargaining unit , so it is a reasonable expectation to require all workers in the bargaining unit to financially support the labor organization that represents them .

advocates and opponents of expanding rtw laws also posit higher - order effects to support their respective views .

supporters of rtw laws suggest that such laws increase employer flexibility , and may make it difficult for strong unions to be sustained , which in turn may lead to increases in efficiency and economic output .

opponents of rtw laws suggest that such laws reduce the financial viability of unions , leading to declines in collective bargaining and corresponding benefits for workers .

in assessing the potential effects of expanding rtw , existing empirical research is inconclusive .

comparing outcomes in states with and without rtw laws can provide limited perspectives on possible effects of these laws , but states' economies are extremely complex and even the most sophisticated studies are unable to fully isolate the effects of varied union security policies .

furthermore , the variation in findings among researchers suggests that no consensus will be reached in the near future .

as such , the ongoing debate on rtw may be driven by factors other than rigorous empirical evidence related to economic outcomes .

