a range of federal incentives supports the development and deployment of alternatives to conventional fuels and engines in transportation .

these incentives include tax deductions and credits for vehicle purchases and the installation of refueling systems , federal grants for conversion of older vehicles to newer technologies , mandates for the use of biofuels , and incentives for manufacturers to produce alternative fuel vehicles .

some of these incentives have expired in recent years when their authorizations expired .

many of the policy choices presented for alternative fuel and advanced vehicle technologies originated as a response to the nation's interest in reducing petroleum imports , a goal first articulated at the time of the two oil embargoes imposed by the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) in the 1970s .

while president richard nixon is often cited as the first president to call for "energy independence," successive presidents and congresses have made efforts to reduce petroleum import dependence as well .

as shown in figure 1 , since peaking in 2005 , net u.s. oil imports have fallen by 70% .

factors in this reversal include the last recession , which reduced domestic demand , followed by a rise in the supply of u.s. oil and oil alternatives due to increased private sector investment and federal incentives , some of which are cited in this report .

in addition , the united states has become a net exporter of petroleum products ( while it remains a net importer of crude oil ) .

with declining u.s. import dependence , reliance on petroleum and petroleum products may be less of a factor in promoting alternative fuels and alternative fuel vehicles in the future .

in addition to concerns over petroleum import dependence , other factors also have driven policy on alternative fuels and advanced vehicle technologies .

federal incentives do not reflect a single , comprehensive strategy but rather an aggregative approach to a range of discrete public policy issues , including improving environmental quality , expanding domestic manufacturing , and promoting agriculture and rural development .

while a reliance on foreign sources of petroleum was an overriding concern for much of the past 40 years , other factors , such as rural development , promotion of domestic manufacturing , and environmental concerns , have also shaped congressional interest in alternative fuels and technologies .

a variety of programs affecting the development and commercialization of alternative fuels and technologies have been proposed and enacted , each with its own benefits and drawbacks .

 ( this report does not evaluate the effectiveness of alternative fuel programs and incentives. ) .

alternative fuels programs can be generally classified into six categories: expanding domestic ethanol production ; establishing other alternative fuels ; encouraging the purchase of nonpetroleum vehicles ; reducing fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions ; supporting u.s. vehicle manufacturing ; and funding u.s. highways .

the federal tax incentives and programs discussed in this report aim to support the development and deployment of alternative fuels .

there is no central coordination of how these incentives interact .

in general , they are independently administered by separate federal agencies , including five agencies: department of the treasury , doe , dot , epa , and usda .

this report focuses strictly on programs that directly support alternative fuels or advanced vehicles .

it does not address more general programs ( eg , general manufacturing loans , rural development loans ) , or programs that have been authorized but never funded .

the programs are presented by agency , starting with those that generally address the above factors , followed by those that are fuel - or technology - specific .

programs that expired or were repealed on or after december 31 , 2017 , are included in appendix a , recently expired or repealed programs .

congress may explore whether to reinstate these expired programs or establish similar programs .

appendix b contains four tables: 1. a summary of the programs discussed in the body of the report , listed by agency ( table b - 1 ) ; 2. a listing of programs and incentives for alternative fuels , by fuel type ( table b - 2 ) ; 3. a listing of programs and incentives for advanced technology vehicles , by vehicle type ( table b - 3 ) ; and 4. a listing of recently expired programs by agency ( table b - 4 ) .

appendix a .

recently expired or repealed programs alternative fuel refueling property credit alternative motor vehicle credit biodiesel or renewable diesel income tax credit biodiesel or renewable diesel mixture tax credit incentives for alternative fuel and alternative fuel mixtures plug - in electric vehicle credit ( two - or three - wheeled ) repowering assistance program second generation biofuel producer credit ( previously the credit for production of cellulosic and algae - based biofuel ) small agri - biodiesel producer credit special depreciation allowance for second generation ( cellulosic and algae - based ) biofuel plant property appendix b .

summary tables appendix b contains four tables table b - 1 provides a summary of the programs discussed in the body of the report , listed by agency ; table b - 2 lists programs and incentives for alternative fuels , by fuel type ; table b - 3 lists programs and incentives for advanced technology vehicles , by vehicle type ; and table b - 4 lists programs by agency that have expired or were repealed since december 31 , 2017 .

