under the constitution , the war powers are divided between congress and the president .

among other relevant grants , congress has the power to declare war and raise and support the armed forces ( article i , section 8 ) , while the president is commander in chief ( article ii , section 2 ) .

it is generally agreed that the commander - in - chief role gives the president power to utilize the armed forces to repel attacks against the united states , but there has long been controversy over whether he is constitutionally authorized to send forces into hostile situations abroad without a declaration of war or other congressional authorization .

congressional concern about presidential use of armed forces without congressional authorization intensified after the korean conflict .

during the vietnam war , congress searched for a way to assert authority to decide when the united states should become involved in a war or the armed forces be utilized in circumstances that might lead to hostilities .

on november 7 , 1973 , it passed the war powers resolution ( p.l .

93-148 ) over the veto of president nixon .

the main purpose of the resolution was to establish procedures for both branches to share in decisions that might get the united states involved in war .

the drafters sought to circumscribe the president's authority to use armed forces abroad in hostilities or potential hostilities without a declaration of war or other congressional authorization , yet provide enough flexibility to permit him to respond to attack or other emergencies .

the record of the war powers resolution since its enactment has been mixed , and after 40 years it remains controversial .

some members of congress believe the resolution has on some occasions served as a restraint on the use of armed forces by presidents , provided a mode of communication , and given congress a vehicle for asserting its war powers .

others have sought to amend the resolution because they believe it has failed to assure a congressional voice in committing u.s. troops to potential conflicts abroad .

others in congress , along with executive branch officials , contend that the president needs more flexibility in the conduct of foreign policy and that the time limitation in the war powers resolution is unconstitutional and impractical .

some have argued for its repeal .

this report examines the provisions of the war powers resolution , actual experience in its use from its enactment in 1973 through march 2015 , and proposed amendments to it .

appendix a lists instances which presidents have reported to congress under the war powers resolution , and appendix b lists certain instances of the use of u.s. armed forces that were not reported .

from its inception , the war powers resolution was controversial because it operated on the national war powers , powers divided by the constitution in no definitive fashion between the president and congress .

congress adopted the resolution in response to the perception that presidents had assumed more authority to send forces into hostilities than the framers of the constitution had intended for the commander in chief .

president nixon in his veto message challenged the constitutionality of the essence of the war powers resolution , and particularly two provisions .

he argued that the legislative veto provision , permitting congress to direct the withdrawal of troops by concurrent resolution , was unconstitutional .

he also argued that the provision requiring withdrawal of troops after 60-90 days unless congress passed legislation authorizing such use was unconstitutional because it checked presidential powers without affirmative congressional action .

every president since the enactment of the war powers resolution has taken the position that it is an unconstitutional infringement on the president's authority as commander in chief .

perceptions of the war powers resolution tended to be set during the cold war .

during the 1970s the issues revolved largely around the adequacy of consultation .

the 1980s raised more serious issues of presidential compliance and congressional willingness to use the war powers resolution to restrain presidential action .

with regard to lebanon in 1983 , congress itself invoked the war powers resolution , but in the 1987-1988 persian gulf tanker war congress chose not to do so .

following is a summary of major u.s. military actions and the issues they raised relating to the war powers resolution from its enactment in 1973 to august 1990 .

after the end of the cold war in 1990 , the united states began to move away from unilateral military actions toward actions authorized or supported by the united nations ( u.n. ) .

under the auspices of u.n. security council resolutions , u.s. forces were deployed in kuwait and iraq , somalia , former yugoslavia / bosnia / kosovo , and haiti .

this raised the new issue of whether the war powers resolution applied to u.s. participation in u.n. military actions .

it was not a problem during the cold war because the agreement among the five permanent members required for security council actions seldom existed .

an exception , the korean war , occurred before the war powers resolution was enacted .

the more basic issue — under what circumstances congressional authorization is required for u.s. participation in u.n. military operations — is an unfinished debate remaining from 1945 .

whether congressional authorization is required depends on the types of u.n. action and is governed by the u.n .

participation act ( p.l .

79-264 , as amended ) , as well as by the war powers resolution and war powers under the constitution .

appropriations action by congress also may be determinative as a practical matter .

for armed actions under articles 42 and 43 of the united nations charter , section 6 of the u.n .

participation act authorizes the president to negotiate special agreements with the security council " which shall be subject to the approval of the congress by appropriate act or joint resolution ," providing for the numbers and types of armed forces and facilities to be made available to the security council .

once the agreements have been concluded , further congressional authorization is not necessary , but no such agreements have been concluded .

section 7 of the united nations participation act , added in 1949 by p.l .

81-341 , authorizes the detail of up to 1,000 personnel to serve in any noncombatant capacity for certain u.n. peaceful settlement activities .

the united states has provided personnel to several u.n. peacekeeping missions , such as observers to the u.n .

truce supervision organization in palestine since 1948 , that appear to fall within the authorization in section 7 of the participation act .

controversy has arisen when larger numbers of forces have been deployed or when it appears the forces might be serving as combatants .

the war powers resolution neither excludes united nations actions from its provisions nor makes any special procedures for them .

section 8 ( a ) ( 2 ) states that authority to introduce u. s. armed forces into hostilities shall not be inferred from any treaty unless it is implemented by legislation specifically authorizing the introduction and stating that it is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of the war powers resolution .

one purpose of this provision was to ensure that both houses of congress be affirmatively involved in any u.s. decision to engage in hostilities pursuant to a treaty , since only the senate approved a treaty .

from 1990 through 1999 , congress primarily dealt with the issue on a case - by - case basis , but members also enacted some measures seeking more control over u.s. participation in future peacekeeping actions wherever they might occur .

the defense appropriations act for fy1994 stated the sense of congress that funds should not be expended for u.s. armed forces serving under u.n. security council actions unless the president consults with congress at least 15 days prior to deployment and not later than 48 hours after such deployment , except for humanitarian operations .

the defense authorization act for fy1994 required a report to congress by april 1 , 1994 , including discussion of the requirement of congressional approval for participation of u.s. armed forces in multinational peacekeeping missions , proposals to conclude military agreements with the u.n. security council under article 43 of the u.n. charter , and the applicability of the war powers resolution and the u.n .

participation act .

in 1994 and 1995 , congress attempted to gain a greater role in u.n. and other peacekeeping operations through authorization and appropriation legislation .

a major element of the house republicans' contract with america , h.r .

7 , would have placed notable constraints on presidential authority to commit u.s. forces to international peacekeeping operations .

senator dole's s. 5 , the peace powers act , introduced in january 1995 , would have also placed greater legislative controls on such operations .

general and specific funding restrictions and presidential reporting requirements were passed for peacekeeping operations underway or in prospect .

some of these legislative enactments led to presidential vetoes .

these representative legislative actions are reviewed below as they apply to given cases .

after four decades in existence , controversy continues over the war powers resolution and its effectiveness and appropriateness as a system for maintaining a congressional role in the use of armed forces in conflict .

one view is that the war powers resolution is basically sound and does not need amendment .

those who hold this opinion believe it has brought about better communication between the two branches in times of crisis , and has given congress a vehicle by which it can act when a majority of members wish to do so .

the resolution served as a restraint on the use of armed forces by the president in some cases because of awareness that certain actions might invoke its provisions .

for example , the threat of invoking the war powers resolution may have been helpful in getting u.s. forces out of grenada , in keeping the number of military advisers in el salvador limited to 55 , and in prodding congress to take a stand on authorizing the war against iraq .

a contrary view is that the war powers resolution is an inappropriate instrument that restricts the president's effectiveness in foreign policy and should be repealed .

those with this perspective believe that the basic premise of the war powers resolution is wrong because in it , congress attempts excessive control of the deployment of u.s. military forces , encroaching on the responsibility of the president .

supporters of repeal contend that the president needs more flexibility in the conduct of foreign policy and that the time limitation in the war powers resolution is unconstitutional and impractical .

some holding this view contend that congress has always had the power , through appropriations and general lawmaking , to inquire into , support , limit , or prohibit specific uses of u.s. armed forces if there is majority support .

the war powers resolution does not fundamentally change this equation , it is argued , but it complicates action , misleads military opponents , and diverts attention from key policy questions .

a third view is that the war powers resolution has not been adequate to accomplish its objectives and needs to be strengthened or reshaped .

proponents of this view assert that presidents have continued to introduce u.s. armed forces into hostilities without consulting congress and without congressional authorization .

presidents have cited section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) on only one occasion — mayaguez — and by the time the action was reported , it was virtually over .

holders of this third view have proposed various types of amendments to the war powers resolution .

these include returning to the version originally passed by the senate , establishing a congressional consultation group , adding a cutoff of funds , and providing for judicial review .

a general discussion of these categories of possible changes follows .

in 1977 , senator thomas eagleton proposed that the war powers resolution return to the original language of the version passed by the senate , and this proposal has been made several times since .

this would require prior congressional authorization for the introduction of forces into conflict abroad without a declaration of war except to respond to or forestall an armed attack against the united states or its forces or to protect u.s. citizens while evacuating them .

the amendment would eliminate the construction that the president has 60 to 90 days in which he can militarily act without authorization .

opponents fear the exceptions to forestall attacks or rescue american citizens abroad would serve as a blanket authorization and might be abused , yet might not allow the needed speed of action and provide adequate flexibility in other circumstances .

another proposal is to shorten the time period that the president could maintain forces in hostile situations abroad without congressional authorization from 60 to 30 days , or eliminate it altogether .

some proponents of this amendment contend the current war powers resolution gives the president 60 to 90 days to do as he chooses and that this provides too much opportunity for mischief or irreversible action .

the original senate version provided that the use of armed forces in hostilities or imminent hostilities in any of the emergency situations could not be sustained beyond 30 days without specific congressional authorization , extendable by the president upon certification of necessity for safe disengagement .

opponents of this and related measures argue that they induce military opponents to adopt strategies to win given conflicts in congress that they could not win in the field over time .

the war powers resolution has an automatic requirement for withdrawal of troops 60 days after the president submits a section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) report .

some members of congress favor replacing this provision with expedited procedures for a joint resolution to authorize the action or require disengagement .

one of the main executive branch objections to the war powers resolution has been that the withdrawal requirement could be triggered by congressional inaction , and that adversaries can simply wait out the 60 days .

by providing for withdrawal by joint resolution , this amendment would also deal with the provision for withdrawal by concurrent resolution , under a cloud because of the chadha decision .

on the other hand , a joint resolution requiring disengagement could be vetoed by the president and thus would require a two - thirds majority vote in both houses for enactment .

some proposals call for prohibiting the obligation or expenditure of funds for any use of u.s. armed forces in violation of the war powers resolution or laws passed under it except for the purpose of removing troops .

congress could enforce this provision by refusing to appropriate further funds to continue the military action .

this has always been the case , some contend , and would not work because congress would remain reluctant to withhold financial support for u.s. armed forces once they were abroad .

many proposed amendments eliminate section 5 ( c ) providing that u.s. forces engaged in hostilities abroad without congressional authorization are to be removed if congress so directs by concurrent resolution , and section 7 providing priority procedures for a concurrent resolution .

those who hold this view contend the concurrent resolution section is invalid because of the chadha decision .

several proposals call for new and more detailed priority procedures for joint resolutions introduced under the war powers resolution .

these would apply to joint resolutions either authorizing a military action or calling for the withdrawal of forces , and to congressional action to sustain or override a presidential veto of the joint resolution .

several proposed amendments have focused on improving consultation under the war powers resolution , particularly by establishing a specific consultation group in congress for this purpose .

senators byrd , nunn , warner , and mitchell have proposed the president regularly consult with an initial group of 6 members — the majority and minority leaders of both chambers plus the speaker of the house and president pro tempore of the senate .

upon a request from a majority of this core group , the president is to consult with a permanent consultative group of 18 members consisting of the leadership and the ranking and minority members of the committees on foreign relations , armed services , and intelligence .

the permanent consultative group would also be able to determine that the president should have reported an introduction of forces and to introduce a joint resolution of authorization or withdrawal that would receive expedited procedures .

other members have favored a consultation group , but consider that amendment of the war powers resolution is not required for congress to designate such a group .

on october 28 , 1993 , house foreign affairs chairman lee hamilton introduced h.r .

3405 to establish a standing consultative group .

its purpose would be to facilitate improved interaction between the executive branch and congress on the use of u.s. military forces abroad , including under the war powers resolution or united nations auspices .

members of the consultative group would be appointed by the speaker of the house and the majority leader of the senate , after consultation with the minority leaders .

the group would include majority and minority representatives of the leadership and the committees on foreign policy , armed services , intelligence , and appropriations .

another proposal would attempt to improve consultation by broadening the instances in which the president is required to consult .

this proposal would cover all situations in which a president is required to report , rather than only circumstances that invoke the time limitation , as is now the case .

proposals have been made that any member of congress may bring an action in the united states district court for the district of columbia for judgment and injunctive relief on the grounds that the president or the u.s. armed forces have not complied with any provision of the war powers resolution .

the intent of this legislation is to give standing to members to assert the interest of the house or senate , but whether it would impel courts to exercise jurisdiction is uncertain .

most recent federal court decisions have rejected war powers lawsuits by congressional litigants on the grounds they lacked standing to sue .

proposals have also called for the court not to decline to make a determination on the merits , on the grounds that the issue of compliance is a political question or otherwise nonjusticiable ; to accord expedited consideration to the matter ; and to prescribe judicial remedies including that the president submit a report or remove armed forces from a situation .

other proposals would construct a hostilities act or use of force act and repeal the war powers resolution .

a possible objection to invoking the war powers resolution is reluctance to escalate international tension by implying that a situation is war .

some would see this as a step in the wrong direction ; in the korean and vietnam conflicts , some contend , it was self - deceptive and ultimately impractical not to recognize hostilities of that magnitude as war and bring to bear the constitutional provision giving congress the power to declare war .

with the increase in united nations actions since the end of the cold war , the question has been raised whether the war powers resolution should be amended to facilitate or restrain the president from supplying forces for u.n. actions without congressional approval .

alternatively , the united nations participation act might be amended , or new legislation enacted , to specify how the war powers resolution is to be applied , and whether the approval of congress would be required only for an initial framework agreement on providing forces to the united nations , or whether congress would be required to approve an agreement to supply forces in specified situations , particularly for u.n. peacekeeping operations .

appendix a .

instances reported under the war powers resolution this appendix lists reports presidents have made to congress through early 2017 as the result of the war powers resolution .

each entry contains the president's reference to the war powers resolution .

the reports generally cite the president's authority to conduct foreign relations and as commander in chief ; each entry indicates any additional legislative authority a president cites for his action .

several of the reports listed for the period since 1991 , in particular , are reports regarding ongoing operations previously reported by the president , rather than completely new instances of use of the u.s. military overseas .

 ( 1 ) danang , vietnam .

on april 4 , 1975 , president ford reported the use of naval vessels , helicopters , and marines to transport refugees from danang and other seaports to safer areas in vietnam .

his report mentioned section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the war powers resolution and authorization in the foreign assistance act of 1961 for humanitarian assistance to refugees suffering from the hostilities in south vietnam .

monroe leigh , legal adviser to the department of state , testified later that the president "advised the members of the senate and house leadership that a severe emergency existed in the coastal communities of south vietnam and that he was directing american naval transports and contract vessels to assist in the evacuation of refugees from coastal seaports. .

 ( 2 ) cambodia .

on april 12 , 1975 , president ford reported the use of ground combat marines , helicopters , and supporting tactical air elements to assist with the evacuation of u.s. nationals from cambodia .

the report took note of both section 4 and section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the war powers resolution .

on april 3 , 1975 , the day the president authorized the ambassador to evacuate the american staff , he directed that the leaders of the senate and house be advised of the general plan of evacuation .

on april 11 , the day he ordered the final evacuation , president ford again directed that congressional leaders be notified .

 ( 3 ) vietnam .

on april 30 , 1975 , president ford reported the use of helicopters , marines , and fighter aircraft to aid in the evacuation of u.s. citizens and others from south vietnam .

the report took note of section 4 of the war powers resolution .

on april 10 , the president had asked congress to clarify its limitation on the use of forces in vietnam to insure evacuation of u.s. citizens and to cover some vietnamese nationals , but legislation to this effect was not completed .

on april 28 , the president directed that congressional leaders be notified that the final phase of the evacuation of saigon would be carried out by military forces within the next few hours .

 ( 4 ) mayaguez .

on may 15 , 1975 , president ford reported that he had ordered u.s. military forces to rescue the crew of and retake the ship mayaguez that had been seized by cambodian naval patrol boats on may 12 , that the ship had been retaken , and that the withdrawal of the forces had been undertaken .

the report took note of section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the war powers resolution .

on may 13 , administration aides contacted 10 members from the house and 11 senators regarding the military measures directed by the president .

 ( 5 ) iran .

on april 26 , 1980 , president carter reported the use of six aircraft and eight helicopters in an unsuccessful attempt of april 24 to rescue the american hostages in iran .

the report was submitted "consistent with the reporting provision" of the war powers resolution .

president carter said the united states was acting in accordance with its right under article 51 of the united nations charter to protect and rescue its citizens where the government of the territory in which they are located is unable or unwilling to protect them .

the administration did not inform congressional leaders of the plan on grounds that consultation could endanger the success of the mission .

 ( 6 ) sinai .

the united states , egypt , and israel signed an executive agreement on august 3 , 1981 , outlining u.s. participation in a multinational force and observers unit to function as a peacekeeping force in the sinai after israel withdrew its forces .

in anticipation of this accord , on july 21 , 1981 , president reagan requested congressional authorization for u.s. participation .

congress authorized president reagan to deploy military personnel to the sinai in the multinational force and observers participation resolution , p.l .

97-132 , signed december 29 , 1981 .

on march 19 , 1982 , president reagan reported the deployment of military personnel and equipment to the multinational force and observers in the sinai .

the president said the report was provided "consistent with section 4 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the war powers resolution" and cited the multinational force and observers participation resolution .

 ( 7 ) lebanon .

on august 24 , 1982 , president reagan reported the dispatch of 800 marines to serve in the multinational force to assist in the withdrawal of members of the palestine liberation force from lebanon .

the report was provided "consistent with" but did not cite any specific provision of the war powers resolution .

president reagan had begun discussions with congressional leaders on july 6 , 1982 , after the plan had been publicly announced , and after leaks in the israeli press indicated that he had approved the plan on july 2 .

 ( 8 ) lebanon .

on september 29 , 1982 , president reagan reported the deployment of 1,200 marines to serve in a temporary multinational force to facilitate the restoration of lebanese government sovereignty .

he said the report was being submitted "consistent with the war powers resolution. .

on this second multinational force in lebanon there was a considerable amount of negotiation between the executive branch and congress , but most of it occurred after the decision to participate had been made and the marines were in lebanon .

 ( 9 ) chad .

on august 8 , 1983 , president reagan reported the deployment of two awacs electronic surveillance planes and eight f - 15 fighter planes and ground logistical support forces to sudan to assist chad and other friendly governments helping chad against libyan and rebel forces .

he said the report was being submitted consistent with section 4 of the war powers resolution .

on august 23 , 1983 , a state department spokesman announced that the planes were being withdrawn .

 ( 10 ) lebanon .

on august 30 , 1983 , after the marines participating in the multinational force in lebanon were fired upon and two were killed , president reagan submitted a report "consistent with section 4 of the war powers resolution. .

in p.l .

98-119 , the multinational force in lebanon resolution , signed october 12 , 1983 , congress determined section 4 ( a ) had become operative on august 29 , 1983 , and authorized the forces to remain for 18 months .

 ( 11 ) grenada .

on october 25 , 1983 , president reagan reported that u.s. army and marine personnel had begun landing in grenada to join collective security forces of the organization of eastern caribbean states in assisting in the restoration of law and order in grenada and to facilitate the protection and evacuation of u.s. citizens .

he submitted the report "consistent with the war powers resolution. .

president reagan met with several congressional leaders at 8 p.m. on october 24 .

this was after the directive ordering the landing had been signed at 6 p.m. , but before the actual invasion that began at 5:30 a.m. , october 25 .

 ( 12 ) libya .

on march 26 , 1986 , president reagan reported ( without any mention of the war powers resolution ) that , on march 24 and 25 , u.s. forces conducting freedom of navigation exercises in the gulf of sidra had been attacked by libyan missiles .

in response , the united states fired missiles at libyan vessels and at sirte , the missile site .

 ( 13 ) libya .

on april 16 , 1986 , president reagan reported , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on april 14 u.s. air and naval forces had conducted bombing strikes on terrorist facilities and military installations in libya .

president reagan had invited approximately a dozen congressional leaders to the white house at about 4 p.m. on april 14 and discussed the situation until 6 p.m .

he indicated that he had ordered the bombing raid and that the aircraft from the united kingdom were on their way to libya and would reach their targets about 7 p.m. ( 14 ) persian gulf .

on september 23 , 1987 , president reagan reported that , on september 21 , two u.s. helicopters had fired on an iranian landing craft observed laying mines in the gulf .

the president said that while mindful of legislative - executive differences on the interpretation and constitutionality of certain provisions of the war powers resolution , he was reporting in a spirit of mutual cooperation .

 ( 15 ) persian gulf .

on october 10 , 1987 , president reagan reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that , on october 8 , three u.s. helicopters were fired upon by small iranian naval vessels and the helicopters returned fire and sank one of the vessels .

 ( 16 ) persian gulf .

on october 20 , 1987 , president reagan reported an attack by an iranian silkworm missile against the u.s. - flag tanker sea isle city on october 15 and u.s. destruction , on october 19 , of the iranian rashadat armed platform used to support attacks and mine - laying operations .

the report was submitted "consistent with the war powers resolution. .

 ( 17 ) persian gulf .

on april 19 , 1988 , president reagan reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that in response to the u.s.s .

samuel b. roberts striking a mine on april 14 , u.s. armed forces attacked and "neutralized" two iranian oil platforms on april 18 and , after further iranian attacks , damaged or sank iranian vessels .

the president called the actions "necessary and proportionate. .

prior to this action , the president met with congressional leaders .

 ( 18 ) persian gulf .

on july 4 , 1988 , president reagan reported that on july 3 the uss vincennes and uss elmer montgomery fired upon approaching iranian small craft , sinking two .

firing in self - defense at what it believed to be a hostile iranian military aircraft , the vincennes had shot down an iranian civilian airliner .

the president expressed deep regret .

the report was submitted "consistent with the war powers resolution. .

 ( 19 ) persian gulf .

on july 14 , 1988 , president reagan reported that , on july 12 , two u.s. helicopters , responding to a distress call from a japanese - owned panamanian tanker , were fired at by two small iranian boats and returned the fire .

the report was submitted "consistent with the war powers resolution. .

 ( 20 ) philippines .

on december 2 , 1989 , president george h. w. bush submitted a report to congressional leaders "consistent with" the war powers resolution , describing assistance of combat air patrols to help the aquino government in the philippines restore order and to protect american lives .

after the planes had taken off from clark air base to provide air cover , vice president quayle and other officials informed congressional leaders .

on december 7 , house foreign affairs committee chairman dante fascell wrote president bush expressing his concern for the lack of advance consultation .

in reply , on february 10 , 1990 , national security adviser brent scowcroft wrote chairman fascell that the president was "committed to consultations with congress prior to deployments of u.s .

forces into actual or imminent hostilities in all instances where such consultations are possible .

in this instance , the nature of the rapidly evolving situation required an extremely rapid decision very late at night and consultation was simply not an option. .

 ( 21 ) panama .

on december 21 , 1989 , president george h. w. bush reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had ordered u.s. military forces to panama to protect the lives of american citizens and bring general noriega to justice .

by february 13 , 1990 , all the invasion forces had been withdrawn .

president bush informed several congressional leaders of the approaching invasion of panama at 6 p.m. on december 19 , 1989 .

this was after the decision to take action was made , but before the operation actually began at 1:00 a.m. , december 20 .

 ( 22 ) liberia .

on august 6 , 1990 , president george h. w. bush reported to congress that following discussions with congressional leaders , a reinforced rifle company had been sent to provide additional security to the u.s. embassy in monrovia and helicopter teams had evacuated u.s. citizens from liberia .

the report did not mention the war powers resolution or cite any authority .

 ( 23 ) iraq .

on august 9 , 1990 , president george h. w. bush reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had ordered the forward deployment of substantial elements of the u.s. armed forces into the persian gulf region to help defend saudi arabia after the invasion of kuwait by iraq .

the bush administration notified congressional leaders that it was deploying u.s. troops to saudi arabia on august 7 , the date of the deployment .

after the forces had been deployed , president bush held several meetings with congressional leaders and members of relevant committees , and committees held hearings to discuss the situation .

 ( 24 ) iraq .

on november 16 , 1990 , president george h. w. bush reported , without mention of the war powers resolution but referring to the august 9 letter , the continued buildup to ensure "an adequate offensive military option. .

just prior to adjournment , senate majority leader mitchell and speaker foley designated members to form a consultation group , and the president held meetings with the group on some occasions , but he did not consult the members in advance on the major buildup of forces in the persian gulf area announced november 8 .

 ( 25 ) iraq .

on january 18 , 1991 , president george h. w. bush reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had directed u.s. armed forces to commence combat operations on january 16 against iraqi forces and military targets in iraq and kuwait .

on january 12 , congress had passed the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution ( p.l .

102-1 ) , which stated it was the specific statutory authorization required by the war powers resolution .

p.l .

102-1 required the president to submit a report to the congress at least once every 60 days on the status of efforts to obtain compliance by iraq with the u.n. security council resolution , and presidents submitted subsequent reports on military actions in iraq "consistent with" p.l .

102-1 .

an exception is report submitted june 28 , 1993 , described below .

 ( 26 ) somalia .

on december 10 , 1992 , president george h. w. bush reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. armed forces had entered somalia on december 8 in response to a humanitarian crisis and a u.n. security council resolution determining that the situation constituted a threat to international peace .

he included as authority applicable treaties and laws , and said he had also taken into account views expressed in h.con.res .

370 , s.con.res .

132 , and the horn of africa recovery and food security act , p.l .

102-274 .

on december 4 , the day the president ordered the forces deployed , he briefed a number of congressional leaders on the action .

 ( 27 ) bosnia .

on april 13 , 1993 , president clinton reported "consistent with section 4 of the war powers resolution" that u.s. forces were participating in a nato air action to enforce a u.n. ban on all unauthorized military flights over bosnia - hercegovina , pursuant to his authority as commander in chief .

later , on april 27 , president clinton consulted with about two dozen congressional leaders on potential further action .

 ( 28 ) somalia .

on june 10 , 1993 , president clinton reported that in response to attacks against u.n. forces in somalia by a factional leader , the u.s. quick reaction force in the area had participated in military action to quell the violence .

he said the report was "consistent with the war powers resolution , in light of the passage of 6 months since president bush's initial report...." he said the action was in accordance with applicable treaties and laws , and said the deployment was consistent with s.j.res .

45 as adopted by the senate and amended by the house .

 ( the senate did not act on the house amendment , so congress did not take final action on s.j.res .

45 . ) .

 ( 29 ) iraq .

on june 28 , 1993 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that on june 26 u.s. naval forces had launched missiles against the iraqi intelligence service's headquarters in baghdad in response to an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate former president bush in kuwait in april 1993 .

 ( 30 ) macedonia .

on july 9 , 1993 , president clinton reported "consistent with section 4 of the war powers resolution" the deployment of approximately 350 u.s. armed forces to macedonia to participate in the u.n. protection force to help maintain stability in the area of former yugoslavia .

he said the deployment was directed in accordance with section 7 of the united nations participation act .

 ( 31 ) bosnia .

on october 13 , 1993 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. military forces continued to support enforcement of the u.n. no - fly zone in bosnia , noting that more than 50 u.s. aircraft were now available for nato efforts in this regard .

 ( 32 ) haiti .

on october 20 , 1993 , president clinton submitted a report "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. ships had begun to enforce a u.n. embargo against haiti .

 ( 33 ) macedonia .

on january 8 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that approximately 300 members of a reinforced company team ( rct ) of the u.s. army's 3 rd infantry division ( mechanized ) had assumed a peacekeeping role in macedonia as part of the united nations protection force ( unprofor ) on january 6 , 1994 .

 ( 34 ) bosnia .

on february 17 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the united states had expanded its participation in united nations and nato efforts to reach a peaceful solution in former yugoslavia and that 60 u.s. aircraft were available for participation in the authorized nato missions .

 ( 35 ) bosnia .

on march 1 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with" the war powers resolution that on february 28 u.s. planes patrolling the "no - fly zone" in former yugoslavia under the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) shot down 4 serbian galeb planes .

 ( 36 ) bosnia .

on april 12 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with" the war powers resolution that on april 10 and 11 , u.s. warplanes under nato command had fired against bosnian serb forces shelling the "safe" city of gorazde .

 ( 37 ) rwanda .

on april 12 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with" the war powers resolution that combat - equipped u.s. military forces had been deployed to burundi to conduct possible noncombatant evacuation operations of u.s. citizens and other third - country nationals from rwanda , where widespread fighting had broken out .

 ( 38 ) macedonia .

on april 19 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the u.s. contingent in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia had been augmented by a reinforced company of 200 personnel .

 ( 39 ) haiti .

on april 20 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. naval forces had continued enforcement in the waters around haiti and that 712 vessels had been boarded .

 ( 40 ) bosnia .

on august 22 , 1994 , president clinton reported the use on august 5 of u.s. aircraft under nato to attack bosnian serb heavy weapons in the sarajevo heavy weapons exclusion zone upon request of the u.n. protection forces .

he did not cite the war powers resolution but referred to the april 12 report that cited the war powers resolution .

 ( 41 ) haiti .

on september 21 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" the deployment of 1,500 troops to haiti to restore democracy in haiti .

the troop level was subsequently increased to 20,000 .

 ( 42 ) bosnia .

on november 22 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" the use of u.s. combat aircraft on november 21 , 1994 , under nato to attack bases used by serbs to attack the town of bihac in bosnia .

 ( 43 ) macedonia .

on december 22 , 1994 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the u.s. army contingent in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia continued its peacekeeping mission and that the current contingent would soon be replaced by about 500 soldiers from the 3 rd battalion , 5 th cavalry regiment , 1 st armored division from kirchgons , germany .

 ( 44 ) somalia .

on march 1 , 1995 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that on february 27 , 1995 , 1,800 combat - equipped u.s. armed forces personnel began deployment into mogadishu , somalia , to assist in the withdrawal of u.n. forces assigned there to the united nations operation in somalia ( unosom ii ) .

 ( 45 ) haiti .

on march 21 , 1995 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. military forces in haiti as part of a u.n .

multinational force had been reduced to just under 5,300 personnel .

he noted that as of march 31 , 1995 , approximately 2,500 u.s. personnel would remain in haiti as part of the u.n. mission in haiti unmih ) .

 ( 46 ) bosnia .

on may 24 , 1995 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. combat - equipped fighter aircraft and other aircraft continued to contribute to nato's enforcement of the no - fly zone in airspace over bosnia - herzegovina .

u.s. aircraft , he noted , are also available for close air support of u.n. forces in croatia .

roughly 500 u.s. soldiers continue to be deployed in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia as part of the u.n. preventive deployment force ( unpredep ) .

u.s. forces continue to support u.n. refugee and embargo operations in this region .

 ( 47 ) bosnia .

on september 1 , 1995 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution," that "u.s. combat and support aircraft" had been used beginning on august 29 , 1995 , in a series of nato air strikes against bosnian serb army ( bsa ) forces in bosnia - herzegovina that were threatening the u.n. - declared safe areas of sarajevo , tuzla , and gorazde. .

he noted that during the first day of operations , "some 300 sorties were flown against 23 targets in the vicinity of sarajevo , tuzla , goradzde and mostar. .

 ( 48 ) haiti .

on september 21 , 1995 , president clinton reported "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the united states had 2,400 military personnel in haiti as participants in the u.n. mission in haiti ( unmih ) .

in addition , 260 u.s. military personnel are assigned to the u.s. support group haiti .

 ( 49 ) bosnia .

on december 6 , 1995 , president clinton notified congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that he had "ordered the deployment of approximately 1,500 u.s. military personnel to bosnia and herzegovina and croatia as part of a nato 'enabling force' to lay the groundwork for the prompt and safe deployment of the nato - led implementation force ( ifor ) ," which would be used to implement the bosnian peace agreement after its signing .

the president also noted that he had authorized deployment of roughly 3,000 other u.s. military personnel to hungary , italy , and croatia to establish infrastructure for the enabling force and the ifor .

 ( 50 ) bosnia .

on december 21 , 1995 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had ordered the deployment of approximately 20,000 u.s. military personnel to participate in the nato - led implementation force ( ifor ) in the republic of bosnia - herzegovina , and approximately 5,000 u.s. military personnel would be deployed in other former yugoslav states , primarily in croatia .

in addition , about 7,000 u.s. support forces would be deployed to hungary , italy and croatia and other regional states in support of ifor's mission .

the president ordered participation of u.s. forces "pursuant to" his "constitutional authority to conduct the foreign relations of the united states and as commander - in - chief and chief executive. .

 ( 51 ) haiti .

on march 21 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that beginning in january 1996 there had been a "phased reduction" in the number of united states personnel assigned to the united nations mission in haiti ( unmih ) .

as of march 21 , 309 u.s. personnel remained a part of unmih .

these u.s. forces were "equipped for combat. .

 ( 52 ) liberia .

on april 11 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that on april 9 , 1996 , due to the "deterioration of the security situation and the resulting threat to american citizens" in liberia he had ordered u.s. military forces to evacuate from that country "private u.s. citizens and certain third - country nationals who had taken refuge in the u.s. embassy compound...." ( 53 ) liberia .

on may 20 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution" of the continued deployment of u.s. military forces in liberia to evacuate both american citizens and other foreign personnel , and to respond to various isolated "attacks on the american embassy complex" in liberia .

the president noted that the deployment of u.s. forces would continue until there was no longer any need for enhanced security at the embassy and a requirement to maintain an evacuation capability in the country .

 ( 54 ) central african republic .

on may 23 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution" of the deployment of u.s. military personnel to bangui , central african republic , to conduct the evacuation from that country of "private u.s. citizens and certain u.s. government employees," and to provide "enhanced security" for the american embassy in bangui .

 ( 55 ) bosnia .

on june 21 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution" that united states forces totaling about 17,000 remain deployed in bosnia "under nato operational command and control" as part of the nato implementation force ( ifor ) .

in addition , about 5,500 u.s. military personnel are deployed in hungary , italy and croatia , and other regional states to provide "logistical and other support to ifor. .

the president noted that it was the intention that ifor would complete the withdrawal of all troops in the weeks after december 20 , 1996 , on a schedule "set by nato commanders consistent with the safety of troops and the logistical requirements for an orderly withdrawal. .

he also noted that a u.s. army contingent ( of about 500 u.s. soldiers ) remains in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia as part of the united nations preventive deployment force ( unpredep ) .

 ( 56 ) rwanda and zaire .

on december 2 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that in support of the humanitarian efforts of the united nations regarding refugees in rwanda and the great lakes region of eastern zaire , he had authorized the use of u.s. personnel and aircraft , including ac - 130u planes to help in surveying the region in support of humanitarian operations , although fighting still was occurring in the area , and u.s. aircraft had been subject to fire when on flight duty .

 ( 57 ) bosnia .

on december 20 , 1996 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that he had authorized u.s. participation in an ifor follow - on force in bosnia , known as sfor ( stabilization force ) , under nato command .

the president said the u.s. forces contribution to sfor was to be "about 8,500" personnel whose primary mission was to deter or prevent a resumption of hostilities or new threats to peace in bosnia .

sfor's duration was bosnia is expected to be 18 months , with progressive reductions and eventual withdrawal .

 ( 58 ) albania .

on march 15 , 1997 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on march 13 , 1997 , he had utilized u.s. military forces to evacuate certain u.s. government employees and private u.s. citizens from tirana , albania , and to enhance security for the u.s. embassy in that city .

 ( 59 ) congo and gabon .

on march 27 , 1997 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on march 25 , 1997 , a standby evacuation force of u.s. military personnel had been deployed to congo and gabon to provide enhanced security for american private citizens , government employees and selected third country nationals in zaire , and be available for any necessary evacuation operation .

 ( 60 ) sierra leone .

on may 30 , 1997 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on may 29 and may 30 , 1997 , u.s. military personnel were deployed to freetown , sierra leone to prepare for and undertake the evacuation of certain u.s. government employees and private u.s. citizens .

 ( 61 ) bosnia .

on june 20 , 1997 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that u.s. armed forces continued to support peacekeeping operations in bosnia and other states in the region in support of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

he reported that most u.s. military personnel then involved in sfor were in bosnia , near tuzla , and about 2,800 u.s. troops were deployed in hungary , croatia , italy , and other regional states to provide logistics and other support to sfor .

a u.s. army contingent of about 500 also remained deployed in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia as part of the u.n. preventative deployment force ( unpredep ) .

 ( 62 ) cambodia .

on july 11 , 1997 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that in an effort to ensure the security of american citizens in cambodia during a period of domestic conflict there , he had deployed a task force of about 550 u.s. military personnel to utapao air base in thailand .

these personnel were to be available for possible emergency evacuation operations in cambodia .

 ( 63 ) bosnia .

on december 19 , 1997 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that he intended "in principle" to have the united states participate in a security presence in bosnia when the nato sfor contingent withdrew in the summer of 1998 .

 ( 64 ) guinea - bissau .

on june 12 , 1998 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that , on june 10 , 1998 , in response to an army mutiny in guinea - bissau endangering the u.s. embassy and u.s. government employees and citizens in that country , he had deployed a standby evacuation force of u.s. military personnel to dakar , senegal , to remove such individuals , as well as selected third country nationals , from the city of bissau .

 ( 65 ) bosnia .

on june 19 , 1998 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" regarding activities in the last six months of combat - equipped u.s. forces in support of nato's sfor in bosnia and surrounding areas of former yugoslavia .

 ( 66 ) kenya and tanzania .

on august 10 , 1998 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had deployed , on august 7 , 1998 , a joint task force of u.s. military personnel to nairobi , kenya to coordinate the medical and disaster assistance related to the bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania .

he also reported that teams of 50-100 security personnel had arrived in nairobi , kenya and dar es salaam , tanzania to enhance the security of the u.s. embassies and citizens there .

 ( 67 ) albania .

on august 18 , 1998 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that he had , on august 16 , 1998 , deployed 200 u.s. marines and 10 navy seals to the u.s. embassy compound in tirana , albania to enhance security against reported threats against u.s. personnel .

 ( 68 ) afghanistan and sudan .

on august 21 , 1998 , by letter , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had authorized airstrikes on august 20 th against camps and installations in afghanistan and sudan used by the osama bin laden terrorist organization .

the president did so based on what he termed convincing information that the bin laden organization was responsible for the bombings , on august 7 , 1998 , of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania .

 ( 69 ) liberia .

on september 29 , 1998 , by letter , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had deployed a stand - by response and evacuation force to liberia to augment the security force at the u.s. embassy in monrovia , and to provide for a rapid evacuation capability , as needed , to remove u.s. citizens and government personnel from the country .

 ( 70 ) bosnia .

on january 19 , 1999 , by letter , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that pursuant to his authority as commander in chief he was continuing to authorize the use of combat - equipped u.s. armed forces to bosnia and other states in the region to participate in and support the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

he noted that u.s. sfor military personnel totaled about 6,900 , with about 2,300 u.s. military personnel deployed to hungary , croatia , italy and other regional states .

also some 350 u.s. military personnel remain deployed in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia ( fyrom ) as part of the un preventive deployment force ( unpredep ) .

 ( 71 ) kenya .

on february 25 , 1999 , president clinton submitted a supplemental report to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" describing the continuing deployment of u.s. military personnel in kenya to provide continuing security for u.s. embassy and american citizens in nairobi in the aftermath of the terrorist bombing there .

 ( 72 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on march 26 , 1999 , president clinton notified congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on march 24 , 1999 , u.s. military forces , at his direction and acting jointly with nato allies , had commenced air strikes against yugoslavia in response to the yugoslav government's campaign of violence and repression against the ethnic albanian population in kosovo .

 ( 73 ) yugoslavia / albania .

on april 7 , 1999 , president clinton notified congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that he had ordered additional u.s. military forces to albania , including rotary wing aircraft , artillery , and tactical missiles systems to enhance nato's ability to conduct effective air operations in yugoslavia .

about 2,500 soldiers and aviators are to be deployed as part of this task force .

 ( 74 ) yugoslavia / albania .

on may 25 , 1999 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had directed "deployment of additional aircraft and forces to support nato's ongoing efforts [against yugoslavia] , including several thousand additional u.s. armed forces personnel to albania in support of the deep strike force located there. .

he also directed that additional u.s. forces be deployed to the region to assist in "humanitarian operations. .

 ( 75 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on june 12 , 1999 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that he had directed the deployment of about "7,000 u.s. military personnel as the u.s. contribution to the approximately 50,000-member , nato - led security force ( kfor ) " being assembled in kosovo .

he also noted that about "1,500 u.s. military personnel , under separate u.s. command and control , will deploy to other countries in the region , as our national support element , in support of kfor. .

 ( 76 ) bosnia .

on july 19 , 1999 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that about 6,200 u.s. military personnel were continuing to participate in the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) in bosnia , and that another 2,200 personnel were supporting sfor operations from hungary , croatia , and italy .

he also noted that u.s. military personnel remain in the former yugoslav republic of macedonia to support the international security presence in kosovo ( kfor ) .

 ( 77 ) east timor .

on october 8 , 1999 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had directed the deployment of a limited number of u.s. military forces to east timor to support the u.n. multinational force ( interfet ) aimed at restoring peace to east timor .

u.s. support had been limited initially to "communications , logistics , planning assistance and transportation. .

the president further noted that he had authorized deployment of the amphibious ship uss belleau wood , together with its helicopters and her complement of personnel from the 31 st marine expeditionary unit ( special operations capable ) ( meu soc ) to the east timor region , to provide helicopter airlift and search and rescue support to the multinational operation .

u.s. participation was anticipated to continue until the transition to a u.n. peacekeeping operation was complete .

 ( 78 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on december 15 , 1999 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that u.s. combat - equipped military personnel continued to serve as part of the nato - led security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

he noted that the american contribution to kfor in kosovo was "approximately 8,500 u.s. military personnel. .

u.s. forces were deployed in a sector centered around "urosevac in the eastern portion of kosovo. .

for u.s. kfor forces , "maintaining public security is a key task. .

other u.s. military personnel are deployed to other countries in the region to serve in administrative and logistics support roles for u.s. forces in kfor .

of these forces , about 1,500 u.s. military personnel are in macedonia and greece , and occasionally in albania .

 ( 79 ) bosnia .

on january 25 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the u.s. continued to provide combat - equipped u.s. armed forces to bosnia and herzegovina and other states in the region as part of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

the president noted that the u.s. force contribution was being reduced from "approximately 6,200 to 4,600 personnel," with the u.s. forces assigned to multinational division , north , centered around the city of tuzla .

he added that approximately 1,500 u.s. military personnel were deployed to hungary , croatia , and italy to provide "logistical and other support to sfor," and that u.s. forces continue to support sfor in "efforts to apprehend persons indicted for war crimes. .

 ( 80 ) east timor .

on february 25 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that he had authorized the participation of a small number of u.s. military personnel in support of the united nations transitional administration in east timor ( untaet ) , with a mandate to maintain law and order throughout east timor , facilitate establishment of an effective administration there , deliver humanitarian assistance , and support the building of self - government .

the president reported that the u.s. contingent was small: three military observers , and one judge advocate .

to facilitate and coordinate u.s. military activities in east timor , the president also authorized the deployment of a support group ( usget ) , consisting of 30 u.s. personnel .

u.s. personnel would be temporarily deployed to east timor , on a rotational basis , and through periodic ship visits , during which u.s. forces would conduct "humanitarian and assistance activities throughout east timor. .

rotational activities should continue through the summer of 2000 .

 ( 81 ) sierra leone .

on may 12 , 2000 , president clinton , "consistent with the war powers resolution" reported to congress that he had ordered a u.s. navy patrol craft to deploy to sierra leone to be ready to support evacuation operations from that country if needed .

he also authorized a u.s. c - 17 aircraft to deliver "ammunition , and other supplies and equipment" to sierra leone in support of united nations peacekeeping operations there .

 ( 82 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on june 16 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the u.s. was continuing to provide military personnel to the nato - led kfor security force in kosovo .

u.s. forces were numbered at 7,500 , but were scheduled to be reduced to 6,000 when ongoing troop rotations were completed .

u.s. forces in kosovo are assigned to a sector centered near gnjilane in eastern kosovo .

other u.s. military personnel are deployed to other countries to serve in administrative and logistics support roles , with approximately 1,000 u.s. personnel in macedonia , albania , and greece .

 ( 83 ) bosnia .

on july 25 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that combat - equipped u.s. military personnel continued to participate in the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) in bosnia and herzegovina , being deployed to bosnia , and other states in the region in support of peacekeeping efforts in former yugoslavia .

u.s. military personnel levels have been reduced from 6,200 to 4,600 .

apart from the forces in bosnia , approximately 1,000 u.s. personnel continue to be deployed in support roles in hungary , croatia , and italy .

 ( 84 ) east timor .

on august 25 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress," consistent with the war powers resolution," that the united states was contributing three military observers to the united nations transitional administration in east timor ( untaet ) that is charged by the un with restoring and maintaining peace and security there .

he also noted that the u.s. was maintaining a military presence in east timor separate from untaet , comprised of about 30 u.s. personnel who facilitate and coordinate u.s. military activities in east timor and rotational operations of u.s. forces there .

u.s. forces conduct humanitarian and civic assistance activities for east timor's citizens .

u.s. rotational presence operations in east timor were presently expected , the president said , to continue through december 2000 .

 ( 85 ) yemen .

on october 14 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on october 12 , 2000 , in the wake of an attack on the uss c ole in the port of aden , yemen , he had authorized deployment of about 45 military personnel from u.s .

naval forces central command to aden to provide "medical , security , and disaster response assistance. .

the president further reported that on october 13 , 2000 , about 50 u.s. military security personnel arrived in aden , and that additional "security elements" may be deployed to the area , to enhance the ability of the u.s. to ensure the security of the uss cole and the personnel responding to the incident .

in addition , two u.s. navy surface combatant vessels are operating in or near yemeni territorial waters to provide communications and other support , as required .

 ( 86 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on december 18 , 2000 , president clinton reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the united states was continuing to provide approximately 5,600 u.s. military personnel in support of peacekeeping efforts in kosovo as part of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

an additional 500 u.s. military personnel are deployed as the national support element in macedonia , with an occasional presence in albania and greece .

u.s. forces are assigned to a sector centered around gnjilane in the eastern portion of kosovo .

the president noted that the mission for these u.s. military forces is maintaining a safe and secure environment through conducting "security patrols in urban areas and in the countryside throughout their sector. .

 ( 87 ) bosnia .

on january 25 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that about 4,400 combat - equipped u.s. armed forces continued to be deployed in bosnia and herzegovina , and other regional states as part of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

most were based at tuzla in bosnia .

about 650 others were based in hungary , croatia , and italy , providing logistical and other support .

 ( 88 ) east timor .

on march 2 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the u. s. armed forces were continuing to support the united nations peacekeeping effort in east timor aimed at providing security and maintaining law and order in east timor , coordinating delivery of humanitarian assistance , and helping establish the basis for self - government in east timor .

the u.s. had three military observers attached to the united nations transitional administration in east timor ( untaet ) .

the united states also has a separate military presence , the u.s. support group east timor ( usget ) , of approximately 12 u.s. personnel , including a security detachment , which "facilitates and coordinates" u.s. military activities in east timor .

 ( 89 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on may 18 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the united states was continuing to provide approximately 6,000 u.s. military personnel in support of peacekeeping efforts in kosovo as part of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

an additional 500 u.s. military personnel are deployed as the national support element in macedonia , with an occasional presence in greece and albania .

u.s. forces in kosovo are assigned to a sector centered around gnjilane in the eastern portion .

president bush noted that the mission for these u.s. military forces is maintaining a safe and secure environment through conducting security patrols in urban areas and in the countryside through their sector .

 ( 90 ) bosnia .

on july 24 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," about 3,800 combat - equipped u.s. armed forces continued to be deployed in bosnia and herzegovina , and other regional states as part of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

most were based at tuzla in bosnia .

about 500 others were based in hungary , croatia , and italy , providing logistical and other support .

 ( 91 ) east timor .

on august 31 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the u. s. armed forces were continuing to support the united nations peacekeeping effort in east timor aimed at providing security and maintaining law and order in east timor , coordinating delivery of humanitarian assistance , and helping establish the basis for self - government in east timor .

the u.s. had three military observers attached to the united nations transitional administration in east timor ( untaet ) .

the united states also has a separate military presence , the u.s. support group east timor ( usget ) , of approximately 20 u.s. personnel , including a security detachment , which "facilitates and coordinates" u.s. military activities in east timor , as well as a rotational presence of u.s. forces through temporary deployments to east timor .

the president stated that u.s. forces would continue a presence through december 2001 , while options for a u.s. presence in 2002 are being reviewed , with the president's objective being redeployment of usget personnel , as circumstances permit .

 ( 92 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on september 24 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," and "senate joint resolution 23" that in response to terrorist attacks on the world trade center and the pentagon he had ordered the "deployment of various combat - equipped and combat support forces to a number of foreign nations in the central and pacific command areas of operations. .

the president noted in efforts to "prevent and deter terrorism" he might find it necessary to order additional forces into these and other areas of the world...." he stated that he could not now predict "the scope and duration of these deployments," nor the "actions necessary to counter the terrorist threat to the united states. .

 ( 93 ) afghanistan .

on october 9 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," and "senate joint resolution 23" that on october 7 , 2001 , u.s. armed forces "began combat action in afghanistan against al qaida terrorists and their taliban supporters. .

the president stated that he had directed this military action in response to the september 11 , 2001 , attacks on u.s. "territory , our citizens , and our way of life , and to the continuing threat of terrorist acts against the united states and our friends and allies. .

this military action was "part of our campaign against terrorism" and was "designed to disrupt the use of afghanistan as a terrorist base of operations. .

 ( 94 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on november 19 , 2001 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the united states was continuing to provide approximately 5,500 u.s. military personnel in support of peacekeeping efforts in kosovo as part of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

an additional 500 u.s. military personnel are deployed as the national support element in macedonia , with an occasional presence in greece and albania .

u.s. forces in kosovo are assigned to a sector centered around gnjilane in the eastern portion .

president bush noted that the mission for these u.s. military forces is maintaining a safe and secure environment through conducting security patrols in urban areas and in the countryside through their sector .

 ( 95 ) bosnia .

on january 21 , 2002 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that about 3,100 combat - equipped u.s. armed forces continued to be deployed in bosnia and herzegovina , and other regional states as part of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

most were based at tuzla in bosnia .

about 500 others were based in hungary , croatia , and italy , providing logistical and other support .

 ( 96 ) east timor .

on february 28 , 2002 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that u. s. armed forces were continuing to support the united nations peacekeeping effort in east timor aimed at providing security and maintaining law and order in east timor , coordinating delivery of humanitarian assistance , and helping establish the basis for self - government in east timor .

the u.s. had three military observers attached to the united nations transitional administration in east timor ( untaet ) .

the united states also has a separate military presence , the u.s. support group east timor ( usget ) , comprised of approximately 10 u.s. personnel , including a security detachment , which "facilitates and coordinates" u.s. military activities in east timor , as well as a rotational presence of u.s. forces through temporary deployments to east timor .

the president stated that u.s. forces would continue a presence through 2002 .

the president noted his objective was to gradually reduce the "rotational presence operations," and to redeploy usget personnel , as circumstances permitted .

 ( 97 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on march 20 , 2002 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," on u.s. efforts in the "global war on terrorism. .

he noted that the "heart of the al - qaeda training capability" had been "seriously degraded," and that the remainder of the taliban and the al - qaeda fighters were being "actively pursued and engaged by the u.s. , coalition and afghan forces. .

the united states was also conducting "maritime interception operations ... to locate and detain suspected al - qaeda or taliban leadership fleeing afghanistan by sea. .

at the philippine government's invitation , the president had ordered deployed "combat - equipped and combat support forces to train with , advise , and assist" the philippines' armed forces in enhancing their "existing counterterrorist capabilities. .

the strength of u.s. military forces working with the philippines was projected to be 600 personnel .

the president noted that he was "assessing options" for assisting other nations , including georgia and yemen , in enhancing their "counterterrorism capabilities , including training and equipping their armed forces. .

he stated that u.s. combat - equipped and combat support forces would be necessary for these efforts , if undertaken .

 ( 98 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on may 17 , 2002 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the u.s. military was continuing to support peacekeeping efforts of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

he noted that the current u.s. contribution was about 5,100 military personnel , with an additional 468 personnel in macedonia ; and an occasional presence in albania and greece .

 ( 99 ) bosnia .

on july 22 , 2002 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the u.s. military was continuing to support peacekeeping efforts of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) in bosnia and herzegovina and other regional states .

he noted that the current u.s. contribution was "approximately 2,400 personnel. .

most u.s. forces in bosnia and herzegovina are assigned to the multinational division , north headquartered in tuzla .

an additional 60 u.s. military personnel are deployed to hungary and croatia to provide logistical and other support .

 ( 100 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on september 20 , 2002 , president bush reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that u.s. "combat - equipped and combat support forces" have been deployed to the philippines since january 2002 to train with , assist and advise the philippines' armed forces in enhancing their "counterterrorist capabilities. .

he added that u.s. forces were conducting maritime interception operations in the central and european command areas to combat movement , arming , or financing of "international terrorists. .

he also noted that u.s. combat personnel had been deployed to georgia and yemen to help enhance the "counterterrorist capabilities" of their armed forces .

 ( 101 ) cote d'ivoire .

on september 26 , 2002 , president bush reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that in response to a rebellion in cote d'ivoire that he had on september 25 , 2002 , sent u.s. military personnel into cote d'ivoire to assist in the evacuation of american citizens and third country nationals from the city of bouake ; and otherwise assist in other evacuations as necessary .

 ( 102 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on november 15 , 2002 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the u.s. was continuing to deploy combat equipped military personnel as part of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

the u.s. had approximately 4,350 u.s. military personnel in kosovo , with an additional 266 military personnel in macedonia .

the u.s. also has an occasional presence in albania and greece , associated with the kfor mission .

 ( 103 ) bosnia .

on january 21 , 2003 , president george w. bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that about 1,800 u.s. armed forces personnel continued to be deployed in bosnia and herzegovina , and other regional states as part of the nato - led stabilization force ( sfor ) .

most were based at tuzla in bosnia .

about 80 others were based in hungary and croatia , providing logistical and other support .

 ( 104 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on march 20 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," as well as p.l .

107-40 , and "pursuant to" his authority as commander in chief , that he had continued a number of u.s. military operations globally in the war against terrorism .

these military operations included ongoing u.s. actions against al - qaeda fighters in afghanistan ; collaborative anti - terror operations with forces of pakistan in the pakistan / afghanistan border area ; "maritime interception operations on the high seas" in areas of responsibility of the central and european commands to prevent terrorist movement and other activities ; and military support for the armed forces of georgia and yemen in counter - terrorism operations .

 ( 105 ) war against iraq .

on march 21 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," as well as p.l .

102-1 and p.l .

107-243 , and "pursuant to" his authority as commander in chief , that he had "directed u.s. armed forces , operating with other coalition forces , to commence operations on march 19 , 2003 , against iraq. .

he further stated that it was not possible to know at present the duration of active combat operations or the scope necessary to accomplish the goals of the operation — "to disarm iraq in pursuit of peace , stability , and security both in the gulf region and in the united states. .

 ( 106 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on may 14 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that combat - equipped u.s. military personnel continued to be deployed as part of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

he noted that about 2,250 u.s. military personnel were deployed in kosovo , and additional military personnel operated , on occasion , from macedonia , albania , and greece in support of kfor operations .

 ( 107 ) liberia .

on june 9 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that on june 8 he had sent about 35 combat - equipped u.s. military personnel into monrovia , liberia , to augment u.s. embassy security forces , to aid in the possible evacuation of u.s. citizens if necessary .

the president also noted that he had sent about 34 combat - equipped u.s. military personnel to help secure the u.s. embassy in nouakchott , mauritania , and to assist in evacuation of american citizens if required .

they were expected to arrive at the u.s. embassy by june 10 , 2003 .

back - up and support personnel were sent to dakar , senegal , to aid in any necessary evacuation from either liberia or mauritania .

 ( 108 ) bosnia .

on july 22 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that the united states continued to provide about 1,800 combat - equipped military personnel in bosnia and herzegovina in support of nato's stabilization force ( sfor ) and its peacekeeping efforts in this country .

 ( 109 ) liberia .

on august 13 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," that in response to conditions in liberia , on august 11 , 2003 , he had authorized about 4,350 u.s. combat - equipped military personnel to enter liberian territorial waters in support of u.n. and west african states efforts to restore order and provide humanitarian assistance in liberia .

 ( 110 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on september 19 , 2003 , president bush reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," that u.s. "combat - equipped and combat support forces" continue to be deployed at a number of locations around the world as part of u.s. anti - terrorism efforts .

american forces support anti - terrorism efforts in the philippines , and maritime interception operations continue on the high seas in the central , european and pacific command areas of responsibility , to "prevent the movement , arming , or financing of international terrorists. .

he also noted that "u.s. combat equipped and support forces" had been deployed to georgia and djibouti to help in enhancing their "counterterrorist capabilities. .

 ( 111 ) yugoslavia / kosovo .

on november 14 , 2003 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the united states was continuing to deploy combat equipped military personnel as part of the nato - led international security force in kosovo ( kfor ) .

the united states had approximately 2,100 u.s. military personnel in kosovo , with additional american military personnel operating out of macedonia , albania , and greece , in support of kfor operations .

 ( 112 ) bosnia .

on january 22 , 2004 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the united states was continuing to deploy combat equipped military personnel in bosnia and herzegovina in support of nato's stabilization force ( sfor ) and its peacekeeping efforts in this country .

about 1,800 u.s. personnel are participating .

 ( 113 ) haiti .

on february 25 , 2004 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that , on february 23 , he had sent a combat - equipped "security force" of about "55 u.s. military personnel from the u.s. joint forces command" to port - au - prince , haiti to augment the u.s. embassy security forces there and to protect american citizens and property in light of the instability created by the armed rebellion in haiti .

 ( 114 ) haiti .

on march 2 , 2004 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that on february 29 he had sent about "200 additional u.s. combat - equipped , military personnel from the u.s. joint forces command" to port - au - prince , haiti for a variety of purposes , including preparing the way for a un multinational interim force , and otherwise supporting un security council resolution 1529 ( 2004 ) .

 ( 115 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on march 20 , 2004 , the president sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the global war on terrorism ( including in afghanistan ) ," as well as operations in bosnia and herzegovina , kosovo , and haiti .

in this report , the president noted that u.s. anti - terror related activities were underway in georgia , djibouti , kenya , ethiopia , yemen , and eritrea .

he further noted that u.s. combat - equipped military personnel continued to be deployed in kosovo as part of the nato - led kfor ( 1,900 personnel ) ; in bosnia and herzegovina as part of the nato - led sfor ( about 1,100 personnel ) ; and approximately 1,800 military personnel were deployed in haiti as part of the u.n .

multinational interim force .

 ( 116 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on november 4 , 2004 , the president sent to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the global war on terrorism. .

these deployments , support or military operations include activities in afghanistan , djibouti , as well as kenya , ethiopia , eritrea , bosnia and herzegovina , and kosovo .

in this report , the president noted that u.s. anti - terror related activities were underway in djibouti , kenya , ethiopia , yemen , and eritrea .

he further noted that u.s. combat - equipped military personnel continued to be deployed in kosovo as part of the nato - led kfor ( 1,800 personnel ) ; and in bosnia and herzegovina as part of the nato - led sfor ( about 1,000 personnel ) .

meanwhile , he stated that the united states continued to deploy more than 135,000 military personnel in iraq .

 ( 117 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on may 20 , 2005 , the president sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the global war on terrorism," as well as operations in iraq , where about 139,000 u.s. military personnel were stationed .

u.s. forces are also deployed in kenya , ethiopia , yemen , eritrea , and djibouti assisting in "enhancing counter - terrorism capabilities" of these nations .

the president further noted that u.s. combat - equipped military personnel were deployed in kosovo as part of the nato - led kfor ( 1,700 personnel ) .

approximately 235 u.s. personnel were also deployed in bosnia and herzegovina as part of the nato headquarters - sarajevo who assist in defense reform and perform operational tasks , such as counter - terrorism and supporting the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia .

 ( 118 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 7 , 2005 , the president sent to congress "consistent" with the war powers resolution , a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the global war on terrorism," and in support of the multinational force in iraq , where about 160 , 000 u.s. military personnel are deployed .

u.s. forces are also deployed in the horn of africa region — kenya , ethiopia , yemen , and djibouti — assisting in "enhancing counter - terrorism capabilities" of these nations .

the president further noted that u.s. combat - equipped military personnel continued to be deployed in kosovo as part of the nato - led kfor ( 1,700 personnel ) .

approximately 220 u.s. personnel are also deployed in bosnia and herzegovina as part of the nato headquarters - sarajevo who assist in defense reform and perform operational tasks , such as "counter - terrorism and supporting the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia. .

 ( 119 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 15 , 2006 , the president sent to congress "consistent" with the war powers resolution , a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the war on terror," and in kosovo , bosnia and herzegovina , and as part of the multinational force ( mnf ) in iraq .

presently , about 131 , 000 military personnel were deployed in iraq .

u.s. forces were also deployed in the horn of africa region , and in djibouti to support necessary operations against al - qaida and other international terrorists operating in the region .

u.s. military personnel continue to support the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the current u.s. contribution to kfor is about 1,700 military personnel .

the nato headquarters - sarajevo was established in november 22 , 2004 , as a successor to its stabilization operations in bosnia - herzegovina to continue to assist in implementing the peace agreement .

approximately 250 u.s. personnel are assigned to the nato headquarters - sarajevo who assist in defense reform and perform operational tasks , such as "counter - terrorism and supporting the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia. .

 ( 120 ) lebanon .

on july 18 , 2006 , the president reported to congress "consistent" with the war powers resolution , that in response to the security threat posed in lebanon to u.s. embassy personnel and citizens and designated third country personnel," he had deployed combat - equipped military helicopters and military personnel to beirut to assist in the departure of the persons under threat from lebanon .

the president noted that additional combat - equipped u.s. military forces may be deployed "to lebanon , cyprus and other locations , as necessary" to assist further departures of persons from lebanon and to provide security .

he further stated that once the threat to u.s. citizens and property has ended , the u.s. military forces would redeploy .

 ( 121 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 15 , 2006 , the president sent to congress "consistent" with the war powers resolution , a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the war on terror," in kosovo , bosnia and herzegovina , and as part of the multinational force ( mnf ) in iraq .

presently , about 134 , 000 military personnel are deployed in iraq .

u.s. forces were also deployed in the horn of africa region , and in djibouti to support necessary operations against al - qaida and other international terrorists operating in the region , including yemen .

u.s. military personnel continue to support the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the u.s. contribution to kfor was about 1,700 military personnel .

the nato headquarters - sarajevo was established in november 22 , 2004 , as a successor to its stabilization operations in bosnia - herzegovina to continue to assist in implementing the peace agreement .

approximately 100 u.s. personnel are assigned to the nato headquarters - sarajevo who assist in defense reform and perform operational tasks , such as "counter - terrorism and supporting the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia. .

 ( 122 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 15 , 2007 , the president sent to congress , "consistent" with the war powers resolution , a consolidated report giving details of ongoing u.s. military deployments and operations "in support of the war on terror," and in support of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the president reported that various u.s. "combat - equipped and combat - support forces" were deployed to "a number of locations in the central , pacific , european ( kfor ) , and southern command areas of operation" and were engaged in combat operations against al - qaida terrorists and their supporters .

the united states was "pursuing and engaging remnant al - qaida and taliban fighters in afghanistan. .

u.s. forces in afghanistan totaled approximately 25,945 .

of this total , "approximately 14,340 were assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan. .

the u.s. military continued to support peacekeeping operations in kosovo , specifically the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the u.s. contribution to kfor in kosovo was approximately 1,584 military personnel .

 ( 123 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 14 , 2007 , the president sent to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of ongoing u.s. military deployments and operations "in support of the war on terror," and in support of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the president reported that various u.s. "combat - equipped and combat - support forces" were deployed to "a number of locations in the central , pacific , european , and southern command areas of operation" and were engaged in combat operations against al - qaida terrorists and their supporters .

the united states was "pursuing and engaging remnant al - qaida and taliban fighters in afghanistan. .

u.s. forces in afghanistan totaled approximately 25,900 .

of this total , "approximately 15,180 were assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan. .

the u.s. military supports peacekeeping operations in kosovo , specifically the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the u.s. contribution to kfor in kosovo was approximately 1,498 military personnel .

 ( 124 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 13 , 2008 , the president sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of ongoing u.s. military deployments and operations "in support of the war on terror," and in support of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the president reported that various u.s. "combat - equipped and combat - support forces" were deployed to "a number of locations in the central , pacific , european , and southern command areas of operation" and were engaged in combat operations against al - qaida terrorists and their supporters .

the united states is "pursuing and engaging remnant al - qaida and taliban fighters in afghanistan. .

u.s. forces in afghanistan totaled approximately 31,122 .

of this total , "approximately 14,275 were assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan. .

the u.s. military continued to support peacekeeping operations in kosovo , specifically the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the u.s. contribution to kfor in kosovo was about 1,500 military personnel .

 ( 125 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 16 , 2008 , president george w. bush sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of ongoing u.s. military deployments and operations "in support of the war on terror," and in support of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the president reported that various u.s. "combat - equipped and combat - support forces" were deployed to "a number of locations in the central , pacific , european , southern , and africa command areas of operation" and were engaged in combat operations against al - qaida and their supporters .

the united states is "actively pursuing and engaging remnant al - qaida and taliban fighters in afghanistan. .

u.s. forces in afghanistan total approximately 31,000 .

of this total , "approximately 13,000 are assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan. .

the u.s. military continued to support peacekeeping operations in kosovo , specifically the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the u.s. contribution to kfor in kosovo was about 1,500 military personnel .

 ( 126 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 15 , 2009 , president barack obama sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" a supplemental consolidated report giving details of "ongoing contingency operations overseas. .

the report noted that the total number of u.s. forces in afghanistan was "approximately 58,000," of which approximately 20,000 were assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan. .

the united states continued to pursue and engage "remaining al - qa'ida and taliban forces in afghanistan. .

the u.s. also continued to deploy military forces in support of the multinational force ( mnf ) in iraq .

the current u.s. contribution to this effort is "approximately 138,000 u.s. military personnel. .

u.s. military operations continue in kosovo , as part of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

presently the united states contributed approximately 1,400 u.s. military personnel to kfor .

in addition , the united states continued to deploy "u.s. combat - equipped forces to help enhance the counterterrorism capabilities of our friends and allies" not only in the horn of africa region , but globally through "maritime interception operations on the high seas" aimed at blocking the "movement , arming and financing of international terrorists. .

 ( 127 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 5 , 2009 , the president sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of "global deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat. .

the report detailed "ongoing u.s. contingency operations overseas. .

the report noted that the total number of u.s. forces in afghanistan was "approximately 68,000," of which approximately 34,000 are assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

the united states continued to pursue and engage "remaining al - qa'ida and taliban forces in afghanistan. .

the united states has deployed "various combat - equipped forces to a number of locations in the central , pacific , european , southern , and african command areas of operation" in support of anti - terrorist and anti - al - qa'ida actions .

the u.s. also continued to deploy military forces in iraq to "maintain security and stability" there .

these iraqi operations continue pursuant to the terms of a bilateral agreement between the u.s. and iraq , which entered into force on january 1 , 2009 .

the u.s. force level in iraq was "approximately 116,000 u.s. military personnel. .

u.s. military operations continue in kosovo , as part of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the united states contributed approximately 1,475 u.s. military personnel to kfor .

in addition , the united states continued to deploy "u.s. combat - equipped forces to assist in enhancing the counterterrorism capabilities of our friends and allies" not only in the horn of africa region , but globally through "maritime interception operations on the high seas" aimed at blocking the "movement , arming and financing of international terrorists. .

 ( 128 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 15 , 2010 , the president sent to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report , giving details of "deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat. .

the report noted that the total number of u.s. forces in afghanistan was "approximately 87,000," of which over 62,000 are assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

the united states continues combat operations "against al - qa'ida terrorists and their taliban supporters" in afghanistan .

the united states has deployed "combat - equipped forces to a number of locations in the u.s. central , pacific , european , southern and african command areas of operation" in support of anti - terrorist and anti - al - qa'ida actions .

the united states also continues to deploy military forces in iraq to "maintain security and stability" there .

these iraqi operations continue pursuant to the terms of a bilateral agreement between the united states and iraq , which entered into force on january 1 , 2009 .

the current u.s. force level in iraq is "approximately 95,000 u.s. military personnel. .

u.s. military operations continue in kosovo , as part of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

presently , the united states contributes approximately 1,074 u.s. military personnel to kfor .

in addition , the united states continues to "conduct maritime interception operations on the high seas" directed at "stopping the movement , arming and financing of international terrorist groups. .

 ( 129 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 15 , 2010 , the president submitted to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report , detailing "deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat. .

the report noted that the total number of u.s. forces in afghanistan was "approximately 97,500," of which over 81,500 were assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

the united states is continuing combat operations "against al - qa'ida terrorists and their taliban supporters" in afghanistan .

the united states has deployed "combat - equipped forces to a number of locations in the u.s. central , pacific , european , southern , and african command areas of operation" in support of anti - terrorist and anti - al - qa'ida actions .

in addition , the united states continues to conduct "maritime interception operations on the high seas in the areas of responsibility of the geographic combatant commands" directed at "stopping the movement , arming and financing of international terrorist groups. .

the united states also continues to deploy military forces in iraq in support of iraqi efforts to "maintain security and stability" there .

these iraqi operations continue pursuant to the terms of a bilateral agreement between the united states and iraq , which entered into force on january 1 , 2009 .

the current u.s. force level in iraq is "approximately 48,400 u.s. military personnel. .

u.s. military operations also continue in kosovo , as part of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

the united states currently contributes approximately 808 u.s. military personnel to kfor .

 ( 130 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 15 , 2011 , the president sent to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a supplemental consolidated report , giving details of "global deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat. .

the report detailed ongoing u.s. contingency operations overseas .

the report noted that the total number of u.s. forces in afghanistan was "approximately 99,000," of which approximately 83,000 are assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

the united states continues to pursue and engage "remaining al - qa'ida and taliban fighters in afghanistan. .

the united states has deployed various "combat - equipped forces" to a number of locations in the central , pacific , european , southern , and african command areas of operation" in support of anti - terrorist and anti - al - qa'ida actions .

this includes the deployment of u.s. military forces globally to assist in enhancing the counterterrorism capabilities of our friends and allies through maritime interception operations on the high seas "aimed at stopping the movement , arming and financing of certain international terrorist groups. .

a combat - equipped security force of about "40 u.s. military personnel from the u.s. central command" were deployed to cairo , egypt , on january 31 , 2011 , for the sole purpose of "protecting american citizens and property. .

that force remains at the u.s. embassy in cairo .

the united states also continues to deploy military forces in iraq to help it "maintain security and stability" there .

these iraqi operations continue pursuant to the terms of a bilateral agreement between the united states and iraq , which entered into force on january 1 , 2009 .

the current u.s. force level in iraq is "approximately 45,000 u.s. military personnel. .

in libya , since april 4 , 2011 , the united states has transferred responsibility for military operations there to nato , and u.s. involvement "has assumed a supporting role in the coalition's efforts. .

u.s. support in libya has been limited to "intelligence , logistical support , and search and rescue assistance. .

the u.s. military aircraft have also been used to assist in the "suppression and destruction of air defenses in support of the no - fly zone" over libya .

since april 23 , 2011 , the united states has supported the coalition effort in libya through use of "unmanned aerial vehicles against a limited set of clearly defined targets" there .

except in the case of operations to "rescue the crew of a u.s. aircraft" on march 21 , 2011 , "the united states has deployed no ground forces to libya. .

u.s. military operations continue in kosovo , as part of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

presently the united states contributes approximately 800 u.s. military personnel to kfor .

 ( 131 ) libya .

on march 21 , 2011 , the president submitted to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a report stating that at "approximately 3:00 p.m. eastern daylight time , on march 19 , 2011," he had directed u.s. military forces to commence "operations to assist an international effort authorized by the united nations ( u.n. ) security council and undertaken with the support of european allies and arab partners , to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe and address the threat posed to international peace and security by the crisis in libya. .

he further stated that u.s. military forces , "under the command of commander , u.s. africa command , began a series of strikes against air defense systems and military airfields for the purposes of preparing a no - fly zone. .

these actions were part of "the multilateral response authorized under u.n. security council resolution 1973," and the president added that "these strikes will be limited in their nature , duration , and scope .

their purpose is to support an international coalition as it takes all necessary measures to enforce the terms of u.n. security council resolution 1973 .

these limited u.s. actions will set the stage for further action by other coalition partners. .

the president noted that united nations security council resolution 1973 authorized member states , under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , to take all necessary measures to protect civilians and civilian populated areas under threat of attack in libya , including the establishment and enforcement of a "no - fly zone" in the airspace of libya .

united states military efforts are discrete and focused on employing unique u.s. military capabilities to set the conditions for our european allies and arab partners to carry out the measures authorized by the u.n. security council resolution .

the president stated further that the "united states has not deployed ground forces into libya .

united states forces are conducting a limited and well - defined mission in support of international efforts to protect civilians and prevent a humanitarian disaster. .

accordingly , he added , "u.s. forces have targeted the qadhafi regime's air defense systems , command and control structures , and other capabilities of qadhafi's armed forces used to attack civilians and civilian populated areas. .

it was the intent of the united states , he said , to "seek a rapid , but responsible , transition of operations to coalition , regional , or international organizations that are postured to continue activities as may be necessary to realize the objectives of u.n. security council resolutions 1970 and 1973. .

the president said that the actions he had directed were "in the national security and foreign policy interests of the united states. .

he took them , the president stated , "pursuant to my constitutional authority to conduct u.s. foreign relations and as commander in chief and chief executive. .

 ( 132 ) central africa .

on october 14 , 2011 , the president submitted to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a report stating that "he had authorized a small number of combat - equipped u.s. forces to deploy to central africa to provide assistance to regional forces that are working toward the removal of joseph kony," leader of the lord's resistance army ( lra ) , from the battlefield .

for over two decades , the lra has murdered , kidnapped , and raped tens of thousands of men , women , and children throughout central africa , and has continued to commit atrocities in south sudan , the democratic republic of the congo , and the central african republic .

the u.s. armed forces , the president noted , would be a "significant contribution toward counter - lra efforts in central africa. .

the president stated that on "october 12 , 2011 , the initial team of u.s. military personnel with appropriate combat equipment deployed to uganda. .

in the "next month , additional forces will deploy , including a second combat - equipped team and associated headquarters , communications , and logistics personnel. .

the president further stated that the "total number of u.s. military personnel deploying for this mission is approximately 100 .

these forces will act as advisors to partner forces that have the goals of removing from the battlefield joseph kony and other senior leadership of the lra. .

u.s. forces "will provide information , advice , and assistance to select partner nation forces. .

with the approval of the respective host nations , "elements of these u.s. forces will deploy into uganda , south sudan , the central african republic , and the democratic republic of the congo .

the support provided by u.s. forces will enhance regional efforts against the lra. .

the president emphasized that even though the "u.s. forces are combat - equipped , they will only be providing information , advice , and assistance to partner nation forces , and they will not themselves engage lra forces unless necessary for self - defense .

all appropriate precautions have been taken to ensure the safety of u.s. military personnel during their deployment. .

the president took note in his report that congress had previously "expressed support for increased , comprehensive u.s. efforts to help mitigate and eliminate the threat posed by the lra to civilians and regional stability" through the passage of the lord's resistance army disarmament and northern uganda recovery act of 2009 , p.l .

111-172 , enacted may 24 , 2010 .

 ( 133 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on december 15 , 2011 , the president submitted to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a supplemental consolidated report , giving details of "deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat. .

the report detailed ongoing u.s. contingency operations overseas .

the report noted that the total number of u.s. forces in afghanistan was "approximately 93,000," of which approximately 78,000 are assigned to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

the united states continues to pursue and engage "remaining al - qa'ida and taliban fighters in afghanistan. .

the united states has deployed various "combat - equipped forces" to a number of locations in the central , pacific , european , southern , and african command areas of operation in support of anti - terrorist and anti - al - qa'ida actions .

this includes the deployment of u.s. military forces globally: "including special operations and other forces" for "sensitive operations" in various places , as well as forces to assist in enhancing the counterterrorism capabilities of our friends and allies .

u.s. forces also have engaged in maritime interception operations on the high seas "aimed at stopping the movement , arming and financing of certain international terrorist groups. .

the united states continued to deploy military forces in iraq to help it "maintain security and stability" there .

these iraqi operations were undertaken pursuant to the terms of a bilateral agreement between the united states and iraq , which entered into force on january 1 , 2009 .

the u.s. force level in iraq on october 28 , 2011 , was "36,001 u.s. military personnel. .

the u.s. was committed to withdraw u.s. forces from iraq by december 31 , 2011 .

 ( this occurred , as scheduled , after this report was submitted. ) .

in libya , after april 4 , 2011 , the united states transferred responsibility for military operations there to nato , and u.s. involvement "assumed a supporting role in the coalition's efforts. .

u.s. support in libya was limited to "intelligence , logistical support , and search and rescue assistance. .

the u.s. military aircraft were also used to assist in the "suppression and destruction of air defenses in support of the no - fly zone" over libya .

after april 23 , 2011 , the united states supported the coalition effort in libya through use of "unmanned aerial vehicles against a limited set of clearly defined targets" there .

except in the case of operations to "rescue the crew of a u.s. aircraft" on march 21 , 2011 , and deploying 16 u.s. military personnel to aid in re - establishing the u.s. embassy in tripoli in september 2011 , "the u.s. deployed no ground forces to libya. .

on october 27 , 2011 , the united nations terminated the "no - fly zone" effective october 31 , 2011 .

nato terminated its mission during this same time .

u.s. military operations continue in kosovo , as part of the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) .

presently the united states contributes approximately 800 u.s. military personnel to kfor .

 ( 134 ) somalia .

on january 26 , 2012 , the president submitted to congress , "consistent with the war powers resolution," a report detailing a successful u.s. special operations forces operation in somalia of january 24 , 2012 , to rescue ms. jessica buchanan , a u.s. citizen who had been kidnapped by a group linked to somali pirates and financiers .

this operation was undertaken "by a small number of joint combat - equipped u.s. forces" following receipt of reliable intelligence establishing her location in somalia .

a danish national poul hagen thisted , kidnapped with ms. buchanan , was also rescued with her .

 ( 135 ) anti - terrorist operations .

on june 15 , 2012 , the president reported to congress , "consistent with" the war powers resolution , a consolidated report regarding various deployments of u.s. armed forces equipped for combat .

in the efforts in support of u.s. counterterrorism ( ct ) objectives against al - qa'ida , the taliban and , associated forces , he noted that u.s. forces were engaged in afghanistan in the above effort were "approximately 90,000. .

with regard to other counter - terrorism operations , the president stated that the united states had deployed "u.s. combat - equipped forces to assist in enhancing the ct capabilities of our friends and allies including special operations and other forces for sensitive operations in various locations around the world. .

he noted that the "u.s. military has taken direct action in somalia against members of al - qa'ida , including those who are also members of al - shabaab , who are engaged in efforts to carry out terrorist attacks against the united states and our interests. .

the president further stated that the u.s. military had been "working closely with the yemini government to operationally and ultimately eliminate the terrorist threat posed by al - qa - ida in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) , the most active and dangerous affiliate of al - qa'ida today. .

he added that these "joint efforts have resulted in direct action against a limited number of aqap operatives and senior leaders in that country who posed a terrorist threat to the united states and our interests. .

the president noted that he would direct "additional measures against al - qa'ida , the taliban , and associated forces to protect u.s. citizens and interests. .

further information on such matters is provided in a "classified annex to this report...." other military operations reported by the president include the deployment of u.s. combat - equipped military personnel to uganda "to serve as advisors to regional forces that are working to apprehend or remove joseph kony and other senior lord's resistance army ( lra ) leaders from the battlefield and to protect local populations. .

the total number of u.s. military personnel deployed for this mission is "approximately 90," and elements of these u.s. forces have been sent to "forward locations in the lra - affected areas of the republic of south sudan , the democratic republic of the congo , and the central african republic. .

these u.s. forces "will not engage lra forces except in self - defense. .

the president also reported that presently the u.s. was contributing "approximately 817 military personnel" to the nato - led kosovo force ( kfor ) in kosovo .

he also reported that the u.s. remained prepared to engage in "maritime interception operations" intended to stop the "movement , arming , and financing of certain international terrorist groups," as well as stopping "proliferation by sea of weapons of mass destruction and related materials. .

additional details about these efforts are included in "the classified annex" to this report .

 ( 136 ) libya / yemen .

on september 14 , 2012 , the president reported to congress , "consistent with" the war powers resolution , that on september 12 , 2012 , he ordered deployed to libya "a security force from the u.s. africa command" to "support the security of u.s. personnel in libya. .

this action was taken in response to the attack on the u.s. "diplomatic post in benghazi , libya," that had killed four america citizens , including u.s .

ambassador john christopher stevens .

the president added on september 13 , 2012 , that "an additional security force arrived in yemen in response to security threats there. .

he further stated that "although these security forces are equipped for combat , these movements have been undertaken solely for the purpose of protecting american citizens and property. .

these security forces will remain in libya and in yemen , he noted , "until the security situation becomes such that they are no longer needed. .

 ( 137 ) six - month periodic report .

on december 14 , 2012 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , military operations in central africa , maritime interception operations , military operations in egypt , u.s. / nato operations in kosovo , and regional security operations in libya and yemen .

 ( 138 ) chad / central african republic .

on december 29 , 2012 , president obama reported to congress that he had ordered deployment of "a stand - by response and evacuation force of approximately 50 u.s. military personnel from u.s. africa command" to chad "to support the evacuation of u.s. embassy personnel and u.s. citizens from the central african republic," due to the "the deteriorating security situation" in that country .

 ( 139 ) somalia .

on january 13 , 2013 , the president notified congress that u.s. combat aircraft entered somali airspace on january 11 , 2013 , in support of a french mission to rescue a french citizen held hostage by the al - shabaab terror group , but did not "employ weapons" and departed somali airspace the same day .

 ( 140 ) niger .

on february 22 , 2013 , the president notified congress of deployment of "the last elements of ... approximately 40 additional u.s. military personnel" to niger to "provide support for intelligence collection and will also facilitate intelligence sharing with french forces conducting operations in mali , and with other partners in the region. .

the president stated that the forces are combat - equipped "for the purpose of providing their own force protection and security. .

 ( 141 ) six - month periodic report .

on june 14 , 2013 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , military operations in central africa , maritime interception operations , military operations in egypt , u.s. / nato operations in kosovo , and regional security operations in libya and yemen .

he also notified congress that forces deployed to chad in december 2012 had withdrawn .

 ( 142 ) jordan .

on june 21 , 2013 , the president reported to congress on deploying u.s. armed forces to jordan "solely to participate in a training exercise," and "a combat - equipped detachment of approximately 700 of these forces remained in jordan after the conclusion of the exercise to join other u.s. forces already in jordan. .

 ( 143 ) six - month periodic report .

on december 13 , 2013 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , military operations in central africa , maritime interception operations , military operations in egypt , military operations in jordan , u.s. / nato operations in kosovo , and regional security operations in libya and yemen .

 ( 144 ) south sudan .

on december 19 , 2013 , the president notified congress that "45 u.s. armed forces personnel deployed to south sudan to support the security of u.s. personnel and our embassy" for "the purpose of protecting u.s. citizens and property. .

 ( 145 ) south sudan .

on december 22 , 2013 , the president notified congress of deployment of "46 additional u.s. military personnel deployed by military aircraft to the area of bor , south sudan , to conduct an operation to evacuate u.s. citizens and personnel. .

according to the notification , u.s. aircraft "came under fire" and withdrew from south sudan without completing the evacuation .

 ( 146 ) uganda / south sudan / democratic republic of the congo / central african republic .

on march 25 , 2014 , the president notified congress of a new deployment of u.s. aircraft and 150 u.s. aircrew and support personnel to uganda , south sudan , the democratic republic of the congo , and the central african republic "to support regional forces from the african union's regional task force that are working to apprehend or remove lord's resistance army leader joseph kony and other senior leaders from the battlefield and to protect local populations. .

 ( 147 ) chad .

on may 21 , 2014 , the president notified congress that "[a]pproximately 80 u.s. armed forces personnel have deployed to chad as part of the u.s. efforts to locate and support the safe return of over 200 schoolgirls who are reported to have been kidnapped in nigeria" in support of the "operation of intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance aircraft for missions over northern nigeria and the surrounding area. .

 ( 148 ) six - month periodic report .

on june 12 , 2014 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , military operations related to the lord's resistance army , military operations in egypt , military operations in jordan , u.s. / nato operations in kosovo , and regional security operations in libya and yemen .

 ( 149 ) iraq .

on june 16 , 2014 , the president notified congress of the deployment of up to 275 u.s. armed forces personnel to iraq to provide support and security for u.s. personnel and the u.s. embassy in baghdad .

 ( 150 ) iraq .

on june 26 , 2014 , the president notified congress of the deployment of up to approximately 300 additional u.s. armed forces personnel in iraq to "assess how we can best train , advise , and support iraqi security forces and to establish joint operations centers with iraqi security forces to share intelligence and coordinate planning to confront the threat posed by isil," and for presidential orders to "increase intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance that is focused on the threat posed by the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isil ) . .

 ( 151 ) iraq .

on june 30 , 2014 , the president notified congress of the deployment of up to approximately 200 additional u.s. armed forces personnel to iraq to "reinforce security at the u.s. embassy , its support facilities , and the baghdad international airport. .

 ( 152 ) iraq .

on august 8 , 2014 , the president notified congress of airstrikes against islamic state ( is ) forces to protect u.s. personnel in erbil and to assist a humanitarian mission to protect iraqi civilians trapped on mount sinjar in northern iraq .

 ( 153 ) iraq .

on august 17 , 2014 , the president notified congress of airstrikes against is forces to assist iraqi security forces in retaking mosul dam in northern iraq .

 ( 154 ) iraq .

on september 1 , 2014 , the president notified congress of airstrikes near amirli in northern iraq targeting is forces besieging the town and as part of a mission to provide humanitarian assistance .

 ( 155 ) iraq .

on september 5 , 2014 , the president notified congress of the deployment of 350 additional combat - equipped troops to provide security for diplomatic facilities and personnel in baghdad .

 ( 156 ) iraq .

on september 8 , 2014 , president obama notified congress of airstrikes "in the vicinity of the haditha dam in support of iraqi forces in their efforts to retain control of and defend this critical infrastructure site from isil," stating that "[t]hese additional military operations will be limited in their scope and duration as necessary to address this threat and prevent endangerment of u.s. personnel and facilities and large numbers of iraqi civilians. .

 ( 157 ) central african republic .

president obama notified congress on september 11 , 2014 , of the deployment of "approximately 20 u.s. armed forces personnel" to the central african republic "to support the resumption of the activities of the u.s. embassy in bangui. .

 ( 158 ) syria / khorasan group .

on september 23 , 2014 , the president notified congress that he directed u.s. armed forces to begin "a series of strikes in syria against elements of al - qa'ida known as the khorasan group. .

 ( 159 ) iraq / syria / islamic state .

on september 23 , 2014 , president obama notified congress that he had "ordered implementation of a new comprehensive and sustained counterterrorism strategy to degrade , and ultimately defeat , isil," the notification states that the president deployed "475 additional u.s. armed forces personnel to iraq," and "that it is necessary and appropriate to use the u.s. armed forces to conduct coordination with iraqi forces and to provide training , communications support , intelligence support , and other support , to select elements of the iraqi security forces , including kurdish peshmerga forces. .

the president also notified congress that he had ordered u.s. forces "to conduct a systematic campaign of airstrikes and other necessary actions against these terrorists in iraq and syria," "in coordination with and at the request of the government of iraq and in conjunction with coalition partners. .

the president stated that the duration of the deployments and operations is not known .

 ( 160 ) six - month periodic report .

on december 11 , 2014 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , including the military campaign against the islamic state in iraq and syria , military operations related to the lord's resistance army , military operations in egypt , military operations in jordan , u.s. / nato operations in kosovo , and regional security operations in the central african republic , libya , tunisia , and yemen .

 ( 161 ) six - month periodic report .

on june 11 , 2015 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , including the military campaign against the islamic state in iraq and syria , military operations related to the lord's resistance army , military operations in egypt , military operations in jordan , and u.s. / nato operations in kosovo .

 ( 162 ) cameroon .

on october 14 , 2015 , president obama notified congress that he had deployed approximately 90 u.s. armed forces personnel to cameroon to "conduct airborne intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance operations in the region. .

 ( 163 ) six - month periodic report .

on december 11 , 2015 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , including the military campaign against the islamic state in iraq and syria ( of note were deployments of combat aircraft and personnel to turkey and airstrikes in libya ) , as well as new counterterrorism deployments to cameroon , military operations related to the lord's resistance army , military operations in egypt , military operations in jordan , and u.s. / nato operations in kosovo .

 ( 164 ) six - month periodic report .

on june 13 , 2016 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , including the military campaign against the islamic state in iraq and syria , military operations related to the lord's resistance army , military operations in egypt , military operations in jordan , and u.s. / nato operations in kosovo .

 ( 165 ) south sudan .

on july 13 , 2016 , president obama notified congress that he had ordered deployment of approximately 47 u.s. armed forces personnel to south sudan to support the security of u.s. personnel and the u.s. embassy in juba .

 ( 166 ) uganda .

on july 15 , 2016 , president obama notified congress of the deployment of approximately 200 u.s. armed forces personnel in uganda , for the purpose of supporting the security of u.s. citizens and property in south sudan .

 ( 167 ) yemen .

on october 14 , 2016 , president obama reported to congress that he had ordered u.s. armed force to conduct missile strikes in houthi - controlled territory in yemen , targeting radar facilities in response to anti - ship cruise missile launches conducted by houthi insurgents against u.s. navy warships in the red sea .

 ( 168 ) six - month periodic report .

on december 5 , 2016 , president obama reported to congress concerning ongoing military deployments for u.s. counterterrorism operations , including the military campaign against the islamic state in iraq and syria , military operations related to the lord's resistance army , military operations in the red sea ( previously reported missile strikes against houthi insurgents in yemen ) , military operations in egypt , military operations related to the security of u.s. citizens and property in south sudan , and u.s. / nato operations in kosovo .

appendix b .

instances not formally reported to the congress under the war powers resolution in some instances where u.s. armed forces have been deployed in potentially hostile situations abroad , presidents did not submit reports to congress under the war powers resolution and the question of whether a report was required could be raised .

representative examples of these instances from 1973 to 1998 include evacuation of civilians from cyprus in 1974 evacuation of civilians from lebanon in 1976 korean dmz tree - cutting incident of 1976 transport of european troops to zaire in 1978 dispatch of additional military advisers to el salvador in 1981 shooting down of two libyan jets over the gulf of sidra on august 19 , 1981 , after one had fired a heat - seeking missile the use of training forces in honduras after 1983 dispatch of awacs to egypt after a libyan plane bombed a city in sudan march 18 , 1983 shooting down of two iranian fighter planes over persian gulf on june 5 , 1984 , by saudi arabian jet fighter planes aided by intelligence from a u.s. awacs interception by u.s. navy pilots on october 10 , 1985 , of an egyptian airliner carrying hijackers of the italian cruise ship achille lauro use of u.s. army personnel and aircraft in bolivia for anti - drug assistance on july 14 , 1986 buildup of fleet in persian gulf area in 1987 force augmentations in panama in 1988 and 1989 shooting down 2 libyan jet fighters over the mediterranean sea on january 4 , 1989 dispatch of military advisers and special forces teams to colombia , bolivia , and peru , in the andean initiative , announced september 5 , 1989 , to help those nations combat illicit drug traffickers transport of belgian troops and equipment into zaire september 25-27 , 1991 evacuation of nonessential u.s. government workers and families from sierra leone , may 3 , 1992 a bombing campaign against iraq , termed operation desert fox , aimed at destroying iraqi industrial facilities deemed capable of producing weapons of mass destruction , as well as other iraqi military and security targets , december 16-23 , 1998 .

appendix c. text of the war powers resolution war powers resolution p.l .

93-148 ( h.j.res 542 ) , 87 stat .

555 , passed over president's veto november 7 , 1973 joint resolution concerning the war powers of congress and the president .

resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled , short title section 1 .

this joint resolution may be cited as the "war powers resolution. .

purpose and policy section 2 .

 ( a ) it is the purpose of this joint resolution to fulfill the intent of the framers of the constitution of the united states and insure that the collective judgment of both the congress and the president will apply to the introduction of united states armed forces into hostilities , or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances , and to the continued use of such forces in hostilities or in such situations .

 ( b ) under article i , section 8 , of the constitution , it is specifically provided that the congress shall have the power to make all laws necessary and proper for carrying into execution , not only its own powers but also all other powers vested by the constitution in the government of the united states , or in any department or officer thereof .

 ( c ) the constitutional powers of the president as commander in chief to introduce united states armed forces into hostilities , or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances , are exercised only pursuant to ( 1 ) a declaration of war , ( 2 )  specific statutory authorization , or ( 3 ) a national emergency created by attack upon the united states , its territories or possessions , or its armed forces .

consultation section 3 .

the president in every possible instance shall consult with congress before introducing united states armed forces into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances , and after every such introduction shall consult regularly with the congress until united states armed forces are no longer engaged in hostilities or have been removed from such situations .

reporting section 4 .

 ( a ) in the absence of a declaration of war , in any case in which united states armed forces are introduced — ( 1 ) into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances ; ( 2 ) into the territory , airspace , or waters of a foreign nation , while equipped for combat , except for deployments which relate solely to supply , replacement , repair , or training of such forces ; or ( 3 ) in numbers which substantially enlarge united states armed forces equipped for combat already located in a foreign nation ; the president shall submit within 48 hours to the speaker of the house of representatives and to the president pro tempore of the senate a report , in writing , setting forth — ( a ) the circumstances necessitating the introduction of united states armed forces ; ( b ) the constitutional and legislative authority under which such introduction took place ; and ( c ) the estimated scope and duration of the hostilities or involvement .

 ( b ) the president shall provide such other information as the congress may request in the fulfillment of its constitutional responsibilities with respect to committing the nation to war and to the use of united states armed forces abroad .

 ( c ) whenever united states armed forces are introduced into hostilities or into any situation described in subsection ( a ) of this section , the president shall , so long as such armed forces continue to be engaged in such hostilities or situation , report to the congress periodically on the status of such hostilities or situation as well as on the scope and duration of such hostilities or situation , but in no event shall he report to the congress less often than once every six months .

congressional action section 5 .

 ( a ) each report submitted pursuant to section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) shall be transmitted to the speaker of the house of representatives and to the president pro tempore of the senate on the same calendar day .

each report so transmitted shall be referred to the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives and to the committee on foreign relations of the senate for appropriate action .

if , when the report is transmitted , the congress has adjourned sine die or has adjourned for any period in excess of three calendar days , the speaker of the house of representatives and the president pro tempore of the senate , if they deem it advisable ( or if petitioned by at least 30% of the membership of their respective houses ) shall jointly request the president to convene congress in order that it may consider the report and take appropriate action pursuant to this section .

 ( b ) within sixty calendar days after a report is submitted or is required to be submitted pursuant to section 4 ( a ) ( 1 ) , whichever is earlier , the president shall terminate any use of united states armed forces with respect to which such report was submitted ( or required to be submitted ) , unless the congress ( 1 ) has declared war or has enacted a specific authorization for such use of united states armed forces , ( 2 ) has extended by law such sixty - day period , or ( 3 ) is physically unable to meet as a result of an armed attack upon the united states .

such sixty - day period shall be extended for not more than an additional thirty days if the president determines and certifies to the congress in writing that unavoidable military necessity respecting the safety of united states armed forces requires the continued use of such armed forces in the course of bringing about a prompt removal of such forces .

 ( c ) notwithstanding subsection ( b ) , at any time that united states armed forces are engaged in hostilities outside the territory of the united states , its possessions and territories without a declaration of war or specific statutory authorization , such forces shall be removed by the president if the congress so directs by concurrent resolution .

congressional priority procedures for joint resolution or bill section 6 .

 ( a ) any joint resolution or bill introduced pursuant to section 5 ( b ) at least thirty calendar days before the expiration of the sixty - day period specified in such section , shall be referred to the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives or the committee on foreign relations of the senate , as the case may be , and such committee shall report one such joint resolution or bill , together with its recommendations , not later than twenty - four calendar days before the expiration of the sixty - day period specified in such section , unless such house shall otherwise determine by the yeas and nays .

 ( b ) any joint resolution or bill so reported shall become the pending business of the house in question ( in the case of the senate the time for debate shall be equally divided between the proponents and the opponents ) , and shall be voted on within three calendar days thereafter , unless such house shall otherwise determine by yeas and nays .

 ( c ) such a joint resolution or bill passed by one house shall be referred to the committee of the other house named in subsection ( a ) and shall be reported out not later than fourteen calendar days before the expiration of the sixty - day period specified in section 5 ( b ) .

the joint resolution or bill so reported shall become the pending business of the house in question and shall be voted on within three calendar days after it has been reported , unless such house shall otherwise determine by yeas and nays .

 ( d ) in the case of any disagreement between the two houses of congress with respect to a joint resolution or bill passed by both houses , conferees shall be promptly appointed and the committee of conference shall make and file a report with respect to such resolution or bill not later than four calendar days before the expiration of the sixty - day period specified in section 5 ( b ) .

in the event the conferees are unable to agree within 48 hours , they shall report back to their respective house in disagreement .

notwithstanding any rule in either house concerning the printing of conference reports in the record or concerning any delay in the consideration of such reports , such report shall be acted on by both houses not later than the expiration of such sixty - day period .

congressional priority procedures for concurrent resolution section 7 .

 ( a ) any concurrent resolution introduced pursuant to section 5 ( c ) shall be referred to the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives or the committee on foreign relations of the senate , as the case may be , and one such concurrent resolution shall be reported out by such committee together with its recommendations within fifteen calendar days , unless such house shall otherwise determine by the yeas and nays .

 ( b ) any concurrent resolution so reported shall become the pending business of the house in question ( in the case of the senate the time for debate shall be equally divided between the proponents and the opponents ) and shall be voted on within three calendar days thereafter , unless such house shall otherwise determine by yeas and nays .

 ( c ) such a concurrent resolution passed by one house shall be referred to the committee of the other house named in subsection ( a ) and shall be reported out by such committee together with its recommendations within fifteen calendar days and shall thereupon become the pending business of such house and shall be voted upon within three calendar days , unless such house shall otherwise determine by yeas and nays .

 ( d ) in the case of any disagreement between the two houses of congress with respect to a concurrent resolution passed by both houses , conferees shall be promptly appointed and the committee of conference shall make and file a report with respect to such concurrent resolution within six calendar days after the legislation is referred to the committee of conference .

notwithstanding any rule in either house concerning the printing of conference reports in the record or concerning any delay in the consideration of such reports , such report shall be acted on by both houses not later than six calendar days after the conference report is filed .

in the event the conferees are unable to agree within 48 hours , they shall report back to their respective houses in disagreement .

interpretation of joint resolution section 8 .

 ( a ) authority to introduce united states armed forces into hostilities or into situations wherein involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances shall not be inferred — ( 1 ) from any provision of law ( whether or not in effect before the date of the enactment of this joint resolution ) , including any provision contained in any appropriation act , unless such provision specifically authorizes the introduction of united states armed forces into hostilities or into such situations and states that it is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of this joint resolution ; or ( 2 ) from any treaty heretofore or hereafter ratified unless such treaty is implemented by legislation specifically authorizing the introduction of united states armed forces into hostilities or into such situations and stating that it is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of this joint resolution .

 ( b ) nothing in this joint resolution shall be construed to require any further specific statutory authorization to permit members of united states armed forces to participate jointly with members of the armed forces of one or more foreign countries in the headquarters operations of high - level military commands which were established prior to the date of enactment of this joint resolution and pursuant to the united nations charter or any treaty ratified by the united states prior to such date .

 ( c ) for purposes of this joint resolution , the term "introduction of united states armed forces" includes the assignment of members of such armed forces to command , coordinate , participate in the movement of , or accompany the regular or irregular military forces of any foreign country or government when such military forces are engaged , or there exists an imminent threat that such forces will become engaged , in hostilities .

 ( d ) nothing in this joint resolution — ( 1 ) is intended to alter the constitutional authority of the congress or of the president , or the provisions of existing treaties ; or ( 2 ) shall be construed as granting any authority to the president with respect to the introduction of united states armed forces into hostilities or into situations wherein involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances which authority he would not have had in the absence of this joint resolution .

separability clause section 9 .

if any provision of this joint resolution or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid , the remainder of the joint resolution and the application of such provision to any other person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby .

effective date section 10 .

this joint resolution shall take effect on the date of its enactment .

