t he posse comitatus act , enacted in 1878 and now codified at 18 u.s.c .

§ 1385 , is perhaps the most tangible expression of an american tradition , born in england and developed in the early years of our nation , that rebels against military involvement in civilian affairs .

the declaration of independence listed among our grievances against great britain that the king had "kept among us , in times of peace , standing armies without the consent of our legislatures," had "affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power. .

the articles of confederation addressed the threat of military intrusion into civilian affairs by demanding that the armed forces assembled during peacetime be no more numerous than absolutely necessary for the common defense , and by entrusting control to civil authorities within the states .

the constitution continued the theme .

it provided that a civilian , the president , should be the commander in chief of the army and navy of the united states and that civilian authorities , the congress , should be solely empowered to raise and support armies , provide and maintain a navy , and make rules for their government and regulation .

the bill of rights limited the quartering of troops in private homes , u.s. const .

amend .

iii , and noted that "a well - regulated militia , being necessary to the security of a free state , the right of the people to keep and bear arms , shall not be infringed," u.s. const .

amend .

ii .

the constitution , on the other hand , explicitly permitted the congress to provide for calling out the militia to execute the laws , suppress insurrection , and repel invasion , u.s. const .

art .

i , § 8 , cl.16 .

soon after congress was first assembled under the constitution , it authorized the president to call out the militia , initially to protect the frontier against "hostile incursions of the indians," and subsequently in cases of invasion , insurrection , or obstruction of the laws , in aid of a state government or where federal law met resistance .

these authorities were used to put down the "whiskey rebellion" and other armed resistance to the revenue laws , labor strikes and race riots , and bands of desperados in the territories .

congress in some cases specifically authorized the use of the armed forces to execute civilian laws in cases that did not amount to insurrection , including enforcement of embargoes and the neutrality laws .

the president's authority to call upon the state militia to aid in putting down insurrections is reminiscent of the authority enjoyed by the sheriff at common law to call upon the posse comitatus .

in the beginning , the two were comparable but unrelated .

even though congress empowered the president to call out the militia to overcome obstructions to law enforcement , it continued to vest the federal equivalent of the sheriff , the federal marshal , with the power to call forth the posse comitatus in performance of his duties .

in addition , congress sometimes authorized recourse to the posse comitatus for the enforcement of particular statutes .

under the fugitive slave act , for instance , owners whose slaves had escaped to another state were entitled to an arrest warrant for the slaves and to have the warrant executed by federal marshals .

the marshals in turn might "summon and call to their aid the bystanders , or posse comitatus of the proper county ... [and] all good citizens [were] commanded to aid and assist in the prompt and efficient execution of this law , whenever their services may be required , as aforesaid , for that purpose," 9 stat .

462 , 463 ( 1850 ) .

attorney general caleb cushing declared that the "bystanders" contemplated by the fugitive slave act might include members of a state militia even when not in federal service , and they did encompass members of the armed forces by virtue of their duties as citizens as part of the posse comitatus .

following the civil war , the use of federal troops to execute the laws , particularly in the states that had been part of the confederacy , continued even after all other political restrictions had been lifted .

in response , congress passed the posse comitatus act as part of an army appropriations bill in 1878 .

with the exception of a reference to the air force , it has remained essentially unchanged ever since , although congress has authorized a substantial number of exceptions and has buttressed the act with an additional proscription against use of the armed forces to make arrests or conduct searches and seizures .

while the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 led some to call for a reexamination of the role of the military in domestic law enforcement , congress , in establishing the department of homeland security , expressed its sense reaffirming the continued importance and applicability of the posse comitatus act .

6 u.s.c .

§ 466 .

the posse comitatus act contains no expression of extraterritorial application , but it seems unlikely that it was meant to apply beyond the confines of the united states , its territories and possessions .

congress enacted it in response to problems occurring within the united states and its territories , problems associated with the american political process , and policies and actions that promoted military usurpation of civilian law enforcement responsibilities over americans .

congress does appear to have intended the authority and restrictions contained in 10 u.s.c .

§§ 271-284 to apply both in the united states and beyond its borders .

the posse comitatus act is a criminal statute under which there has apparently been only a couple of prosecutions .

it has been invoked with varying degrees of success , however , to challenge the jurisdiction of the courts ; as a defense in criminal prosecutions for other offenses ; as a ground for the suppression of evidence ; as the grounds for , or a defense against , civil liability ; and as a means to enjoin proposed actions by the military .

allegations that the posse comitatus act has been violated are made most often by defendants seeking to exclude related testimony or physical evidence , but most cases note the absence of an exclusionary rule , often avoiding unnecessary analysis of the scope of the act and whether a violation has occurred .

while courts have repeated dicta from one case suggesting that an exclusionary rule might be necessary for deterrence purposes where "widespread or repeated violations" are at issue , such a case does not appear to have presented itself .

defendants have found the act helpful in prosecutions where the government must establish the lawfulness of its conduct as one of the elements of the offense .

several defendants at wounded knee persuaded the court that evidence of possible violations precluded their convictions for obstructing law enforcement officials "lawfully engaged" in the performance of their duties .

on the other hand , defendants appear to have had no success persuading the courts to dismiss their prosecutions on the basis that military involvement in their investigation or arrest violated the act , even in cases where the court agrees a violation has occurred .

the eighth circuit has declared that a violation of the act might constitute an unreasonable search and seizure for purposes of the fourth amendment , giving rise to a bivens cause of action , under which aggrieved persons can bring a case against offending federal officers or employees for violations of constitutional rights .

a posse comitatus act violation , however , also provides the government with a defense to a claim under the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) since the government is not liable under the ftca for injuries inflicted by federal officers or employees acting outside the scope of their authority .

it appears that plaintiffs asserting violations against state or local law enforcement officers also face an uphill battle , where the lack of precedent for such liability seems to lead to qualified immunity on the part of law enforcement officers .

the most significant impact of the posse comitatus act is attributable to compliance by the armed forces .

as administrative adoption of the act for the navy and marines demonstrates , the military has a long - standing practice of avoiding involvement in civilian affairs which it believes are contrary to the act , and which date back to military acceptance of civilian authority since the founding of the republic .

