a health insurance exchange is a structured marketplace for the sale and purchase of health insurance .

"customers" can include individuals and businesses .

the insurance companies ( "issuers" ) that choose to sell their products through an exchange may be required to comply with consumer protections , such as offering insurance to every qualified applicant .

exchanges , however , are not issuers ; rather , exchanges contract with issuers who will make insurance products available for purchase through exchanges .

essentially , exchanges are designed to bring together buyers and sellers of insurance , with the goal of increasing access to coverage .

this rather broad definition allows for a great deal of latitude , and therefore variance , in the number and scope of responsibilities covered in a particular exchange .

for example , the role of an exchange may be more or less administrative: facilitating the sale and purchase of health insurance .

an administrative - only exchange may function similar to websites that allow individuals to find airline travel options and purchase tickets ( eg , kayak ) .

such an approach does not necessarily change or establish standards for the products being sold ( whether they are health plans or airline tickets ) , or limit the types of buyers and sellers participating in the exchange , beyond what already exists in the private market .

an example of a minimalist health insurance exchange is the utah health exchange .

essentially , utah's exchange is an internet portal that is "designed to connect consumers to the information they need to make informed health care choices , and in the case of health insurance , to execute that choice electronically. .

at the other end of the spectrum , an exchange may have multiple functions beyond the role of insurance marketplace .

for instance , an exchange may be responsible for implementing regulatory standards , such as requiring standardization of all products offered through it or imposing requirements on exchange participants .

an exchange may be responsible for determining eligibility for exchange plans and government - provided subsidies .

an example of a more regulatory - oriented exchange is the health connector ( "connector" ) in massachusetts .

similar to utah's exchange , the connector provides an online tool to allow consumers and others to find commercial health insurance options available to them .

in addition , the connector also manages a publicly subsidized coverage program for low - income state residents , and offers certificates to exempt individuals from the state's individual mandate , among other duties .

an exchange may occupy a physical location and / or be virtual ( i.e. , performing its functions on the internet ) .

it may be governed by a public agency , a private entity , or a hybrid organization .

the insurance options offered through an exchange may also vary across insurance markets and plan types .

nonetheless , while the authority and responsibilities of an exchange may vary , its fundamental purpose is to provide a venue where insurance companies may sell their insurance products and purchasers can compare and choose from multiple options available to them .

thus an exchange allows for "one - stop shopping" with respect to health insurance .

the exchange concept was included in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , as a means to increase access to health insurance .

while aca places many restrictions on the design and function of exchanges , the law also leaves many operational decisions to the states .

such flexibility will likely lead to variation in exchange models across the states .

for example , a state may decide to operate an exchange by itself , establish an exchange in partnership with the federal government , or leave this work entirely to the federal government .

the initial open enrollment period for all exchanges will begin on october 1 , 2013 , and all exchanges are to be operational and offering coverage on january 1 , 2014 .

this report looks at the requirements for exchanges established in aca and provides information about the requirements and choices available to states for the establishment , functions , financial responsibilities , and coverage of the aca exchanges .

it also includes a brief discussion of the interactions between exchanges and other provisions in the law .

aca intends exchanges to be marketplaces where qualified individuals and small businesses can "shop" for private health insurance coverage .

the coverage offered through exchanges will be comprehensive and meet all applicable private market reforms specified in aca .

such plans offered through the exchanges will be certified as "qualified health plans" or qhps .

aca explicitly states that enrollment in exchanges is voluntary and no individual may be compelled to enroll in exchange coverage .

while the main purpose of the exchanges will be to facilitate the offer and purchase of health insurance , nothing in aca prohibits qualified individuals , qualified small businesses , and insurance carriers from participating in the health insurance market outside of exchanges .

for individuals seeking coverage , exchanges will not only create marketplaces where qualified individuals can purchase qhps in the nongroup ( individual ) market , but exchanges will also assist individuals with obtaining federally subsidized premium and cost - sharing assistance to help low to middle income individuals offset the cost of both purchasing and using health insurance .

exchanges will also screen individuals for eligibility for certain public insurance programs ( eg , medicaid ) and connect them with appropriate agencies .

for the purposes of this report , an exchange that allows individuals to seek nongroup coverage or eligibility for public programs is referred to as the "individual exchange. .

small businesses seeking coverage for their employees will be able to use the small business health options program ( shop ) exchange .

the shop exchange is designed to assist qualified small employers and their employees with the purchase of qhps offered in the small group market .

qualified small employers will be able to select one or more qhps available in the shop to offer to their employees , and they will be able to set the amount they will contribute to qhp premiums .

exchanges must be established by the state itself or by the secretary of hhs , and they must carry out the general functions described above for both individuals and small businesses .

additionally , exchanges will be expected to perform a number of other functions relating to managing the qhps offered through the exchanges and assisting individuals and small businesses in accessing and obtaining coverage .

regardless of how an exchange is established , the initial open enrollment period for an exchange will be october 1 , 2013 , through march 31 , 2014 .

exchanges must begin offering coverage to qualified individuals and small businesses on january 1 , 2014 .

aca provides general direction regarding the establishment and administration of an exchange .

aca is supplemented by regulations and other guidance produced by federal agencies , particularly hhs .

taken together , these documents set forth some requirements and minimum standards that various stakeholders — including consumers , states , issuers , and employers — must meet to be part of or to participate in an exchange .

one factor that could influence a number of exchange implementation decisions is how an exchange is established .

states have the option of establishing their own exchanges ( state - based exchange ) as a governmental agency or a non - profit entity .

states that intend to operate their own exchanges must have hhs approval .

if a state - based exchange ( sbe ) is not approved , or if a state chooses not to establish its own exchange , the hhs secretary has the authority to establish and operate an exchange in that state directly , or through an agreement with a non - profit entity .

in a federally - facilitated exchange ( ffe ) , hhs will carry out all functions of the exchange and have authority over the exchange .

states also have the option to partner with the federal government to establish an exchange .

in a state partnership exchange ( "partnership" ) a state partners with the federal government and certain state - designed and operated functions are combined with federally - designed and operated functions .

states that enter into a partnership exchange are required to carry out certain functions and activities related to plan management or consumer assistance or both .

while hhs and states share responsibility for carrying out functions in state partnership exchanges , hhs retains authority over these exchanges .

in may 2013 , hhs published guidance that indicated that hhs intends to propose , through rulemaking , that a state may also choose to establish and administer its shop exchange while the federal government establishes and administers the state's individual exchange .

in this case the state would retain authority over its shop exchange while the federal government would have authority over the state's individual exchange .

for the purposes of this report , this arrangement is referred to as a "state - based shop / federally - facilitated individual exchange. .

states had until december 14 , 2012 to declare their intentions to operate a sbe in 2014 ; states had until february 15 , 2013 to declare their intentions to have a partnership exchange in 2014 .

hhs has not yet indicated whether there will be a deadline for requesting to have a state - based shop / federally - facilitated individual exchange , but hhs has indicated that only states that previously submitted an approved application to have a sbe may request to change to a state - based shop / federally - facilitated individual exchange for 2014 .

figure 1 shows the status of states' decisions as of may 30 , 2013 .

it should be noted that states may elect to operate a different type of exchange in the future .

for example , if a state chooses not to establish a sbe for 2014 , it still may elect to do so in the future .

to do so , a state would have to follow the process and timeline outlined by hhs .

the following sections provide more details about sbes , ffes , and partnership exchanges .

exchanges are required to carry out a number of different functions , including determining eligibility and enrolling individuals in appropriate plans ; conducting plan management activities ; assisting consumers ; ensuring plan accountability ; and providing financial management .

these functions are not necessarily exhaustive of exchange responsibilities ; rather , this section is intended to provide a general overview of an exchange's responsibilities .

unless otherwise noted , both sbes and ffes are required to carry out the functions described in this section .

additionally , some responsibilities may be different for individual exchanges and shop exchanges , so the following discussion provides information for both .

aca requires federal agencies , primarily hhs , to oversee the exchanges , thus carrying out a number of responsibilities related to the establishment and administration of exchanges .

many of these responsibilities require federal agencies to create systems and criteria .

for example , the hhs secretary is required to develop the minimum criteria an exchange will use to certify qhps to be offered through an exchange .

the hhs secretary is also required to grant financial awards to states to be used to establish exchanges .

most private health insurance plans sold through exchanges must include a comprehensive set of benefits .

the law specifies standards for the types and levels of coverage that can be offered through exchanges .

beginning in 2014 , most individuals are required to have health insurance or potentially pay a penalty for noncompliance .

generally , individuals will be required to maintain "minimum essential coverage" for themselves and their dependents .

nearly all plans offered through exchanges qualify as minimum essential coverage .

as follows , most individuals who have coverage through an exchange will meet the requirements of the individual mandate .

other coverage , such as employer - sponsored insurance and medicaid , is also considered minimum essential coverage for the purpose of the individual mandate , so an individual does not have to enroll in an exchange plan to meet the requirements of the mandate .

certain individuals will be exempt from the individual mandate .

for example , some individuals will qualify for an exemption based on the affordability of coverage while others will qualify because of their religious beliefs .

in screening applicants for eligibility for qhps and iaps , exchanges are required to determine whether an individual is exempt from the mandate and issue certificates of exemption accordingly .

while employers are not required to offer health benefits to their employees , certain large employers may be subject to penalties whether or not they offer health insurance .

large employers who do not offer health insurance may be subject to penalties if any of their full - time workers enroll in exchange plans and receive premium credits .

while most employers who do offer health benefits will meet the law's requirements , some also may be required to pay a penalty if any of their full - time workers receive a premium credit .

in the latter scenario , one way that workers with an employer offer of health benefits may be eligible for premium credits is if the employer plan does not provide minimum value ; that is , has an actuarial value that is less than 60% .

so while employers are not required to offer coverage through the exchanges , certain large employers may be subject to a penalty if they offer coverage with an actuarial value lower than a bronze - level plan and one of their full - time workers enrolls in an exchange and receives a premium credit .

exchanges are responsible for notifying an employer if an employee has been found eligible for advance payment of premium credits or cost - sharing subsidies .

the exchange must identify the employee , indicate the employee's eligibility , explain that the employer may be subject to penalty , and notify the employer of the right to appeal the determination .

aca includes a number of private market reforms that impose requirements on health insurance carriers and others .

such reforms relate to the offer , issuance , generosity , and pricing of health plans , among other requirements .

for example , aca requires most health plans to extend dependent coverage to children under age 26 , with exception .

given that health insurance carriers will be offering plans through the exchanges , aca's private market reforms will apply to exchange plans .

as discussed under the " plan management responsibilities " section of this report , one of the responsibilities of exchanges will be to certify that plans meet the criteria for a qualified health plan , and , therefore , may be offered through an exchange .

while the certification process will consider plan marketing requirements , provider network adequacy , and other features , as specified in the law , the market reforms are requirements imposed generally on insurance companies .

since states remain the primary regulators of health insurance , even post - aca enactment , states would enforce aca insurance requirements .

while medicaid is generally beyond the scope of this report , aca's medicaid and exchange provisions were originally designed to work in tandem with each other to provide a continuous source of subsidized coverage for low - to middle - income individuals and families , beginning in 2014 .

as previously discussed , exchanges are responsible for facilitating enrollment in medicaid .

as originally enacted , aca required states to expand medicaid to certain individuals who are under age 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , beginning in 2014 .

this reform not only expanded eligibility to a group that generally is not eligible for medicaid ( low - income childless adults ) , but also raised medicaid's mandatory income eligibility level for certain existing groups to 133% of the fpl .

states were required to do this mandatory expansion as a condition of receipt of medicaid federal financial participation .

given that premium credits would be available through all exchanges at the same time as this medicaid expansion , the law envisioned that all individuals with income up to 400% fpl would have access to subsidized coverage , regardless of their state of residency .

on june 28 , 2012 , the united states supreme court issued its decision in national federation of independent business v. sebelius .

the court held that the federal government cannot terminate current medicaid program federal matching funds if a state refuses to expand its medicaid program to include non - elderly , non - pregnant adults under 133% of the federal poverty level .

if a state accepts the new aca medicaid expansion funds , it must abide by the new expansion coverage rules , but , based on the court's opinion , it appears that a state can refuse to participate in the expansion without losing any of its current federal medicaid matching funds .

all other provisions of aca , including the entire health care and education reconciliation act ( hcera , p.l .

111-152 ) , remain intact .

given that some states may choose not to expand medicaid , there is a possibility that some individuals will not have access to either medicaid or the premium tax credits .

regardless of whether or not a state expands its medicaid program , the rules for coordination and facilitating enrollment between exchange plans and medicaid will still apply .

for example , an individual exchange may decide to determine eligibility for medicaid .

if a person who has applied for exchange coverage is determined eligible for medicaid , the individual exchange must enroll the person in medicaid and share the person's information with the state medicaid agency .

