the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides an array of benefits to veterans and to certain members of their families .

these benefits include , but are not limited to , disability compensation , education and training benefits , dependent and survivor benefits , medical treatment , life insurance and burial benefits , and home loan guaranty .

in order to apply for these benefits , in most circumstances , the claimant will send an application to his or her local va office .

the local va regional office ( ro ) will review the application and make an initial determination as to whether the claimant is entitled to the benefit .

if , after the local va makes a determination on the claim , the claimant is not satisfied with the results , he or she has the right to appeal that decision .

this report provides an overview of the va appeal process from the first stages of the appeal through review by the supreme court of the united states .

the introduction to this report will discuss the types of decisions that can be appealed , introduce the various actors in the appeal process , briefly describe the two avenues for appeal within the va , and address the rights of a claimant to be represented during the appeal process .

the report will then provide a step - by - step breakdown of the appeal process within the department of veterans affairs followed by a description of further judicial review from the court of appeals for veterans claims , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit , and the supreme court of the united states .

the court of appeals for veterans claims , an article i court , has exclusive jurisdiction over appeals from the board of veterans appeals .

in order to have the cavc hear an appeal from the bva , the appellant must submit a notice of appeal to the court within 120 days of the date that the bva mailed its decision .

only the claimant may file an appeal to the cavc ; the va does not have the right to have a decision of the bva reviewed .

the cavc will reach its determination by reviewing the record from the bva and the written arguments provided by the appellant and the va .

although the cavc is authorized to hear oral arguments , a vast majority of cases are decided without such argument .

the cavc is not permitted to review de novo a determination of fact made by the bva .

depending on the nature and complexity of the case , either one judge , a panel of three judges or the entire court will render a decision on the case .

in a vast majority of cases , one judge will make a decision on the case .

if the cavc rules in favor of the appellant , the case can be remanded to the bva in order to implement the cavc's ruling .

if the cavc denies the appellant's claim , the appellant may seek further review at the united states court of appeals for federal claims .

the va may also appeal a cavc decision .

for years , the 120-day deadline was viewed as a procedural requirement , and thus subject to equitable tolling — that is , missing the deadline did not automatically preclude review by the cavc .

after the supreme court decision in bowles v. russell , the cavc and u.s. court of appeals for federal claims determined that the deadline was actually a jurisdictional requirement — that is , an appeal made after the deadline could not be heard by the cavc for any reason .

however , in 2011 , the supreme court clarified that the cavc deadline was not jurisdictional and , therefore , an appeal will not necessarily be precluded if the deadline is missed .

in 2001 , david henderson filed a claim with the va for compensation based on his need for in - home care .

his claim was denied by the va regional office and was subsequently denied by the bva .

after the bva denied his claim , henderson appealed the decision to the cavc .

however , his notice of appeal was filed 15 days after the 120-day filing deadline had expired .

the cavc , in a 2-1 decision , relied on the supreme court's bowles v. russell decision and dismissed his appeal for lack of jurisdiction due to the missed deadline .

the court of appeals for federal claims concurred with the cavc , noting that the 120-day deadline was jurisdictional , and thus mandatory .

the supreme court granted certiorari .

the court reviewed whether "a veteran's failure to file a notice of appeal within the 120-day period should be regarded as having 'jurisdictional' consequences. .

the court unanimously determined that the deadline was not jurisdictional and that missing the deadline does not necessarily preclude the cavc from hearing an appeal .

the court noted that congress had taken great care to ensure that the system for awarding veterans benefits greatly favors veterans .

thus , the court determined that congress did not intend the 120-day deadline to be a jurisdictional rule .

however , the court did state that the deadline is an "important procedural rule" and remanded the case to the federal circuit to determine whether the appellant's "case falls within any exception to the rule. .

therefore , although the court established that the deadline was not mandatory , it provided no guidance for when a case could still be heard even after the deadline was missed .

the cavc , in bove v. shinseki , issued a ruling that provides context to when the court would still hear an appeal even after the deadline is missed .

the cavc , prior to its decision in henderson v. shinseki , already had a test for determining when equitable tolling would be permissible .

therefore , it returned to its previous jurisprudence on the issue .

it stated , the doctrine of equitable tolling has generally established parameters , and over time decisions of the federal circuit and this court have addressed those parameters in the context of appeals to this court .

thus , for example , equitable tolling was not applied when failure to file was due to general negligence or procrastination .

rather , it was applied only when circumstances precluded a timely filing despite the exercise of due diligence , such as ( 1 ) a mental illness rendering one incapable of handling one's own affairs or other extraordinary circumstances beyond one's control , ( 2 ) reliance on the incorrect statement of a va official , or ( 3 ) a misfiling at the regional office or the board .

the cavc held that if an appellant accidentally files the notice of appeal at the wrong location — for example , at the bva instead of with the cavc — but the notice of appeal is otherwise timely , equitable tolling is appropriate .

it also held that , although mental illness can be a reason to find equitable tolling to be appropriate , the appellant must demonstrate that he is actually " incapable of functioning or making decisions due to mental illness , that his mental illness prevented him from filing his appeal or seeking the assistance of counsel , or that his mental disabilities were related directly to his untimely filing. .

therefore , although the 120-day deadline is not "jurisdictional," it still precludes review from the cavc in many circumstances .

however , it should be noted , the federal circuit overruled bove in dixon v. mcdonald .

in bove , the cavc had held that it had the authority to address untimely filings and equitable tolling sua sponte — that is , on its own accord without prompting from either party — and that the 120-day time period in which to file an appeal is not subject to waiver or forfeiture by the secretary .

the federal circuit overruled the cavc with respect to its sua sponte authority "to resolve timeliness in the face of the secretary's waiver by granting him relief that he explicitly declined to seek. .

the federal circuit determined that the cavc's conclusion was wrong for three reasons: ( 1 ) it failed to account for statutory limits to its jurisdiction ; ( 2 ) it misread supreme court precedent ; and ( 3 ) it misconstrued the relevant policy considerations .

thus , the federal circuit held that the cavc does not have the sua sponte authority to grant relief on a non - jurisdictional timeliness defense when the secretary has waived the defense .

however , the first holding in bove , that the 120-day period in which to file an appeal is subject to equitable tolling , was not overruled and remains valid .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) has exclusive jurisdiction to hear appeals from a cavc decision .

the federal circuit provides the last appeal of right during the appeal process .

by statute , the review provided by the federal circuit is rather limited .

the federal circuit is not permitted to review " ( a ) a challenge to a factual determination , or ( b ) a challenge to a law or regulation as applied to the facts of a particular case. .

the federal circuit can only review actions to see if they are arbitrary or capricious , unconstitutional , in excess of statutory jurisdiction , or procedurally deficient .

the federal circuit may modify , reverse , or remand decisions by the cavc , as appropriate .

if either party is dissatisfied with the ruling from the federal circuit , an appeal may be made to the supreme court of the united states .

the supreme court does not have to hear the case and may deny certiorari .

if the supreme court decides to hear the case , any decision reached by the court is final .

