introduced in each of the last several congressional sessions , the student non - discrimination act ( snda ) would prohibit discrimination on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity in public elementary and secondary schools .

the stated purpose of the legislation ( h.r .

846 / s. 439 in the 114 th congress ) is to ensure that students are free from discriminatory conduct such as harassment , bullying , intimidation , and violence .

snda appears to be patterned on title ix of the education amendments of 1972 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in federally funded education programs or activities , although snda does differ from title ix in several important respects .

in the 113 th congress , snda was included as part of legislation to reauthorize the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

similar legislation to reauthorize the esea is pending in the 114 th congress , and it is possible that snda could be incorporated into one of these bills during the legislative process .

this report begins by discussing current laws that prohibit discrimination in education , and continues with an analysis of the specific provisions contained in snda , including provisions relating to coverage , prohibited acts , and enforcement and remedies under the proposed legislation .

under current law , no civil rights statute explicitly prohibits discrimination in schools on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity , although there are several civil rights statutes that bar discrimination in education on other grounds .

in addition to title ix , the applicable federal civil rights statutes that currently prohibit discrimination in schools include title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 ( cra ) , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , or national origin in federally funded programs or activities ; section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in federally funded programs or activities ; title ii of the americans with disabilities act of 1990 ( ada ) , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability by state or local governments ; title iv of the cra , which bars discrimination in public schools on the basis of race , color , sex , religion , or national origin ; and the equal educational opportunities act , which prohibits states from denying equal educational opportunities based on race , color , sex , or national origin .

the last two statutes were largely designed to combat segregation in public schools .

although none of these civil rights statutes explicitly prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity , there may be instances in which such discrimination may also be a form of sex discrimination that violates title ix .

in the employment context , the supreme court has recognized that sex discrimination may encompass same - sex sexual harassment , meaning that sex discrimination is prohibited even if the harasser and victim are members of the same sex .

the court has also ruled that gender stereotyping is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex .

therefore , if a student who is gay or transgender is being harassed because of a failure to conform to gender stereotypes , such harassment is prohibited by title ix .

it is important to note , however , that title ix prohibits sexual orientation or gender identity discrimination only when it constitutes a form of sex discrimination .

thus , the statute does not prohibit all forms of sexual orientation or gender identity discrimination or harassment of students , and snda appears to be designed to fill this gap .

in 2010 , the department of education ( ed ) issued guidance that discusses when student bullying or harassment may violate federal education anti - discrimination laws and that clarifies a school's obligation to combat such bullying or harassment .

the guidance includes a discussion of when bullying or harassment that targets lesbian , gay , bisexual , or transgender students may be a form of sex discrimination that violates title ix .

as noted above , there are certain circumstances in which discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity in federally funded education programs or activities may currently be prohibited by title ix's prohibition against sex discrimination .

indeed , both ed and the department of justice ( doj ) have taken an active role in pursuing enforcement efforts in such circumstances .

these efforts have resulted in a number of settlements in recent years .

for example , in a 2013 case involving arcadia unified school district , a transgender male student alleged that the school district had violated title ix by denying him access to facilities consistent with his male gender .

under an agreement reached with ed and doj , the school district will work with a consultant to support and assist the district in creating a safe , nondiscriminatory learning environment for students who are transgender or do not conform to gender stereotypes ; amend its policies and procedures to reflect that gender - based discrimination , including discrimination based on a student's gender identity , transgender status , and nonconformity with gender stereotypes , is a form of discrimination based on sex ; and train administrators and faculty on preventing gender - based discrimination and creating a nondiscriminatory school environment for transgender students .

additionally , the district will take a number of steps to treat the student like all other male students in the education programs and activities offered by the district .

likewise , in j.l .

v. mohawk central school district , doj intervened in a lawsuit filed by a transgender male student who alleged that the school district had violated title ix and the equal protection clause of the u.s. constitution by failing to take action to remedy harassment based on gender stereotypes .

the school district and doj eventually reached a court - approved settlement agreement that provided a number of remedies to address discrimination on the basis of sex , gender identity , gender expression , and sexual orientation .

despite the anti - discrimination protections that may be available in title ix cases such as these , it is important to note that not all instances of sexual orientation or gender identity discrimination will be deemed to be a form of sex discrimination prohibited by federal law .

snda therefore appears to be designed to offer protection in cases in which such discrimination is not currently prohibited under title ix .

