this report surveys existing law for legal issues that have arisen , or may arise in the future , on account of climate change and government responses thereto .

the reader interested in proposals for new laws to deal with climate change is referred to other works .

of course , while this report covers many of the major legal issues that have emerged or may do so , the endless ramifications of climate change preclude any claim to exhaustiveness .

the report takes as its point of departure the current scientific consensus that climate change is occurring and , to the degree it continues , will cause sea level rise and extreme weather events .

inclusion of some legal issues was based further on the predominant scientific view that human activities are contributing to climate change .

discussion of several topics in this report may have to be substantially modified or deleted if congress enacts comprehensive climate change legislation , though prospects for congress doing so now seem small .

congressional legislation might alter or displace the role of certain existing statutes , the clean air act and the endangered species act being prime candidates , for addressing climate change , or end the already limited availability of common law claims for that purpose .

federal courts have evolved a variety of gatekeeper doctrines to ensure that only certain plaintiffs and certain types of claims can invoke their jurisdiction .

two of these doctrines , standing and political question , have posed daunting barriers for plaintiffs in climate change cases .

standing doctrine .

this principle flows from article iii of the constitution , which limits the jurisdiction of courts created under that article ( such as federal district courts ) to "cases" or "controversies. .

these words are construed to require a person who sues in an article iii court to show ( 1 ) "injury in fact" ( existing or imminent ) , ( 2 ) "causation" ( a traceable connection between the injury in fact and defendant's conduct ) , and ( 3 ) "redressability" ( plaintiff's injury is likely to be remedied by the relief plaintiff seeks ) .

a plaintiff not satisfying any of these elements is said to lack standing ; his or her suit will be dismissed .

it should be apparent that a plaintiff complaining of injury from climate change may be thwarted by any of the three standing requirements .

for example , how does such a plaintiff show the second element , causation ? .

how does he show , say , that a drought that destroyed his crops was caused by climate change — indeed , by climate change to which the defendant's greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions contributed ? .

to be sure , in two climate change decisions , massachusetts v. epa in the supreme court and american elec .

power co. v. connecticut in the second circuit , article iii standing was found — but specifically for state plaintiffs .

massachusetts asserted that states are entitled to "special solicitude" when seeking to establish standing , and both decisions noted the sovereign status of states as parens patriae ( literally , father of the country ) .

case law since these decisions , however , has rejected their extension to private plaintiffs , who have often encountered difficulty establishing standing in climate change cases .

courts have not relaxed the traditional standing law requirements discerned in article iii just because climate change is involved .

true , such plaintiffs may seek to avoid article iii standing issues by attempting to establish standing in state courts .

but if , as is likely , the lawsuit takes aim at ghg emissions from out - of - state sources , the defendants are likely to remove the case to federal court under federal question or diversity jurisdiction .

thus the question of article iii standing likely will need to be faced .

a specialized issue is whether indian tribes , by virtue of their inherent sovereignty , should also be able to establish standing through parens patriae status .

the argument for tribal parens patriae standing was rejected by the district court in native village of kivalina v. exxonmobil corp . , a case in which an alaskan native village seeks damages for coastal erosion allegedly caused by climate change to which the defendants' ghg emissions assertedly contribute .

standing issues have arisen in most of the many cases challenging the adequacy of agencies' discussion of climate change in environmental impact statements , where the partially relaxed requirements for standing based on procedural injury apply .

political question doctrine .

while standing asks whether there is a proper plaintiff before the court , political question doctrine asks whether there is a justiciable claim .

the doctrine seeks to restrain courts from inappropriate interference in the business of the other branches of government — often because resolving the issue necessarily involves policy determinations .

six factors indicating a non - justiciable political question ( any one of which may be dispositive ) were famously stated by the supreme court in baker v. carr in 1962 .

of these , the first three have played a role in the climate - change nuisance cases: "a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department ; or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it ; or the impossibility of deciding [the issue] without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion.... " baker made clear it was setting a high threshold for nonjusticiability ; since it was decided a half - century ago , the court has found few issues to present political questions .

but the doctrine has been ubiquitous in the nuisance - based climate change litigation with more courts rejecting such claims on that ground than not .

addendum .

at this point , the reader is referred to section iii.a. , " a .

liability after american electric power co. , inc. v. connecticut ," which discusses yet another litigation barrier: federal displacement of common - law - based climate change claims by the clean air act .

this barrier , announced by the supreme court in 2011 , now makes it unnecessary for courts to reach the standing and political question issues in the case , allowing them to avoid the abstruse questions raised by those defenses .

proactive responses to climate change are usually grouped under one of two headings: mitigation and adaptation .

this section treats some of the legal issues raised by mitigation .

sections iv and v compile some of the legal issues associated with adaptation .

based on consensus predictions as to the many harms that climate change may cause , one may safely predict that liability lawsuits will be filed .

this report previously mentioned the standing hurdle looming before climate change plaintiffs , especially those that are not states , and the political question hurdle .

following are some additional issues in liability actions .

the previous section touched on a few adaptation measures specifically related to sea level rise .

this section continues with additional adaption measures that raise legal issues .

united nations high commissioner for refugees antonio guterres has said: "climate change is today one of the main drivers of forced displacement , both directly through impact on environment — not allowing people to live any more in the areas where they were traditionally living — and as a trigger of extreme poverty and conflict. .

climate - related migrants , however , are not considered a "protected class" of people in international law or u.s. immigration law , nor is there a specific legal framework or entity responsible for their displacement .

in international law , the foundational document is the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees , which defines "refugee" as a person who "owing to a well - founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group , or political opinion , is outside the country of his nationality. .

this definition is unlikely to embrace climate change refugees since they do not suffer "persecution," and certainly not for the stated reasons .

in addition , it is widely held that for the foreseeable future , most people displaced by climate change will stay within their own countries , and thus fall outside the definition of refugee because not "outside the country of [their] nationality. .

similarly , the united states has long held to the principle that it will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened , but this principle does not encompass economic or environmental migrants .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) requires foreign nationals seeking asylum or refugee status to demonstrate a well - founded fear that , if returned home , they will be persecuted based upon the five characteristics listed in the convention ( above ) .

provisions also exist in the ina to offer temporary protected status or relief from removal when natural disasters occur or when violence and civil unrest erupt in spots around the world .

while temporary protected status may benefit people stranded in the united states because of natural disasters , it is only short - term relief from removal .

