federal law punishes convicted sex offenders for failure to register or to update their registration as the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) demands .

the offense consists of three elements: ( 1 ) a continuing obligation to report to the authorities in any jurisdiction in which the individual resides , works , or attends school ; ( 2 ) the knowing failure to comply with registration requirements ; and ( 3 ) a jurisdictional element , i.e . , ( a ) an obligation to register as a consequence of a prior qualifying federal conviction or ( b ) ( i ) travel in interstate or foreign commerce , ( ii )  travel into or out of indian country , or ( iii ) residence in indian country .

violators face imprisonment for not more than 10 years .

the registration offense carries an additional penalty of imprisonment for not more than 30 years , but not less than 5 years , if the offender is also guilty of a federal crime of violence .

the adam walsh child protection and safety act created sorna .

sorna revised an earlier nationwide sex offender registration system , the jacob wetterling act .

the jacob wetterling act encouraged the states to establish and maintain a registration system .

each of them had done so .

their efforts , however , though often consistent , were hardly uniform .

the walsh act preserves the basic structure of the wetterling act , expands upon it , and makes more specific matters that were previously left to individual state choice .

the walsh act contemplates a nationwide , state - based , publicly available , contemporaneously accurate , online system .

jurisdictions that fail to meet the walsh act's threshold requirements face the loss of a portion of their federal criminal justice assistance grants .

the walsh act vests the attorney general with authority to determine the extent to which sorna would apply to those with qualifying convictions committed prior to enactment .

after enactment , the attorney general promulgated implementing regulations that imposed the registration requirements on those with pre - enactment convictions .

conscious of the legal and technical adjustments required of the states , the walsh act afforded jurisdictions an extension to make the initial modifications necessary to bring their systems into compliance .

thereafter , states not yet in compliance have been allowed to use the penalty portion of their federal justice assistance funds for that purpose .

the justice department indicates that 17 states , 3 territories , and numerous tribes are now in substantial compliance with the 2006 legislation .

section 2250 convictions require the government to prove ( 1 ) that the defendant had an obligation under sorna to register and to maintain the currency of his registration information ; ( 2 ) that the defendant knowingly failed to comply ; and ( 3 ) that one of the section's jurisdictional prerequisites has been satisfied .

much of the litigation relating to section 2250 relates to const itutional challenges involving either section 2250 or sorna .

the attacks have taken one of two forms .

one argues that sorna or section 2250 operates in a manner which the constitution specifically forbids , for example in its clauses on ex post facto laws , due process , and cruel and unusual punishment .

the other argues that the constitution does not grant congress the legislative authority to enact either section 2250 or sorna .

these challenges probe the boundaries of the commerce clause , the necessary and proper clause , and the spending clause , among others .

the supreme court addressed two of the most common constitutional issues associated with sex offender registration before the enactment of sorna .

one addressed the ex post facto clause implications of sex offender registration , smith v. doe ; the other the due process clause implications , connecticut department of public safety v. doe .

neither the states nor the federal government may enact laws that operate ex post facto .

the prohibition covers both statutes that outlaw conduct that was innocent when it occurred and statutes that authorize imposition of a greater penalty for a crime than applied when the crime occurred .

the prohibitions , however , apply only to criminal statutes or to civil statutes whose intent or effect is so punitive as to belie any but a penal characterization .

in smith , the supreme court dealt with the ex post facto issue in the context of the alaska sex offender registration statute .

it found the statute civil in nature and effect , not punitive , and consequently its retroactive application did not violate the ex post facto clause .

its analysis has colored the lower federal courts' treatment of ex post facto challenges to section 2250 and sorna .

"relying on smith , circuit courts have consistently held that sorna does not violate the ex post facto clause," with one apparently limited exception .

the ninth circuit initially held that the sorna obligations for pre - enactment juveniles constituted punishment , because they stripped juveniles of the confidentiality that then surrounded juvenile proceedings .

thus , their enforcement against such juveniles would constitute an ex post facto violation , the ninth circuit decided .

it subsequently concluded that "not all applications of sorna to individuals based on juvenile sex offender determinations are sufficiently punitive to violate the ex post facto clause. .

this is particularly true , the circuit opined , when sorna did not result in a loss of confidentiality because of the disclosure requirements that accompanied the original qualifying juvenile adjudication .

the supreme court's assessment of state sex offender registration statutes has been less dispositive of due process issues because of the variety of circumstances in which they may arise .

neither the federal nor state governments may deny a person of "life , liberty , or property , without due process of law. .

due process requirements take many forms .

they preclude punishment without notice: "[a] conviction fails to comport with due process if the statute under which it is obtained fails to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what is prohibited , or is so standardless that it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory enforcement. .

they bar restraint of liberty or the enjoyment of property without an opportunity to be heard: "[a]n essential principle of due process is that a deprivation of life , liberty , or property be preceded by notice and opportunity for hearing appropriate to the nature of the case. .

they proscribe any punishments or restrictions that are so fundamentally unfair as to constitute a violation of fundamental fairness , that is , substantive due process .

in connecticut dept .

of public safety v. doe , the court found no due process infirmity in the connecticut sex offender registration regime in spite of its failure to afford offenders an opportunity to prove they were not dangerous .

doe suffered no injury from the absence of a pre - registration hearing to determine his dangerousness , in the eyes of the court , because the system required registration of all sex offenders , both those who were dangerous and those who were not .

connecticut dept .

of public safety forecloses the assertion that offenders are entitled to a pre - registration "dangerousness" hearing ; the relevant question under sorna is prior conviction not dangerousness .

in lambert v. california , the court dealt with the issue of sufficiency of notice .

there , the court held invalid a city ordinance that required all felony offenders to register within five days of their arrival in the city .

the court explained that "[w]here a person did not know of the duty to register and where there was no proof of the probability of such knowledge , he may not be convicted consistently with due process. .

since "by the time that congress enacted sorna , every state had a sex offender registration law in place," attempts to build on lambert have been rejected , because the courts concluded that offenders knew or should have known of their duty to register .

suggestions that differences between state and federal requirements result in impermissible vagueness have fared no better .

to qualify as a violation of substantive due process , a governmental regime must intrude upon a right "deeply rooted in our history and traditions," or "fundamental to our concept of constitutionally ordered liberty. .

perhaps because the threshold is so high , section 2250 and sorna have only infrequently been questioned on substantive due process grounds .

"the 'right to travel' ... embraces at least three different components .

it protects the right of a citizen of one state to enter and to leave another state , the right to be treated as a welcome visitor rather than an unfriendly alien when temporarily present in the second state , and , for those travelers who elect to become permanent residents , the right to be treated like other citizens of that state. .

section 2250 , it has been contended , violates the right to travel because it punishes those who travel from one state to another yet fail to register , but not those who fail to register without leaving the state .

the courts have responded , however , that the right must yield to compelling state interest in the prevention of future sex offenses .

the eighth amendment bars the federal government from inflicting "cruel and unusual punishment. .

a punishment is cruel and unusual within the meaning of the eighth amendment when it is grossly disproportionate to the offense .

the courts have refused to say that sentences within section 2250's 10-year maximum are grossly disproportionate to the crime of failing to maintain current and accurate sex offender registration information .

they have also declined to hold that sorna's registration regime itself violates the eighth amendment , either because they do not consider the requirements punitive or because they do not consider them grossly disproportionate .

the most frequent constitutional challenge to sorna and section 2250 is that congress lacked the constitutional authority to enact them .

some of these challenges speak to the breadth of congress's constitutional powers , such as those vested under the tax and spend clause , the commerce clause , or the necessary and proper clause .

others address contextual limitations on the exercise of those of those powers imposed by such things as the non - delegation doctrine or the principles of separation of powers reflected in the tenth amendment .

the federal government enjoys only such authority as may be traced to the constitution ; the tenth amendment reserves to the states and the people powers not vested in federal government .

challengers of congress's legislative authority to enact sorna or the justice department's authority to prosecute failure to comply with its demands on tenth amendment grounds have had to overcome substantial obstacles .

first , several of congress's constitutional powers are far reaching .

among them are the powers to regulate interstate and foreign commerce , to tax and spend for the general welfare , and to enact laws necessary and proper to effectuate the authority the constitution provides .

second , although a particular statute may implicate the proper exercise of more than one constitutional power , only one is necessary for constitutional purposes .

third , "while sorna imposes a duty on the sex offender to register , it nowhere imposes a requirement on the state to accept such registration. .

finally , until recently some courts have held that the individual defendants had no standing to contest the statutory validity on the basis of constitutional provisions designed to protect the institutional interests of governmental entities rather than to protect private interests .

several earlier courts rejected sorna challenges under the tenth amendment on the grounds that the defendants had no standing .

standing refers to the question of whether a party in litigation is asserting or "standing" on his or her own rights or only upon those of another .

at one time , there was no consensus among the lower federal appellate courts over whether individuals had standing to present tenth amendment claims .

more specifically , at least two circuits had held that defendants convicted under section 2250 had no standing to challenge their convictions on tenth amendment grounds .

those courts , however , did not have the benefit of the supreme court's bond and reynolds decisions .

in bond , the court pointed out that a defendant who challenges the tenth amendment validity of the statute under which she was convicted "seeks to vindicate her own constitutional rights... .

the individual , in a proper case , can assert injury from governmental action taken in excess of the authority that federalism defines .

her rights in this regard do not belong to the state. .

in reynolds , the court implicitly recognized the defendant's standing when at his behest it held that sorna did not apply to pre - enactment convictions until after the attorney general had exercised his delegated authority .

yet , the fact a defendant's tenth amendment challenge may be heard does not mean it will succeed .

"the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes ... to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the united states.... " "objectives not thought to be within article i's enumerated legislative fields , may nevertheless be attained through the use of the spending power and the conditional grant of federal funds. .

in the past , the supreme court has described the limits on congress in very general terms: [first,] [t]he exercise of the spending power must be in pursuit of the general welfare.... second , ... if congress desires to condition the states' receipt of federal funds , it must do so unambiguously ... third , ... conditions on federal grants ... [must be] []related to the federal interest in particular national projects or programs... .

finally , ... other constitutional provisions may provide an independent bar to the conditional grant of federal funds .

moreover , at the end of its 2011 term in national federation of business v. sebelius , seven members of a highly divided court concluded that the power of the spending clause may not be exercised to coerce state participation in a federal program .

congress may use the spending power to induce state participation ; it may not present the choice under such circumstances that a state has no realistic alternative but to acquiesce .

sorna establishes minimum standards for the state sex offender registers and authorizes the attorney general to enforce compliance by reducing by up to 10% the funds a non - complying state would receive in criminal justice assistance funds .

some defendants have suggested that this impermissibly commandeers state officials to administer a federal program and therefore exceeds congress's authority under the spending clause .

as a general matter , while congress may encourage state participation in a federal program , it is not constitutionally free to require state legislators or executive officials to act to enforce or administer a federal regulatory program .

to date , the federal appellate courts have held that sorna's reduction in federal law enforcement assistance grants for a state's failure to comply falls on the encouragement rather than directive side of the constitutional line .

the fact that most states do not feel compelled to bring their systems into full sorna compliance may lend credence to that assessment .

"the congress shall have power ... to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes. .

the supreme court explained in lopez and again in morrison that congress's commerce clause power is broad but not boundless .

modern commerce clause jurisprudence has identified three broad categories of activity that congress may regulate under its commerce power .

first , congress may regulate the use of the channels of interstate commerce .

second , congress is empowered to regulate and protect the instrumentalities of interstate commerce , or persons or things in interstate commerce , even though the threat may come only from intrastate activities .

finally , congress' commerce authority includes the power to regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce .. .

i.e. , those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce .

the lower federal appellate courts have rejected commerce clause attacks on section 2250 in the interstate travel cases , because there they believe section 2250 "fits comfortably with the first two lopez prongs[ , i.e .

the regulation of ( 1 ) the "channels" of interstate commerce and ( 2 ) the "instrumentalities" of interstate commerce]. .

they have also rejected commerce clause attacks on sorna ( "§16913 [sorna] is an unconstitutional exercise of congress's commerce clause power and because lack of compliance with §16913 is a necessary element of §2250 , §2250 is also unconstitutional" ) based on the necessary and proper clause: requiring sex offenders to update their registrations due to intrastate changes of address or employment status is a perfectly logical way to help ensure that states will more effectively be able to track sex offenders when they do cross state lines .

to the extent that §16913 regulates solely intrastate activity , its means are reasonably adapted to the attainment of a legitimate end under the commerce power and therefore proper .

the supreme court in comstock described the breadth of congress's authority under the necessary and proper clause in the context of another walsh act provision .

the walsh act authorizes the attorney general to hold federal inmates beyond their release date in order to initiate federal civil commitment proceedings for the sexually dangerous .

comstock and others questioned application of the statute on the grounds that it exceeded congress's legislative authority under the commerce and necessary and proper clauses .

the court pointed out that the necessary and proper clause has long been understood to empower congress to enact legislation "rationally related to the implementation of a constitutionally enumerated power. .

moreover , be the chain clear and unbroken , the challenged statute need not necessarily be directly linked to a constitutionally enumerated power .

the comstock "statute is a 'necessary and proper' means of exercising the federal authority that permits congress to create federal criminal laws [ ( to carry into effect its commerce clause power for instance ) ] , to punish their violation , to imprison violators , to provide appropriately for those imprisoned , and to maintain the security of those who are not imprisoned but who may be affected by the federal imprisonment of others. .

the court , however , warned that its conclusion was predicated on several factors specific to the case before it .

acting on this suggestion , the fifth circuit , sitting en banc , erroneously concluded that sorna , as applied to kebodeaux , rested beyond congress's legislative reach .

kebodeaux had been convicted by a military court for having sexual relations with a consenting fifteen - year - old while he was a twenty - one - year - old airman .

he was sentenced to six months and given a bad conduct discharge in 1999 .

he registered as a sex offender with texas authorities in 2007 .

he was convicted for violating section 2250 in 2008 , when he failed to report that he had relocated from el paso to san antonio .

the constitution empowers congress to make rules for the governing and regulation of the armed forces .

it also vests congress with broad implementing authority to enact legislation necessary and proper to carry into effect this military governance power and the other powers conveyed by the constitution .

the fifth circuit believed that , unlike the comstock statute , the application of sorna was insufficiently proximate to a federal custodial interest and was sweeping in its conceptual foundation ( "[t]hat reasoning opens the door ... to congressional power over anyone who was ever convicted of a federal crime of any sort" ) .

justice breyer , the author of the supreme court's kebodeaux opinion , provided a two - fold response .

first , by operation of sorna's predecessor , the wetterling act , kebodeaux's registration requirement arose proximate to federal custody .

"[a]s of the time of kebodeaux's offense , conviction and release from federal custody , these wetterling act provisions applied to kebodeaux and imposed upon him registration requirements very similar to those that sorna later imposed. .

second , "[n]o one here claim[ed] that the wetterling act , as applied to military sex offenders like kebodeaux , falls outside the scope of the necessary and property clause .

and it is difficult to see how anyone could persuasively do so. .

perhaps the same might be said of federal sex offenses enacted under congress's enumerated powers other than the military clauses .

yet , chief justice roberts in his kebodeaux concurrence asserted that , "[t]he fact of a prior federal conviction , by itself , does not give congress a freestanding , independent , and perpetual interest in protecting the public from the convict's purely intrastate conduct. .

nevertheless , a subsequent circuit court opinion concluded that congress's authority under the necessary and proper clause extends to a defendant convicted of a commerce clause - based federal offense who was never unconditionally released from federal supervision .

there , the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit acknowledged the kebodeaux concurring views of chief justice roberts and justice alito , but observed that , "for our purposes , the majority opinion binds us , and its analysis does not confine sorna's constitutionality to applications involving only the military regulation clause .

nothing in the major opinion isolates the military regulation clause as the sole foundation of congressional authority in support of sorna. .

the first section of the first article of the constitution declares that "[a]ll legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress of the united states.... " this means that "congress manifestly is not permitted to abdicate or to transfer to others the essential legislative functions with which it is [constitutionally] vested. .

this non - delegation doctrine , however , does not prevent congress from delegating the task of filling in the details of its legislative handiwork , as long as it provides "intelligent principles" to direct the effectuation of its legislative will .

the circuit courts have yet to be persuaded that congress's sorna delegation to the attorney general violates the non - delegation doctrine .

