this report presents an analysis of the discretionary appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fiscal year 2013 ( fy2013 ) .

it compares the president's request for fy2013 funding for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the enacted fy2012 appropriations for dhs , the house - passed and senate - reported dhs appropriations legislation for fy2013 , and the final dhs appropriations legislation included in division d of p.l .

113-6 .

it tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to these bills with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the report does not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically follow any other legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

title i of the dhs appropriations bill provides funding for the department's management activities , analysis and operations ( a&o ) account , and the office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

the administration requested $1,279 million for these accounts in fy2013 , an increase of $147 million above the enacted level .

the house - passed bill would have provided $1,020 million , a decrease of 20.2% from the requested level and 9.9% below fy2012 .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $1,102 million , 13.8% below the request and 2.7% below fy2012 .

after the across - the - board cuts made under division g of p.l .

113-6 , the act provides $1,086 million in appropriations for title i , a decrease of 15.1% from the requested level and 4.1% below fy2012 .

the operating plan for dhs for fy2013 indicates sequestration reduced this to $1,026 million , prior to any transfers or reprogrammings that might mitigate the impact of sequestration in some areas and exacerbate it in others .

table 6 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title i for fy2012 , the administration's request for these components for fy2013 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , the enacted level in p.l .

113-6 and the post - sequester level of available resources from p.l .

113-6 reported by dhs .

title ii of the dhs appropriations bill , which includes over three - quarters of the budget authority provided in the legislation , contains the appropriations for u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

the administration requested $30,759 million for these accounts in fy2013 , a decrease of $768 million ( 2.4% ) below the enacted level .

the house - passed bill would have provided $30,946 million , an increase of 0.6% from the requested level and 1.8% below fy2012 .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $30,974 million , 0.7% above the request and 1.8% below fy2012 .

after the across - the - board cuts made under division g of p.l .

113-6 , the act provides $31,267 million in appropriations for title ii , an increase of 1.7% from the requested level and 0.8% below fy2012 .

the operating plan for dhs for fy2013 indicates sequestration reduced this to $30,184 million , prior to any transfers or reprogrammings that might mitigate the impact of sequestration in some areas and exacerbate it in others .

table 8 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title ii for fy2012 , the administration's request for these components for fy2013 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , the enacted level in p.l .

113-6 , and the post - sequester level of available resources from p.l .

113-6 reported by dhs .

title iii of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the administration requested $5,911 million for these accounts in fy2013 , an increase of $231 million above the enacted level .

the house - passed bill would have provided $5,930 million , an increase of 0.3% above the requested level and 4.4% above fy2012 .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $5,971 million , 1% above the request and 5.1% above fy2012 .

in addition , both house - passed and senate - reported versions of this title also would have included a requested $5,481 million for disaster relief that is offset by an adjustment under the budget control act ( bca ) .

the adjustment would have been $919 million smaller than the adjustment provided in the fy2012 disaster relief appropriations act ( p.l .

112-77 ) .

after the across - the - board cuts but prior to applying sequestration , p.l .

113-6 provides $5,920 million , an increase of 0.2% from the requested level and 4.3% above fy2012 .

the act also included $6,400 million for disaster relief that is offset by an adjustment under the ( bca ) .

table 15 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iii for fy2012 , the administration's request for these components for fy2013 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , the enacted level in p.l .

113-6 and the post - sequester level of available resources from p.l .

113-6 reported by dhs .

title iv of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office .

the administration requested $1,561 million for these accounts in fy2013 , a decrease of $229 million below the enacted level .

the house - passed bill provides $1,510 million , a decrease of 3.3% from the requested level and 13.4% above fy2012 .

the senate - reported bill provides $1,535 million , 1.7% below the request and 15.2% above fy2012 .

after the across - the - board cuts but prior to applying sequestration , p.l .

113-6 provides $1,520 million , a decrease of 0.5% from the requested level and 2.2% above fy2012 .

table 19 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iv for fy2012 , the administration's request for these components for fy2013 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , the enacted level in p.l .

113-6 , and the post - sequester level of available resources from p.l .

113-6 reported by dhs .

title v of the dhs appropriations bill contains the general provisions for the bill .

general provisions typically include rescissions of funding from previous years that partially offset the score of the bill .

occasionally appropriations for special initiatives are found here as well .

this section of the report limits its discussion to new general provisions not mentioned elsewhere in the report and those with a direct impact on the budgetary scoring of the bill .

the administration generally requests rescissions in the accounts where they are made , rather than in this title , and requested no direct funding through general provisions for fy2013 .

the administration proposed not carrying forward 35 of the general provisions from the fy2012 dhs appropriations bill ( division d of p.l .

112-74 ) .

three of these were rescissions , which are one - time provisions .

eleven other provisions were viewed as one - time provisions , including two appropriations and one provision on fees .

five of the provisions the administration suggested not carrying forward were permanent changes in the u.s. code — therefore not requiring repetition — and one the administration said was obsolete .

the other fifteen were deemed by the administration to be "restrictive" in one form or another and therefore a hindrance to the ability of the department to manage its affairs or conduct its mission .

the administration also proposed adding five new general provisions: to add a new provision extending the termination deadline for e - verify , which is still technically a pilot program , until the end of fy2013 .

to add a new provision allowing fema to use earmarked predisaster hazard mitigation grant funds that have not or will not be applied for by their intended recipient .

to add a new provision to establish an outreach program connected to fema's dam safety efforts .

to add a new provision intended to make certain fees collected under the united states colombia trade promotion agreement available for pay for customs inspectors and equipment .

to add a new provision that would allow cbp to enter into reimbursable fee agreements to provide services .

house - passed h.r .

5855 includes $292 million in rescissions in title v , all of which reduce the net scoring of the bill .

those are the only provisions in this title that impact the score of the bill .

the house concurred with the administration's request to drop 22 general provisions , although it did not concur with the administration's position that 13 other provisions did not merit repetition or were no longer necessary .

the house appropriations committee added one of the five general provisions requested by the administration , extending the termination deadline for e - verify .

the house added 13 general provisions to the bill during floor action .

these amendments prohibited the use of funds made available by the legislation to do the following: contravene several key constitutional and legal protections against racial , ethnic or religious profiling ; finalize or enforce a proposed ice rule that would allow undocumented aliens with children eligible for u.s. citizenship to stay in the country while seeking a waiver of a re - entry ban based on their illegal presence in the united states ; pay for the position of public advocate within ice ; enforce a section of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) that prohibits the government from contracting for alternative transportation fuels ( other than for research ) that do not produce less greenhouse gases over their lifecycle than the equivalent conventional petroleum fuel ; implement , administer or enforce section 1301 ( a ) of title 31 , united states code ( 31 u.s.c .

1301 ( a ) ) with respect to the use of cbp funds , thereby allowing cbp to use its salaries and expenses appropriation to pay for cbp operations in puerto rico in the event of a shortfall in the puerto rico trust fund ; restrict a government official from sending or receiving information regarding an individual's immigration status to or from the immigration and naturalization service , in violation of current law ; lease or buy new light duty vehicles except in accordance with the may 24 , 2011 , presidential memorandum on alternative - fuel vehicles ; contravene title 8 , chapter 12 of the u.s. code , and all laws , conventions , and treaties of the united states relating to the immigration , exclusion , deportation , expulsion , or removal of aliens ; buy , operate , or maintain armed unmanned aerial vehicles ; contravene section 236 ( c ) of the immigration and nationality act ( 8 u.s.c .

1226 ( c ) ) , which outlines the authority of the attorney general to detain and release criminal aliens ; enforce an executive order requiring federal agencies to implement a system that allows people with limited english - language proficiency to meaningfully access their services without unduly burdening the fundamental mission of the agencies ; finalize , implement , administer , or enforce three policy memos issued by the director of ice that establish priorities for civil immigration enforcement activities ; and terminate an existing agreement allowing local officials to act as immigration officers under section 287 ( g ) of the immigration and nationality act ( 8 u.s.c .

1357 ( g ) ) .

senate - reported s. 3216 includes $192 million in rescissions in title v , as well as several other provisions that impact the scoring of the bill , including appropriations and changes in fee programs .

taken together , these senate bill provisions offset its cost by $68 million .

the senate concurred with the administration's request to drop 15 general provisions , although it did not agree that 17 other provisions did not merit repetition or were no longer necessary .

in addition , three provisions providing funding to dhs initiatives were essentially modified to apply to fy2013 , rather than being dropped as proposed by the administration: reimbursement of security costs to state and local governments for national special security events ( $8 million ) ; migration and consolidation of dhs data centers ( $65 million ) ; and dhs headquarters consolidation ( $89 million ) were all funded in the general provisions of the senate - reported bill .

like the house , the senate appropriations committee added one of the five general provisions requested by the administration , although they chose to add the provision allowing cbp to enter into reimbursable fee agreements for providing cbp services .

p.l .

113-6 includes $307 million in rescissions in title v , as well as several other provisions that impact the scoring of the bill , including appropriations .

in total , these general provisions offset the cost of the act by $202 million , according to cbo .

the enacted bill dropped ten general provisions the administration sought to remove ( not including rescissions ) , and included a modified form of one of the general provisions sought by the administration .

in addition , as was the case in the senate bill , several provisions providing funding to dhs initiatives were included immigrant integration grants ( $10 million , of which $7.5 million is offset by fees ) ; reimbursement of security costs to state and local governments for national special security events ( $5 million ) ; migration and consolidation of dhs data centers ( $55 million ) ; and dhs headquarters consolidation ( $29 million ) were all funded in the general provisions of the senate - reported bill .

appendix a. appropriations terms and concepts budget authority , obligations , and outlays federal government spending involves a multi - step process that begins with the enactment of budget authority by congress .

federal agencies then obligate funds from the enacted budget authority to pay for their activities .

finally , payments are made to liquidate those obligations ; the actual payment amounts are reflected in the budget as outlays .

budget authority is established through appropriations acts or direct spending legislation and determines the amounts that are available for federal agencies to spend .

the antideficiency act prohibits federal agencies from obligating more funds than the budget authority that was enacted by congress .

budget authority may also be indefinite , as when congress enacts language providing "such sums as may be necessary" to complete a project or purpose .

budget authority may be available on a one - year , multi - year , or no - year basis .

one - year budget authority is only available for obligation during a specific fiscal year ; any unobligated funds at the end of that year are no longer available for spending .

multi - year budget authority specifies a range of time during which funds can be obligated for spending ; no - year budget authority is available for obligation for an indefinite period of time .

obligations are incurred when federal agencies employ personnel , enter into contracts , receive services , and engage in similar transactions in a given fiscal year .

outlays are the funds that are actually spent during the fiscal year .

because multi - year and no - year budget authorities may be obligated over a number of years , outlays do not always match the budget authority enacted in a given year .

additionally , budget authority may be obligated in one fiscal year but spent in a future fiscal year , especially with certain contracts .

in sum , budget authority allows federal agencies to incur obligations and authorizes payments , or outlays , to be made from the treasury .

discretionary agencies and programs , and appropriated entitlement programs , are funded each year in appropriations acts .

discretionary and mandatory spending gross budget authority , or the total funds available for spending by a federal agency , may be composed of discretionary and mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is not mandated by existing law and is thus appropriated yearly by congress through appropriations acts .

the budget enforcement act of 1990 defines discretionary appropriations as budget authority provided in annual appropriation acts and the outlays derived from that authority , but it excludes appropriations for entitlements .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , consists of budget authority and resulting outlays provided in laws other than appropriation acts and is typically not appropriated each year .

however , some mandatory entitlement programs must be appropriated each year and are included in the appropriations acts .

within dhs , the coast guard retirement pay is an example of appropriated mandatory spending .

offsetting collections offsetting funds are collected by the federal government , either from government accounts or the public , as part of a business - type transaction such as offsets to outlays or collection of a fee .

these funds are not counted as revenue .

instead , they are counted as negative outlays .

dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , is composed of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending .

some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority .

other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .

these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility .

the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .

some entitlements are funded by permanent appropriations , others by annual appropriations .

the secret service retirement pay is a permanent appropriation and as such is not annually appropriated , whereas the coast guard retirement pay is annually appropriated .

in addition to these entitlements , the dhs budget contains offsetting trust and public enterprise funds .

these funds are not appropriated by congress .

they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority .

appendix b. dhs appropriations in context federal government - wide homeland security funding since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been an increasing interest in the levels of funding available for homeland security efforts .

the office of management and budget , as originally directed by the fy1998 national defense authorization act , has published an annual report to congress on combating terrorism .

beginning with the june 24 , 2002 , edition of this report , homeland security was included as a part of the analysis .

in subsequent years , this homeland security funding analysis has become more refined , as distinctions ( and account lines ) between homeland and non - homeland security activities have become more precise .

this means that while table b - 1 is presented in such a way as to allow year - to - year comparisons , they may in fact not be strictly comparable due to the increasing specificity of the analysis , as outlined above .

with regard to dhs funding , it is important to note that dhs funding does not comprise all federal spending on homeland security efforts .

in fact , while the largest component of federal spending on homeland security is contained within dhs , the dhs homeland security budget for fy2012 accounted for nearly 52% of total federal funding for homeland security .

the department of defense comprised the next highest proportion at nearly 26% of all federal spending on homeland security .

the department of health and human services at 6% , the department of justice at nearly 6% , and the department of state at more than 3% rounded out the top five agencies in spending on homeland security .

these five agencies collectively accounted for approximately 93% of all federal spending on homeland security .

it is also important to note that not all dhs funding is classified as pertaining to homeland security activities .

the legacy agencies that became a part of dhs also conduct activities that are not homeland security related .

therefore , while the enacted fy2012 budget bills and existing law included total homeland security budget authority of $35.1 billion for dhs , the total budget authority for dhs was $52.5 billion .

moreover , the amounts shown in table b - 1 will not be consistent with total amounts shown elsewhere in the report .

this same inconsistency between homeland security budget authority and requested total budget authority is also true for the budgets of the other agencies listed in the table .

due to the fact that the administration's budget was released without an estimate for fy2013 that accounted for p.l .

113-6 or the impact of sequestration , no authoritative data for fy2013 is available as of the date of publication .

