the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) is a potential free trade agreement ( fta ) among 12 , and perhaps more , countries ( figure 1 ) .

the united states and 11 other countries of the asia - pacific region — australia , brunei , canada , chile , japan , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , peru , singapore , and vietnam — are negotiating the text of the fta .

with over 20 chapters under negotiation , the tpp partners envision the agreement to be "comprehensive and high - standard," in that they seek to eliminate tariffs and nontariff barriers to trade in goods , services , and agriculture , and to establish or expand rules on a wide range of issues including intellectual property rights , foreign direct investment , and other trade - related issues .

they also strive to create a "21 st - century agreement" that addresses new and cross - cutting issues presented by an increasingly globalized economy .

the tpp draws congressional interest on a number of fronts .

congress would have to approve implementing legislation for u.s. commitments under the agreement to enter into force .

in addition , under long - established executive - legislative practice , the administration notifies and consults with congressional leaders , before , during , and after trade agreements have been negotiated .

furthermore , the tpp will likely affect a range of sectors and regions of the u.s. economy of direct interest to members of congress and could influence the shape and path of u.s. trade policy for the foreseeable future .

this report examines the issues related to the proposed tpp , the state and substance of the negotiations ( to the degree that the information is publically available ) , the specific areas under negotiation , the policy and economic contexts in which the tpp would fit , and the issues for congress that the tpp presents .

the report will be revised and updated as events warrant .

the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership , as it was originally known , was conceived in 2003 by singapore , new zealand , and chile as a path to trade liberalization in the asia - pacific region .

brunei joined negotiations in 2005 , and the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership ( p - 4 ) agreement was concluded in 2006 .

in march 2008 , the united states joined the negotiations to conclude the still outstanding investment and financial services provisions .

president bush notified congress of his intention to negotiate with the existing p - 4 members on september 22 , 2008 , and with other countries , australia , peru , and vietnam , on december 30 , 2008 .

after a period of reflection on u.s. trade policy , the obama administration decided to continue with the tpp negotiations .

on november 14 , 2009 , president obama committed the united states to engage with the tpp countries "with the goal of shaping a regional agreement that will have broad - based membership and the high standards worthy of a 21 st - century trade agreement. .

president obama formally notified congress of his administration's intention to enter into negotiations with the tpp countries on december 14 , 2009 .

that notification set off a 90-day timeline under the now - expired 2002 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation , for congressional consultations prior to the beginning of negotiations .

in october 2010 , tpp participants agreed by consensus to the inclusion of malaysia as a negotiating partner .

the negotiating partners announced a framework for the agreement at the sidelines of the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ministerial in honolulu , hi , november 8-13 , 2011 .

thereafter , canada , japan , and mexico started to consult with the existing tpp partners on joining the negotiations .

after several months of intense bilateral consultations with each of the current tpp countries , those countries agreed by consensus to the inclusion of mexico and canada and they began participating as negotiating partners in december 2012 .

japan continued to debate internally the question of joining the negotiations , with prime minister abe announcing japan's official interest in march 2013 .

after concluding bilateral consultations , japan began to fully participate in the tpp negotiations in july 2013 .

in early 2014 , south korea began consultations with the tpp negotiating partners over the possibility of joining , but at the time of this writing has yet to make a formal request to join the negotiations .

it remains unclear whether the current 12 partners would permit another country's participation before concluding the initial agreement , although the united states seems to favor waiting until the current negotiations are completed .

there is as yet no formal limit to the potential membership of the tpp , aside from excluding those countries unwilling to commit to the ambition of the proposed fta .

all current members of the tpp negotiations are also members of apec , and the tpp countries have stated that membership expansion will likely focus on other apec members first , such as south korea , though non - apec countries with a focus on trade liberalization , such as colombia and costa rica , have also expressed an interest in joining tpp .

the overall economic impact of the potential tpp agreement will likely depend on a number of factors , including the extent of the trade liberalization achieved in the agreement , as well as the current level and potential growth of trade and investment among tpp members .

on both measures , the tpp appears significant given that the tpp would be the largest u.s. fta by trade flows ( $727 billion in u.s. goods exports and $882 billion in imports in 2014 ) , and the tpp negotiators have expressed their intent to achieve a "comprehensive and high - standard" fta that will broadly liberalize regional trade and investment .

from the u.s. perspective , a significant share of this liberalization has already occurred from existing u.s. ftas with 6 of the 11 tpp partners , although potential disciplines in areas not covered in previous ftas may be significant for some sectors ( figure 3 ) .

japan's entry into the negotiations greatly increased the potential economic significance of the agreement .

among the u.s. negotiating partners in the tpp , japan is the largest economy and largest trading partner without an existing u.s. fta ( and hence , with greater scope for trade liberalization with the united states ) .

in 2014 , japan was the united states' fourth largest goods export ( $67 billion ) and import ( $134 billion ) market .

as high income countries , u.s. - japan trade differs considerably from u.s. trade with the other negotiating partners , many of them lower to middle income nations , without u.s. ftas .

hence , japan's participation in the agreement has drawn the interest of a wide range of u.s. industries , including sectors like agriculture , automotive , and services .

malaysia and vietnam also stand out among the tpp countries without existing u.s. ftas , both in terms of their current trade and investment with the united states and their potential for future growth .

together these countries have a population of over 120 million and their economies have experienced rapid growth in recent years .

moreover , malaysia's and vietnam's average applied most - favored nation tariffs — the average tariff on imports — are 6% and 9.5% , respectively , two of the highest levels among tpp members .

both nations also have substantial state sectors which may be affected by tpp outcomes .

market access for goods , services , and agriculture often forms the crux of fta negotiations .

however , nontariff barriers such as technical barriers to trade and sanitary and phytosanitary standards , while considered rules , also have an impact on market access .

negotiations on these latter issues are designed to ensure that , as tariff barriers are reduced , they are not replaced by other forms of protection .

in addition to market access , the tpp contains several provisions that build upon rules and disciplines contained in the world trade organization's uruguay round agreements .

many of these provisions have become part of the standard template for u.s. ftas .

while all countries likely would eventually have to adhere to all of the obligations of the agreement , tpp participants may be open to allowing developing countries in the tpp to have longer phase - in periods for rules - based commitments .

in addition to treating certain existing issues in new or different ways , the tpp also seeks disciplines on certain activities not heretofore addressed in ftas .

these include not only horizontal or cross - cutting issues that address best practices in several negotiations , such as with regulatory coherence , but also issues not generally addressed in previous u.s. ftas , such as regulatory coherence , supply chain competitiveness , and small - and medium - sized enterprises .

while some of the commitments relating to these issues are in stand - alone chapters , others are included , as appropriate , in other chapters of the agreement .

the proposed tpp likely will contain provisions related to dispute settlement and governance of the agreement .

given that the proposed tpp is being touted as a "living agreement," being open to new members , formal procedures may be established for new members to accede to the agreement .

congress has taken a strong interest in the tpp negotiations since the negotiations were launched in 2008 .

hearings have been held , and many members have expressed views on the negotiations through letters and consultations with the administration and with stakeholder groups .

as the negotiations proceed , a number of issues important to congress are emerging .

the potential trans - pacific partnership agreement has strategic policy implications for the united states , including with respect to trade policy , but the substance of the proposed agreement and its future remain undecided .

the agreement is ambitious in at least three ways: ( 1 ) in terms of its size — it would be the largest u.s. fta by trade flows and could expand in a region that represents over half of all u.s. trade ; ( 2 ) the scope and scale of its liberalization — the negotiating partners have expressed an intent to comprehensively reduce barriers in goods , services , and agricultural trade as well as rules and disciplines on a wide range of topics including new policy issues that neither the wto nor existing ftas yet cover ; and ( 3 ) its flexibility — this "living agreement" has been and may continue to be expanded in terms of its membership and its trade and investment disciplines .

due to this level of ambition , however , achieving such an agreement may be difficult .

differences in opinion exist , both domestically and among the negotiating partners , on precisely what form the agreement's provisions should take .

a broad range of u.s. interests groups view the tpp as a way to "correct" flaws in previous u.s. ftas , but changes that some groups consider improvements to u.s. trade policy others see as unwarranted intrusions into public policy , or as factors that contribute to economic insecurity for some americans .

even challenges with "20 th - century" trade issues , such as market access for goods , have yet to be resolved among the tpp partners .

yet , the partner countries have expressed their commitment to achieving this ambitious agreement and the negotiators remain positive about the progress being made .

this group of countries has self - selected into the negotiations presumably because it sees the tpp as a catalyst to greater economic growth and prosperity , especially if it is expanded to include other countries .

in addition , the large network of existing ftas among the members could be seen as an indicator of their willingness to cooperate on trade issues and may imply that some of the challenging issues have already been addressed .

