the 115 th congress has continued to debate the role of the organization of american states ( oas ) in the western hemisphere and its utility for advancing u.s. objectives in the region .

the united states helped found the oas in 1948 to establish a multilateral forum in which the nations of the hemisphere could engage one another and address issues of mutual concern .

in subsequent decades , oas decisions often reflected u.s. policy as other member states sought to maintain close relations with the dominant economic and political power in the hemisphere .

this was especially true during the early cold war period , when the united states was able to secure oas support for initiatives that were controversial in the region , such as a 1962 resolution to exclude cuba from active participation as a result of its association with the communist bloc .

oas actions again aligned closely with u.s. policy in the 1990s following the end of the cold war as a result of strong consensus among member states in support of initiatives designed to liberalize markets and strengthen democratic governance .

according to many foreign policy analysts , the ability of the united states to exert authority and shape outcomes in the western hemisphere has declined over the past 15 years .

this is the result of a number of trends .

citizens throughout latin america and the caribbean have elected ideologically diverse leaders , bringing an end to the post - cold war policy consensus .

at the same time , many countries in the region have enjoyed considerable economic growth , grown more confident in addressing their challenges , and diversified their commercial and diplomatic relations .

these developments have enabled countries in the region to pursue more independent foreign policies that are less deferential to the united states .

u.s. policymakers have responded to the united states' declining ability to advance its policy preferences within the oas in a number of ways .

some members of congress , frustrated by the organization's inaction on the political crisis in venezuela , contend that the oas is failing in its mission to support democracy and human rights in latin america .

they have called on the u.s. government to use its influence in the organization to compel stronger action on these issues and occasionally have sought to withhold funding from the organization .

others argue that oas actions continue to align closely with u.s. priorities in many cases and that the oas should not be deemed ineffective solely based on its inability to resolve a few high - profile challenges .

they have called for reforms to strengthen the organization .

as congress continues to debate the utility of the oas for advancing u.s. policies and considers appropriations and other legislation related to the organization , it might examine oas activities in the hemisphere and the extent to which those activities align with u.s. objectives .

this report briefly discusses the history of the oas and its principal institutional bodies ; examines the organization's funding and current priorities ; and analyzes a number of policy issues that have drawn congressional interest in recent years , including the application of the inter - american democratic charter , the challenges facing the inter - american human rights system , the management and budget of the oas , and the potential reintegration of cuba into the inter - american system .

in 2014 , the general assembly adopted a "strategic vision of the oas," which reiterates that the four core pillars of the organization's mission are strengthening democracy ; promoting and protecting human rights ; advancing integral development ; and fostering multidimensional security .

those objectives are "predominantly aligned with the high - level strategic goals for the western hemisphere" of the u.s. department of state and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

congress plays an important role in determining u.s. policy toward the oas .

as noted previously , the united states provided more than 44% of the organization's funding in fy2017 .

congress appropriates funds for the assessed contribution of the united states , as well as voluntary contributions to support specific projects in the hemisphere .

congress also is involved in the development of inter - american treaties , as any conventions negotiated by the executive branch must be submitted to the senate for its advice and consent to ratification .

moreover , congress is charged with providing oversight of how u.s. funds are spent .

members of congress frequently voice concerns over oas actions ( or lack thereof ) and recommend changes in policy .

policy issues that have drawn particular interest from some members of congress in recent years include the application of the inter - american democratic charter , challenges to the inter - american human rights system , the management and budget of the oas , and the potential reintegration of cuba into the inter - american system .

in 1948 , alberto lleras camargo , the first secretary general of the oas , asserted "the organization ... is what the member governments want it to be and nothing else. .

this has held true throughout the organization's history , with the oas engaging in activities and adopting new areas of focus in accordance with the decisions of member states .

as an organization composed of 35 diverse nations that operates based on consensus , however , the oas is often slow to arrive at decisions and prone to inaction .

this is especially the case when the hemisphere is ideologically polarized or addressing contentious topics .

nevertheless , even when member states are incapable of establishing consensus on a given issue , the oas continues to carry out a variety of activities to advance the organization's broad objectives: democracy promotion , human rights protection , economic and social development , and regional security cooperation .

as the organization's largest financial contributor and the hemisphere's most powerful nation , the united states remains influential within the oas .

the organization's objectives in the region are largely consistent with those of the united states , and many of its activities complement u.s. efforts .

at the same time , oas actions ( or the lack thereof ) do not always align with the organization's stated objectives , and the u.s. government's ability to advance its policy initiatives in the organization has declined over the past 15 years .

these conflicting tendencies are likely to continue in the coming years , spurring on the congressional debate over the utility of the oas for advancing u.s. interests in the western hemisphere .

