members of congress and the obama administration are engaged in debate over short - and long - term efforts to sustain recovery and further stimulate the economy , reduce the federal budget deficit , and stabilize the national debt .

within that debate , policymakers hold different points of view on the optimal size and composition of federal spending and revenues .

adding to the issue's complexity , this year's budget discussions are occurring against the backdrop of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) , which put in place budget enforcement mechanisms and procedures intended to achieve a specified amount of deficit reduction over a 10-year period .

president obama submitted a detailed fy2013 budget proposal to congress on february 13 , 2012 .

the house budget committee subsequently reported a concurrent resolution on the fy2013 budget ( h.con.res .

112 ) , based on a proposal by committee chairman paul ryan , which the full house passed on march 29 .

several members of the senate have offered budget proposals , including a resolution by budget committee chairman kent conrad that is based on recommendations of the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform ( also known as the simpson - bowles commission ) .

the conrad / fiscal commission resolution was discussed at a markup session on april 18 , but no vote was taken and the measure has not been formally introduced .

on may 16 , the senate voted on motions to proceed to consideration of several alternative budget resolutions ; however , none was agreed to .

although the house and senate have not agreed on a concurrent resolution on the fy2013 budget , the fy2013 appropriations process is underway in both chambers .

moreover , on may 15 , the house passed the sequester replacement reconciliation act ( h.r .

5652 ) , which is intended to repeal and replace the automatic spending reduction ( or "sequestration" ) scheduled for january 2 , 2013 ( discussed later in this report ) with specific mandatory spending reductions over the period fy2012-fy2022 .

the federal budget is divided into 20 functional categories ( eg , national defense , health , energy , transportation ) , which are further divided into subfunctions .

these functional categories provide a broad statement of budget priorities and facilitate the analysis of trends in related programs ; they are used for informational purposes in the congressional budget process .

some budget functions are grouped together into budget "superfunctions" ( eg , national defense , human resources , physical resources ) .

congress begins formal consideration of the annual budget resolution after the president submits his detailed budget request for the coming fiscal year .

the congressional budget resolution is not signed by the president and does not become public law .

rather , it is an internal blueprint for congress to use in its consideration of appropriations acts and other legislation for the coming fiscal year .

the resolution establishes enforceable levels for projected spending ( budget authority and outlays ) and revenues , along with an estimate of the deficit ( or surplus ) and the national debt .

the resolution includes amounts for the coming fiscal year and projections for subsequent years .

unlike the president's budget request submitted each february , the congressional budget resolution does not specify spending levels by program but instead establishes aggregate spending amounts for each of the functional categories referred to above .

these aggregate amounts are based on certain "assumptions" about spending for specific programs .

however , these assumptions are not typically specified in the resolution , nor are they binding on the appropriations committees or committees with jurisdiction over mandatory spending or tax provisions .

key assumptions are sometimes identified in the budget committee report that accompanies the concurrent resolution .

the congressional budget process includes tools for enforcing the annual budget resolution .

members of congress may raise points of order to bar consideration of legislation that would violate the spending ceilings or revenue floors in the resolution , among other provisions .

congress also has used the "reconciliation" process to implement budget policy .

for example , the house - passed budget resolution for fy2013 ( h.con.res .

112 ) contains reconciliation instructions to six authorizing committees to find a specific amount of deficit reduction over 10 years .

the committee report accompanying the budget resolution identified "illustrative" policy options by which to achieve these savings , but the committees are free to report whatever changes they want within their jurisdictions in response to a reconciliation directive .

in response to the reconciliation instructions in h.con.res .

112 , the six committees reported their recommendations to the house budget committee , which assembled them into a single reconciliation bill ( h.r .

5652 ) that was passed by the house on may 15 , 2012 .

the bca , enacted in august 2011 , provided for increases in the debt limit and established procedures designed to reduce the federal budget deficit .

two components of the bca are relevant to understanding the cbo "current law" baseline for human resources programs , as it is presented in this report .

first , title i of the bca established enforceable limits on discretionary spending for fy2012 through fy2021 .

for fy2012 and fy2013 , the law provided separate amounts for discretionary spending in the "security" and "nonsecurity" categories .

"security" was defined broadly to include the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and state , in addition to the department of defense and certain other activities ; and "nonsecurity" was defined as everything else .

for fy2014 and subsequent years , no distinction was made between security and nonsecurity ; that is , title i of the law established a single discretionary spending limit for each of those years .

second , the bca established a joint select committee on deficit reduction , tasked with developing legislation by november 23 , 2011 , to achieve $1.5 trillion in deficit reduction over the fy2013-fy2021 period .

if congress failed to pass such legislation by january 15 , 2012 , reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion , a series of automatic spending reductions would be triggered , specified in section 302 of the act .

in fact , the joint committee did not meet its deadline and the necessary legislation was not enacted .

thus , under current law , the first automatic spending reductions are scheduled to take effect on january 2 , 2013 .

these automatic procedures include sequestration of mandatory spending for each of fy2013-fy2021 , a one - year sequestration of discretionary spending for fy2013 , and lower discretionary spending limits for fy2014-fy2021 .

in addition to being lowered , the original discretionary spending limits ( discussed above ) are redefined so that security now consists only of budget function 050 ( which is primarily the department of defense ) .

spending reductions are to be equally divided between security and nonsecurity , which means that half the reductions triggered by failure of the joint committee process will come primarily from the department of defense , and the other half will come from the remainder of the federal budget .

it should be noted that a significant amount of nonsecurity spending is either exempt from the sequestration process or otherwise subject to a special rule that limits the size of the reduction .

in its overall current law baseline estimates and projections , cbo incorporated the discretionary spending limits imposed by title i of the bca ( referred to in this report as the "original bca spending limits" ) and the additional spending reductions triggered by failure of the joint committee process ( referred to as the "additional bca spending reductions" ) .

however , with limited exceptions , insufficient information was available for cbo to estimate the impact of these bca provisions at the budget function level .

thus , cbo allocated all budgetary effects of the bca — other than those related to defense and medicare — to budget function 920 ( allowances ) , which is used , among other purposes , as a placeholder category for budgetary effects not yet assigned elsewhere .

this means that cbo's baseline for the human resources superfunction , and for each of the individual functions within , does not reflect the original discretionary spending limits or the additional spending reductions of the bca .

the sole exception in the human resources area is function 570 ( medicare ) , where cbo was able to estimate the amount likely to be sequestered under the bca provisions , which limit sequestration of most medicare spending to 2% .

programs categorized as "human resources" comprise the majority of federal outlays and have grown over the last five decades as a share of the overall national economy .

cbo estimates that spending for these programs peaked in fy2010 and will remain at lower levels for most of the coming decade , although human resources spending will remain consistently higher throughout the period than before the 2007-2009 recession .

cbo also projects that human resources spending will tick up again toward the end of the decade and return to fy2011 levels by fy2022 .

all of the expected growth in human resources spending will be in health care ( medicaid and medicare ) and social security .

all other components of the human resources superfunction are projected to diminish as a share of gdp over the next 10 years .

policymakers are engaged in a high - level debate over short - and long - term strategies to sustain the recovery and further stimulate the economy , reduce the federal deficit , and stabilize the national debt , and hold different points of view about the optimal size and composition of federal spending and revenues .

this crs report compared three fy2013 budget proposals — the president's budget , the house budget resolution , and the conrad / fiscal commission resolution ( which is based on recommendations of the simpson - bowles commission ) — specifically with regard to programs included in the human resources budget functions .

for the human resources superfunction as a whole , the president's budget and the conrad / fiscal commission resolution track closely to the cbo current law baseline for the entire 10-year budget window , although the administration proposes somewhat higher spending in the initial few years .

by contrast , the house budget would result in significantly lower spending for human resources programs throughout the 10-year period .

the president proposes an immediate increase in spending for function 500 programs ( education , training , employment , and social services ) , primarily for activities intended to boost the economy and promote recovery .

this increase would be offset by lower spending in the out - years .

the house resolution calls for an initial drop in spending for this function , followed by a gradual increase but still significantly lower spending than under either current law , the president's budget , or the conrad / fiscal commission resolution .

the house resolution differs most sharply from current law and the other two budget proposals with regard to function 550 , which consists primarily of medicaid .

the house resolution would hold spending in this function relatively flat in real terms , with a slight upward trend in the second half of the decade , while cbo's current law baseline , the administration , and the conrad / fiscal commission all envision substantial growth in this function .

the house budget assumes conversion of medicaid into a capped block grant , while the other budgets would maintain the current structure of medicaid , with some legislative changes to the program .

it is important to note that cbo's baseline was completed prior to the supreme court's june 28 decision on the affordable care act , so the potential impact of that decision on projected spending for function 550 is not yet known .

projected spending under all three budgets for medicare ( function 570 ) looks generally similar to current law estimates , with continued major growth over the next 10 years .

the house assumes a significant policy change in medicare , converting the program into a "premium support" program ; however , this change would not occur until after fy2022 , so its budgetary effects are not reflected in the 10-year budget window examined in this report .

all three budget proposals assume some legislative changes to medicare in the near term , including a replacement for the current law sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) formula , among other changes .

with regard to function 600 income security programs , which include a combination of low - income assistance , unemployment , retirement , and disability programs , spending would decline over the 10-year period under current law and under each of the three budget proposals .

however , the president and conrad / fiscal commission envision spending at higher levels than current law ; the house resolution assumes spending significantly below current law .

key initiatives include conversion of snap ( food stamps ) into a block grant under the house budget , a permanent extension of certain expiring eitc and child tax credit provisions under the administration's budget , and increased retirement contributions by civilian federal employees ( at different levels under the house and administration budget proposals ) .

social security ( function 650 ) appears virtually identical under current law and all three budget proposals , with outlays continuing to climb over the decade .

none of the proposals include specific legislative changes but all express support for achieving bipartisan reform .

and finally , none of the three budget proposals assume major legislative changes in veterans programs , so that function 700 spending generally increases under current law and all of the proposed budgets over the next 10 years .

in comparing these three budget proposals for the human resources superfunction , particularly in the context of deficit reduction , it is important to note the significant difference in size among the functions .

for example , while the house budget resolution envisions a relatively large reduction in spending for function 500 ( etess ) than would otherwise occur , this proposal would contribute relatively little toward deficit reduction because of the small size of the function overall .

likewise , the administration proposes an initial increase in spending for this function , but this additional spending would contribute little to deficit growth .

on the other hand , with no change in current law cbo expects that spending for each of function 550 ( medicaid ) and function 570 ( medicare ) will be nearly eight times the size of function 500 in fy2022 , and social security will be 12 times its size .

thus , reductions from the baseline in these three functions have the most far - reaching implications for the larger deficit reduction debate .

as noted above , the house resolution assumes significantly lower spending for medicaid than the other two proposals , while spending for medicare and social security over the next 10 years would be generally the same under all three .

 table a - 1 shows the congressional budget office's march 2012 current law baseline for medicare ( i.e. , the "unadjusted" baseline for function 570 ) and the "adjusted" cbo baseline as used in the body of this report .

as explained earlier , crs adjusted cbo's baseline for medicare to make it consistent with the baseline for other functions within the human resources superfunction .

cbo's estimate of the budgetary effects of sequestration triggered under the budget control act are not included in the adjusted baseline ; however , they are shown in this appendix table .

table a - 2 , table a - 3 , table a - 4 , and table a - 5 provide supporting data for the figures and text in the body of this report .

