members of congress have demonstrated their interest in the u.s. foreign - trade zone ( ftz ) system through hearings and legislation over the past seven decades .

the program may enhance the competitiveness of u.s. businesses , support employment opportunities , and impact u.s. tariff revenues .

balancing these potential gains , others argue that the program may also be trade distorting , and may play a role in misallocating resources in the economy as a whole .

this report provides a general perspective on the u.s. ftz system .

it is divided into three parts .

as background , the first section discusses free trade zones worldwide .

the second section focuses on the u.s. ftz program — its history , administrative mechanism , structure , growth and industry concentration , and benefits and costs .

the third section focuses on current issues for congress relating to the u.s. ftz program .

current zone - related issues for congress reflect the supply - chain role of free trade zones in a complex , increasingly integrated world .

congressional issues have both u.s. and worldwide aspects .

domestic issues include whether ftzs represent a misallocation of u.s. resources ; whether data relating to zone use are sufficient ; and the extent to which u.s. ftz zone use affects u.s. employment and the competitiveness of u.s. firms .

internationally , congressional issues relate to the effectiveness of trade zones worldwide as a tool for economic development and global competitiveness and u.s. influence on worker rights issues in zones around the world through trade policy .

from time to time , concerns have arisen within the trade community about the future of free trade zones , including u.s. ftzs .

will they disappear with continuing trade liberalization and continuing reductions in tariffs ? .

the future role of zones in the global manufacturing supply chain largely depends on many as yet unknown and undetermined factors .

for example , after the 1993 north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) led to ultimate tariff elimination for trade among the united states , mexico , and canada , questions arose as to whether maquiladoras along the u.s. - mexican border would diminish in importance , and entire fta partner countries would become , in essence vast "free trade zones" for trade with each other .

data since then , however , show that free trade zone use has remained popular in developing and developed countries alike because of its diverse benefits , and that , in fact , there are currently at least 3,700 firms employing at least 1.2 million workers in zones in mexico .

more than 15 years after these questions were voiced , export processing zones have continued to expand in terms of countries hosting them , corporations investing in them , and workers being hired to labor in them .

between 1997 and 2006 , the number of free trade zones worldwide quadrupled , and the number of workers employed in them tripled .

for ftzs in the united states , the direction of growth is the same as for world export processing zones , but the expansion has been more modest , with relatively little growth in employment .

between 1997 and 2012 , the overall increase in zone use , along with the particular expansion by the oil sector , has resulted in a decrease in the number of firms using zones , ( from 3,600 to 3,200 ) .

however , it has also resulted in an increase in employment ( from 310,000 to 370,000 ) and a nearly four - fold increase in the current dollar value of merchandise received / shipped .

 ( see table a - 2 . ) .

reasons previously identified by the oecd as supporting the growth of world export processing zones as policy tools could continue: ( 1 ) the increasing emphasis on export - oriented growth ; ( 2 ) the increasing emphasis on foreign direct investment - oriented growth ; ( 3 ) the transfer of production of labor intensive industries from developed to developing countries ; and ( 4 ) the growing international division of labor and incidence of global production networks .

major factors which , in the future , could increase the use of free trade zones around the world , including u.s. ftzs , are ( 1 ) continuing improvements in technology , which will extend recent advancements in communication tools , computer capabilities , and the transport industry ; ( 2 ) advancements and improvements in security monitoring ; ( 3 ) new efficiencies for zone users including advancements in automated , electronic tracking of goods and services traded internationally ; and ( 4 ) external trends .

possible external trends that could give a significant boost to u.s. ftzs , specifically , could include those events or forces that would encourage a return of basic manufacturing to the united states and a boost to u.s. exports .

if all trade barriers and security issues were eliminated between all countries , exports and imports could move as easily among countries as between u.s. states .

as a result , the need for the zones worldwide would be greatly diminished .

however , as long as international tariff and non - tariff barriers remain , along with the need for heightened security to deal with issues such as terrorism and money laundering , the u.s. ftz system and other zone programs abroad are likely to continue and even , possibly , expand .

