the ability of unauthorized aliens to claim federal refundable tax credits has received considerable scrutiny .

in a july 2011 study , the treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) reported that individuals who were not authorized to work in the united states received $4.2 billion by claiming the refundable portion of the child tax credit — the additional child tax credit ( actc ) .

the actc is available to working families with children under age 17 .

this issue is complicated by the differences in legal classifications of foreign nationals / aliens ( eg , "employment - authorized alien," "legal permanent resident," "resident alien," and "qualified alien" ) across the federal immigration , tax , and welfare laws .

the tigta audit was based upon analysis of tax returns filed by persons with individual taxpayer identification numbers ( itins ) .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) issues itins to individuals who are required to have a taxpayer identification number for tax purposes but are not eligible to obtain a social security number ( ssn ) because they are not authorized to work in the united states .

the number of tax forms filed with itins has increased from 1.55 million in 2005 to 3.02 million in 2010 .

it is unclear how many of these individuals who filed with itins were unauthorized aliens or part of mixed - status families that included u.s. citizens or legally present aliens as well as unauthorized aliens .

this report opens with an explanation of refundable tax credits and follows with an overview of unauthorized resident aliens .

the report proceeds to analyze the federal tax status of unauthorized aliens and their eligibility for refundable tax credits , including a legal analysis of whether refundable tax credits are "federal public benefits" under section 401 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) .

the report concludes with a discussion of selected policy options .

tax credits allow taxpayers to reduce their tax liability dollar - for - dollar up to the value of the credit .

credits are either nonrefundable or refundable .

by definition , the value of nonrefundable tax credits cannot exceed a taxpayer's income tax liability .

in contrast , refundable tax credits can be larger than a taxpayer's income tax liability , with the taxpayer receiving the difference ( or part of the difference in the case of partially refundable tax credits ) as a cash payment from the irs .

as a result of this distinction , refundable tax credits can be claimed by taxpayers with little or no income tax liability , which includes many low - income tax filers .

the existing refundable tax credits include the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) ; the additional child tax credit ( actc ) , which is the refundable portion of the child tax credit ; the american opportunity tax credit , which is a partially refundable credit for tuition and related expenses ; the health coverage tax credit , which provides a credit for health insurance costs of qualifying individuals who receive trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) or pension benefits under a plan taken over by the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) ; the credit for tax withheld on wages ; the credit for tax withheld at source for nonresident aliens and foreign corporations ; the credit for fuel excise taxes paid on fuel used for nontaxable uses ; and the credit for overpayment of tax .

additionally , a premium assistance credit , provided under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 ) , will go into effect in 2014 .

there are also several refundable credits that have recently expired .

these are the first - time homebuyer credit , the "recovery rebate" credit in the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( 2008 stimulus credit ) , the making work pay credit available in 2009 and 2010 , and the adoption expenses credit , which was refundable for 2010 and 2011 .

selected credits are summarized in appendix a .

the credits listed in the last four bulleted points above are essentially methods by which taxpayers receive refunds for overpayment of taxes .

the other refundable credits can be broadly categorized into those whose value depends on the taxpayer's earnings and those whose value is based on the taxpayer's expenditures for a particular action or good , such as higher education or homeownership .

currently , the two largest refundable tax credits — the eitc and actc — fall into the former category and comprise an estimated 95% of the total amount of refundable credits claimed in 2009 .

these credits effectively subsidize low - wage work , providing additional money for each dollar of wages .

in addition , both credits help mitigate the federal taxes that low - income workers pay .

in many cases , these workers may not have sufficient income to incur an income tax liability , but they do pay payroll taxes ( i.e. , the taxes on wages that fund social security benefits under the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program and the medicare hospital insurance ( hi ) program ) .

for extremely low - wage workers , these credits may result in a net increase in income .

for example , in 2011 ( when the two - percentage point payroll tax reduction was in effect ) , taxpayers were directly subject to a payroll tax rate of 5.65% .

if a taxpayer had $20,000 of earnings and one child , the taxpayer would owe $1,130 of payroll taxes and $410 of federal income taxes , for a total federal tax liability of $1,540 , as illustrated in figure 1 .

this same taxpayer would be eligible for a $1,000 refund from the actc and a $2,565 refund from the eitc .

hence , in this example , the taxpayer would receive $2,025 as a refund .

figure 1 also highlights that while taxpayers begin paying payroll taxes on the first dollar they earn , the total amount of refundable credits they receive is greater than their total federal tax liability ( net the non - refundable portion of the child tax credit ) until taxpayers earn approximately $26,000 .

hence , in this example , taxpayers making under approximately $26,000 actually see a net increase in their income as a result of these credits .

for reference , in 2011 the poverty level for an adult under 65 with one child was $15,504 .

the migration and family patterns of unauthorized aliens residing in the united states are central to the question of their ability to claim refundable tax credits .

through the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , foreign nationals enter the united states in two main categories: as legal permanent residents ( lprs ) and temporary nonimmigrants .

unauthorized resident aliens are foreign nationals who overstay their nonimmigrant visas , foreign nationals who enter the country surreptitiously , or foreign nationals who are admitted on the basis of fraudulent documents .

in all three instances , these unauthorized aliens are in violation of the ina and subject to removal .

the actual number of unauthorized aliens in the united states is not known , as locating and enumerating people who are residing in the united states without permission poses many methodological problems .

estimates derived from the march supplement of the u.s. census bureau's current population survey ( cps ) indicate that the unauthorized resident alien population was 11.2 million in 2010 .

the pew hispanic center reported that 35% of unauthorized adults have resided in the united states for 15 years or more and that 28% have resided for 10 to 14 years .

the report also found that the proportion of unauthorized aliens who have been in the country at least 15 years has more than doubled since 2000 .

pew researchers have also found that unauthorized aliens tend to be younger than the u.s. population overall and more likely to be in the child - bearing and child - rearing years .

as a consequence , nearly half — an estimated 46% — of unauthorized adults are parents of minor children .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) does not have a special classification for individuals who are not lawfully present in the united states .

an unauthorized alien is , like all other foreign nationals , classified for tax purposes as a resident or nonresident alien .

resident and nonresident aliens are both subject to u.s. taxes — resident aliens are generally taxed in the same manner as u.s. citizens , while nonresident aliens are subject to special rules .

in general , an individual is a nonresident alien unless he or she is a lawful permanent resident or is present in the united states for a sufficient number of days during the current and previous two years ( "substantial presence test" ) .

thus , an unauthorized alien who has been in the united states long enough to meet the substantial presence test is classified as a resident alien ; otherwise , he or she is generally classified as a nonresident alien .

this classification is for tax purposes only and does not affect the individual's immigration status .

for further information on classes of noncitizens eligible to work and possibly qualify as a resident alien , see appendix b and appendix c .

in determining whether unauthorized aliens may claim the refundable tax credits , two questions arise .

the first is whether these individuals are able to claim the credits under the federal tax laws found in the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

the second is whether any refundable tax credits are "federal public benefits" under section 401 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) .

if so , it could then be argued that the credit should be disallowed to any unauthorized alien even if the irc does not contain any restriction .

if there are concerns with the implementation of current law , there are a variety of policy options that could address them .

these options could range from clarifying that unauthorized aliens are permitted to claim refundable tax credits to enacting a categorical bar preventing unauthorized aliens from obtaining refundable tax credits .

potential policy options include the following: amending the irc to require ssns of all filers claiming refundable tax credits .

a related option would be to amend the irc to require ssns of all filers claiming tax credits , not just those that are refundable .

this may be particularly relevant to tax credits , like the child tax credit and the american opportunity tax credit , that have both refundable and non - refundable components .

in either case , the scope of the ssn requirement ( i.e. , who would be required to provide the ssn — the taxpayer , the spouse if married filing jointly , and / or the qualifying dependents , if applicable ) could impact the ability of some families — especially mixed status families where certain members have ssns and others do not — to claim the credits .

amending the irc to absolutely bar unauthorized aliens from claiming refundable credits ( similar to the existing irc provisions that deny eligibility for certain refundable tax credits to nonresident aliens ) .

amending the irc to enable mixed immigration status families to obtain a partial amount of refundable tax credits for those members of the filing household who are legally authorized to reside and work in the united states .

for example , the value of the credit could be prorated for the proportion of taxpayers who meet the specified criteria ( eg , if three of the four individuals claimed on a tax return have ssns , the taxpayers would be eligible for 75% of the total value of the credit ) .

amending section 401 of prwora to clarify that refundable tax credits are not "federal public benefits" and therefore the only bar to unauthorized aliens claiming such credits would be those found in the irc .

amending section 401 of prwora to expressly include refundable tax credits among the listed "federal public benefits" so that unauthorized aliens would be ineligible to claim the credits even if the irc were silent on the matter .

authorizing and appropriating funds to the irs and dhs to facilitate the cross - checking of data on immigration status and tax returns to identify unauthorized aliens claiming credits for which they may not be eligible .

when considering these policy options , it should be noted that the existing refundable tax credits are not monolithic and serve different purposes .

there may be policy or other reasons to distinguish among them with respect to the eligibility of unauthorized aliens to claim them .

in particular , the refundable credits which are effectively refunds of overpayment of taxes would probably have to be treated differently than the others since denying them could raise constitutional concerns .

appendix a. overview of selected refundable tax credits appendix b .

classes of noncitizens and their eligibility to obtain social security numbers and to qualify as a resident alien appendix c. selected categories of nonimmigrants who are permitted to work there are categories of foreign nationals who are not lprs but who may be working and residing in the united states for periods of time sufficient to qualify under the internal revenue code's "substantial presence" test ( and thus are classified for tax purposes as resident aliens , unless there are specific treaty agreements between the united states and their country of citizenship ) .

the classes of nonimmigrants who are expressly permitted to work in the united states include the following: e treaty traders and investors ; h temporary workers ; nafta temporary workers ; certain f foreign students who have obtained permission ; j and q cultural exchange visitors ; l intracompany transfers ; k fiancés of u.s. citizens ; o and p extraordinary athletes , entertainers , and performers ; r religious workers ; t trafficking victims ; u crime victims ; and v family members waiting for more than three years .

spouses and minor children of the qualifying nonimmigrant may accompany the alien on a related visa , but in most instances are not given permission to work .

appendix d. social security numbers ( ssns ) issued to noncitizens as figure d - 1 shows , in fy2011 there were 1.3 million original ssns issued to noncitizens .

the total number of original ssns issued to noncitizens peaked at 1.8 million in fy1996 .

in the previous decade , the number of ssns issued to noncitizens ranged from a peak of 1.5 million in fy2001 to a low of slightly less than 1.2 million in fy2005 .

over time , there has been a substantial change in composition of the noncitizen population receiving ssns .

for example , in fy1992 , ssa issued ssns to 200,136 aliens who had permanent work authorization ( eg , lprs ) comprising 12% of the total number of ssns issued to noncitizens .

in fy2011 , there were 619,577 aliens with permanent work authorization who received ssns , which accounted for 49% of all ssns issued to noncitizens .

in addition , as discussed previously , in fy1996 and fy2001 , ssa tightened the rules under which aliens could obtain nonwork ssns .

corresponding with these changes , large declines in the number of nonwork ssns issued can be seen between fy1996 and fy1997 ( 325,629 to 141,472 ) , and between fy2001 and fy2002 ( 72,224 to 25,169 ) .

in fy2011 , ssa issued 28,622 nonwork ssns .

