federal law enforcement officers , as defined in statute , and a few related occupations — such as federal firefighters an d air traffic controllers — are eligible for enhanced retirement benefits .

congress decided that these occupations should be composed of young men and women who possess the strength and endurance necessary to perform the required duties .

enhanced retirement benefits help to maintain this type of workforce by permitting employees in these positions to retire earlier and accrue pension benefits faster during earlier years of service than regular civilian federal employees .

many individuals and employee groups who work in law enforcement - related positions , but who have not qualified as law enforcement officers for retirement purposes , have sought enhanced benefits through legislation in recent congresses .

incorporating additional occupations may address problems of attrition and perceived inequity across law enforcement - related positions .

however , expanding access to enhanced retirement benefits also generates concerns over additional expenditures on federal retirement benefits .

currently , the definition of a federal law enforcement officer ( leo ) for retirement purposes is limited to an employee who performs certain duties defined in statute under either the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) , which covers federal employees hired before 1984 , or the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) , which covers federal employees hired in 1984 or later .

individuals employed in positions that meet the statutory definition of a leo , as well as certain personnel who have obtained leo - equivalent benefits through direct legislation , are eligible to retire earlier with fewer years of service and receive a benefit accrual rate during the first 20 years of service that is higher than the benefit accrual rate for regular federal civilian employees .

leos and employees who have enhanced retirement benefits also contribute more to their own benefits than regular civilian federal employees and are subject to a mandatory retirement age .

the duties of law enforcement personnel place unique physical and psychological demands on individuals employed in those positions .

because physical and mental health decline with age , congress deemed it necessary to maintain a youthful workforce to ensure the quality of law enforcement services .

law enforcement personnel are subject to a mandatory retirement age to maintain this goal , which leads to an expectation of limited federal service for these employees .

consequently , congress has established enhanced retirement benefits for individuals in these occupations .

the provision of enhanced retirement benefits for law enforcement personnel was initially implemented with two primary intentions .

the first was to create a retirement system under which it is financially reasonable for officers to retire at an earlier age with fewer years of service than regular civilian federal employees .

second , the enhanced retirement benefits , which encourage entry at a young age , continuous service , and early retirement , are intended to help maintain a young and vigorous federal law enforcement workforce .

enhanced retirement benefits , however , are not intended as compensation for the stress and hazard of the duties that federal law enforcement personnel perform .

in 1947 , congress first legislated enhanced retirement benefits and an early retirement age , but only for the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) agents .

at the time , the agency was losing agents to more lucrative employment in nonfederal positions .

a more generous retirement program was considered necessary to retain youthful individuals for career service .

shortly thereafter , many federal employee groups with comparable duties to fbi agents began to petition for enhanced benefits .

in 1948 , the house committee on post office and civil service submitted a report to congress expressing that it would not oppose granting benefits to groups of employees similar to the fbi agents that congress had previously approved for enhanced benefits .

the committee report stated that "it is only fair to grant such retirement benefits that are provided for under the bill to law - enforcement agents in all parts of the government at an earlier age , because it is physically impossible to carry on the necessary strenuous activities after reaching 50 years of age. .

rather than recognize individual groups , congress developed a blanket definition to authorize benefits for these occupational groups .

the legislation that followed defined a "law enforcement officer" and expanded the provision of enhanced retirement benefits to individuals employed in the relevant occupations .

following the 1948 decision by congress , legislation has done little to alter the definition of a leo for retirement purposes .

fers was enacted in 1986 ( p.l .

99-335 ) and sought to mimic the policies put in place by its predecessor , csrs .

consequently , the definition of a law enforcement officer under fers is similar to the definition under csrs and maintains enhanced retirement benefits for those personnel .

for retirement purposes , most federal employees are covered under either the civil service retirement system , for those hired before 1984 , or the federal employees' retirement system , for those hired in 1984 or later .

congress passed the civil service retirement act of 1920 ( p.l 66-215 ) to create a pension plan for civilian federal employees .

the social security system followed in 1935 to create a retirement plan for private - sector workers .

federal employees were excluded from social security until congress passed the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l .

98-21 ) and the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-335 ) , which together incorporated all civilian federal employees , hired in 1984 or after , into social security as part of a new federal retirement system .

additionally , fers covers employees who were hired before 1984 and were covered by csrs but elected to switch to fers during the "open seasons" that congress authorized in 1987 and 1998 .

many employees in law enforcement occupations are not recognized as leos by their agency and opm , and consequently they are not eligible to receive enhanced retirement benefits .

several employee groups and unions representing individuals in these occupations have sought enhanced benefits through additional legislation .

generally , this legislation either proposes to include these groups as leos for retirement purposes or grant them leo - equivalent benefits .

for instance , in the 113 th congress , legislation has been introduced that would expand the definition of leo — and , therefore , provide enhanced retirement benefits — to include ( 1 ) employees who investigate or apprehend individuals suspected or convicted of offenses against the criminal laws of the united states ; ( 2 ) employees who carry firearms ; and ( 3 ) internal revenue service ( irs ) employees whose duties are primarily the collection of delinquent taxes and the securing of delinquent returns ( eg , h.r .

1362 , the law enforcement officers retirement equity act of 2013 ; h.r .

1525 , the save america comprehensive immigration act of 2013 ) .

two primary reasons are offered in support of extending enhanced benefit entitlement for law enforcement positions that are currently excluded: high attrition rates are among those currently not receiving enhanced benefits .

employees perform duties that are similar to law enforcement personnel currently receiving enhanced benefits , which may create the appearance of inequity .

extending enhanced retirement benefits to other occupational groups would result in higher costs to employing agencies and the federal government .

the majority of personnel pursuing enhanced benefits in the future would be covered under fers and would have most of the costs of their enhanced benefits covered by higher agency contributions .

currently , agencies are required to contribute an additional 14.4% of basic pay for law enforcement personnel in comparison with regular fers employees .

agency contributions are based on opm's annual actuarial calculations of the dynamic normal cost of fers benefits as well as the required employee contributions under current law .

these agency contributions may be subject to change in the future .

