the economic espionage act ( eea ) outlaws two forms of trade secret theft: theft for the benefit of a foreign entity ( economic espionage ) and theft for pecuniary gain ( theft of trade secrets ) .

under either proscription , its reach extends to theft from electronic storage .

individual offenders face imprisonment for up to 15 years for economic espionage and up to 10 years for trade secret theft .

individuals also may incur fines of up to $250,000 or twice the loss or gain associated with the offense for trade secret theft .

for economic espionage , they face fines of up $5 million or twice the loss or gain .

organizations are fined more severely .

they can be fined up $5 million , twice the loss or gain associated with the offense , or three times the value of the stolen trade secret , for trade secret theft .

for economic espionage , the fines of organizations jump to a maximum of the greater of $10 million , three times the value of the trade secret , or twice the gain or loss associated with the offense .

a court may assess the same sanctions for attempt or conspiracy to commit either offense , or for aiding or abetting the completed commission of the either offense .

a sentencing court must order the defendants to pay victim restitution , and the government may confiscate any property that is derived from or used to facilitate either offense .

the government may seek to enjoin violations , and , by virtue of amendments in the defend trade secrets act of 2016 , victims may be entitled to sue for double damages , equitable relief , and attorneys' fees .

conduct that violates the eea's proscriptions may also violate other federal prohibitions , however .

some , like the computer fraud and abuse act , in addition to imposing criminal penalties , likewise authorize victims to sue for damages and other forms of relief under some circumstances .

the eea's economic espionage and theft of trade secret offenses share many of the same elements .

there are four principal differences .

the theft of a trade secret must involve the intent to benefit someone other than the owner .

it must involve an intent to injure the owner .

and , it must involve a trade secret "that is related to or included in a product that is produced for or placed in interstate or foreign commerce. .

economic espionage , on the other hand , must involve an intent to benefit a foreign entity or at least involve the knowledge that the offense will have that result .

it does not require an intent to injure the owner .

and , it applies to any trade secret , notwithstanding the absence of any connection to interstate or foreign commerce .

finally , economic espionage is punished more severely .

the maximum term of imprisonment is 15 years rather than 10 years , and the maximum fine for individuals is $5 million rather than $250,000 .

for organizations , the maximum fine is the greater of $10 million or three times the value of the trade secret rather than $5 million .

as in the case of stealing trade secrets , the maximum permissible fine may be higher if twice the amount of the gain or loss associated with the offense exceeds the otherwise applicable statutory maximum .

and the crime is likewise a rico and , consequently , a money laundering predicate offense .

section 1831 condemns: i .

 ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) intending or knowing the offense will benefit ( 3 ) ( a ) a foreign government , ( b ) a foreign instrumentality , or ( c ) a foreign agent ( 4 ) knowingly ( 5 ) ( a ) steals , without authorization appropriates , takes , carries away , conceals , or by fraud , artifice , or deception obtains a trade secret , ( b ) without authorization copies , duplicates , sketches , draws , photographs , downloads , uploads , alters , destroys , photocopies , replicates , transmits , delivers , sends , mails , communicates , or conveys a trade secret ; [or] ( c ) ( i ) receives , buys , or possesses a trade secret , ( ii ) knowing the same to have been stolen or appropriated , obtained , or converted without authorization ; or ii .

 ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) attempts [to do so] ; or iii .

 ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) conspires with one or more other persons to [do so] , and ( 3 ) one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy .

conduct that violates the economic espionage act may violate other federal criminal provisions as well .

in the case of trade secret offenses , potentially corresponding offenses include violations of the computer fraud and abuse act , the national stolen property act , and the federal wire fraud statute .

the computer fraud and abuse act outlaws accessing certain computers or computer systems without authorization or in excess of authorization , with the intent to defraud .

the national stolen property act outlaws the interstate transportation of tangible stolen property or the knowing receipt of such property .

the federal wire fraud statute outlaws the use of wire communications in execution of a scheme to defraud .

in addition , in the case of economic espionage violations , a defendant may be subject to prosecution under the general espionage statutes , the espionage component of the computer fraud statute , or for failure to register as the agent of a foreign power .

foreign agents , other than diplomatic personnel , must register with the attorney general ; failure to do so is generally a felony .

the computer fraud and abuse act outlaws computer intrusions launched for espionage purposes .

the general espionage laws are only likely to be triggered if the trade secret information is also classified information or national defense information .

for some time , the eea authorized the attorney general to bring a civil action to enjoin violations of its provisions , but it did not authorize a corresponding private cause of action .

the defend trade secrets act created a private cause of action .

the eea now provides that "[a]n owner of a trade secret that is misappropriated may bring a civil action under this subsection if the trade secret is related to a product or service used in , or intended for use in , interstate or foreign commerce. .

not just anyone who suffers damage as the result of trade secret misappropriation ; "owners" may sue .

eea , however , defines the term "owners" to include licensees .

the trade secrets protected by civil suit are the same as those protected by the criminal proscriptions .

the definition of the action that gives rise to liability – "misappropriation" – is taken from the uniform trade secrets act .

the term encompasses acquiring , disclosing , or using a trade secret taken from its owner by scurrilous ( "improper" ) means .

perhaps eea's most distinctive feature is its pre - trial seizure procedure .

it allows an owner who alleges that his trade secret has been appropriated to apply to the court for an ex parte order seizing the purported trade secret .

the procedure is replete with restrictions on its use , some reminiscent of the limitations on a temporary restraining order ( tro ) in federal civil actions: inadequacy of alternatives ; a threat of immediate and irreparable harm ; a likelihood of success on the merits ; and a favorable balance of harms .

yet , the procedure is confined to instances where a tro is insufficient .

"the ex parte seizure provision is expected to be used in instances in which a defendant is seeking to flee the country or planning to disclose the trade secret to a third party immediately or is otherwise not amendable to the enforcement of the court's orders. .

the party from whom the trade secret is seized is entitled to a hearing within seven days , at which the owner of the trade secret bears the burden justifying the seizure order .

anyone injured by a "wrongful or excessive" seizure may sue for the relief described in the trademark act ; that is , for "damages for lost profits , cost of materials , loss of good will , and punitive damages in instances where the seizure was sought in bad faith , and , unless the court finds extenuating circumstances , to recover a reasonable attorney's fee," and , in the discretion of the court , prejudgment interest .

relying heavily on the utsa , eea empowers district courts to award an aggrieved owner equitable relief ; damages ; and in case of willful and malicious misappropriation , double damages and attorneys' fees .

the court may also award attorneys' fees to a party who prevails against a bad faith claim of misappropriation .

an action for the misappropriation must be brought within three years of when it is discovered or would have been discovered with the exercise of reasonable diligence .

section 1837 states that the chapter 90 applies to conduct occurring outside the united states if "the offender" is a u.s. national or an act in furtherance of the offense is committed within the united states .

section 1836 is found in chapter 90 .

it would therefore appear that section 1836 applies to conduct occurring outside the united states if the offender is a u.s. national or an act in furtherance of the offense is committed within the united states .

in the absence of a section 1837-like statement of congressional intent , the supreme court has shown a great reluctance to recognize private causes of action based on conduct abroad .

whether the concerns evidenced there influence future extraterritorial application of section 1836's civil remedies remains to be seen .

