this report discusses the concept of resilience in the context of critical infrastructure and homeland security .

it also identifies and discusses issues related to the evolution of policy and programs at the department of homeland security ( dhs ) that are meant to , or could , promote the resiliency of the nation's critical infrastructure .

the purpose of the report is to aid congress in its oversight of critical infrastructure programs and activities at dhs .

the u.s. patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 , sec .

1016 ( e ) ) defined critical infrastructure as: systems and assets , whether physical or virtual , so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health or safety , or any combination of those matters .

dhs has identified 18 sectors of the economy that they believe possess such systems and assets .

among these are electric power generation and distribution , drinking water , communications and information systems , oil and gas production and distribution , transportation systems , and banking and finance .

dhs's 2009 national infrastructure protection plan defined resilience as "the ability to resist , absorb , recover from , or successfully adapt to adversity or a change in conditions. .

in a homeland security context , a change of conditions implies a terrorist attack , a natural hazard , such as hurricane or earthquake , or a technological failure , such as a dam collapse or a serious accident at a nuclear power plant .

reducing the potential risks associated with the loss of critical infrastructure resulting from a terrorist , natural hazard , or technological disaster ( hereinafter referred to collectively as all - hazard events ) is a key element in the nation's homeland security strategy and a topic of continued interest in congress .

to the extent that resilience can contribute to reducing that risk , congressional interest extends to the policies and programs associated with promoting resilience .

this report focuses on the resilience of critical infrastructure .

the resilience of a community , a region , or the nation as a whole is also important to homeland security , and depends in part on the resilience of critical infrastructure , but also involves a broader range of elements , behaviors , and social - economic relationships that are beyond the scope of this report .

if one accepts that dhs has made progress in incorporating resilience into its policies and goals , a subsequent question could be "what is dhs doing programmatically to improve the resilience of critical infrastructures ? .

as cited earlier , assistant secretary robert stephan stated that "it is fair to say that there is resilience built into practically everything that the department of homeland security does. .

the assistant secretary proceeded to mention more than a dozen activities including forums ( eg , the national communications system's route diversity forum ) , various communication protocols ( eg , the water sector's water / wastewater agency response network , or warn ) , planning guides , exercises , site assistance visits , and analytical products from the national infrastructure simulation and analysis center and dhs's homeland infrastructure threat and risk analysis center , all of which he asserted contribute in some way to dhs's concept of resilience .

one can also argue that the department programs to help owner / operators of critical infrastructure identify threats , assess the vulnerability of their assets and operations to those threats , and assess the possible consequences from those threats , are necessary before one can identify and implement protective or resilient options for reducing those risks .

these programs include the development and refinement of the national infrastructure protection plan ( nipp ) , training for owners / operators on how to participate in and implement the nipp , development and support of information sharing networks like the homeland security information network , support for partnership meetings and cooperation , cataloging critical infrastructure assets , etc .

nevertheless , in its report critical infrastructure resilience , final report and recommendations , released september 8 , 2009 , the national infrastructure advisory council found that "while there are government programs that address resilience tangentially , government lacks a cohesive set of programs and activities that directly address cikr [critical infrastructure and key resources] resilience. .

similar conclusions were reached by the community resilience task force of the homeland security advisory council in june 2011 .

the task force stated that "many relevant activities are already underway , particularly those in fostering development of preparedness capabilities , but [the task force] observes that those activities are rarely linked explicitly to resilience. .

the task force went on to find that "resilience is not well understood by key homeland security stakeholders ; it therefore had not been treated as an integral element of plans and programs to date," and "there are no policies , national objectives , or promulgation of the specific means required to actually assess , achieve , or sustain resilience. .

despite this somewhat amorphous depiction of department efforts to support resiliency , a few programs do explicitly take resilience into consideration .

to date , congress has taken primarily an oversight role in regard to critical infrastructure resilience , holding hearings and requesting reports from its congressional support agencies .

however , it has been two years since gao reported that dhs had not yet developed the ability to measure the extent to which owners and operators of critical infrastructure assets had taken resilience - enhancing actions .

congress may choose to continue its oversight of the progress being made in the area of metrics .

congress also may revisit the ps - prep program .

congress gave dhs the responsibility to establish a voluntary preparedness standard for the private sector in 2007 .

dhs adopted three such standards in 2010 , and the first firm received certification under the program in 2012 .

congress may opt to examine the status of that program and identify impediments , if any , to its implementation .

updating the latest metrics on the extent to which firms are adopting resiliency measures or the extent to which firms are seeking certification through the voluntary ps - prep program could provide insight into the need , if any , for additional incentives beyond those provided by the market .

if additional incentives are warranted , congress could consider expanding its preparedness and mitigation grant programs to include more private sector owner and operators of critical infrastructure .

this could be accompanied with additional funding .

to do so , however , may require the reallocation of funds in the current budget - constrained environment .

alternatively , congress could consider making the voluntary standards mandatory , at least for those assets and systems judged to pose the greatest risks .

however , the recent inability of congress to find consensus on cybersecurity standards for privately held critical infrastructure would indicate such an effort would also raise significant debate .

