the u.s. government uses federal credit ( direct loans and loan guarantees ) to allocate capital to a range of areas including home ownership , education , small business , farming , energy , infrastructure investment , and exports .

a direct loan is "a disbursement of funds by the government to a nonfederal borrower under a contract that requires the repayment of such funds with or without interest. .

a loan guarantee is "a pledge with respect to the payment of all or part of the principal or interest on any debt obligation of a non - federal borrower to a non - federal lender. .

at the end of fiscal year ( fy ) 2013 , outstanding federal direct loans totaled $947 billion and outstanding guaranteed loans totaled $2,207 billion .

thus , at the end of fy2013 , outstanding federal credit totaled $3,154 billion .

the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( fcra ) in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 , §13201 ; 104 stat .

1388 , 1388-610 ) changed the budgetary treatment of federal credit from cash - flow accounting to accrual accounting .

cash flow accounting measured the cost of a new loan or new loan guarantee by its net cash flow in the fiscal year it was provided .

fcra measures the cost of new federal credit as the net present value of cash flows over the life of the loan or loan guarantee at the time the credit is extended , using treasury interest rates to discount the value of future cash flows .

the purpose of this report is to explain the provisions of fcra ; examine the implementation of credit reform , including credit reform provisions of the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 , §1011 ; 111 stat .

254,692 ) ; discuss proposed modifications of credit reform ; and describe proposed legislation in the 113 th congress .

in order to achieve these objectives , it is necessary to initially discuss justifications for credit programs , federal credit concepts , and the budgetary treatment of federal credit before the enactment of fcra .

before fy1992 , the budgetary cost of a new loan or new loan guarantee was reported as its net cash flow for that fiscal year .

this cash flow measure did not accurately reflect the cost of a loan or loan guarantee ( federal credit ) to the federal government because it did not provide a good measure of the economic and budgetary effects .

therefore , it was often difficult for policy makers to accurately monitor and therefore make informed decisions about federal credit .

in addition , administrators at agencies could understate costs by using budgetary techniques such as generating "savings" from the fees on increased volumes of new guarantees , while ignoring the increase in expected losses , and offsetting the ( cash ) cost of new direct loans with current year collections from old loans .

to remedy these problems , congress included credit reform in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra90 ) .

the president signed obra90 into law on november 5 , 1990 .

the legislation added a new title to the congressional budget act , title v , the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( fcra ) .

beginning with fy1992 , fcra changed the methodology in the unified budget for measuring and reporting the cost of federal direct loans and federal loan guarantees .

some budget experts and policy makers criticized the cash flow treatment of federal credit in the unified budget as not accurately measuring the cost of federal credit and its effect on resource allocation .

beginning in 1983 , proposals for using accrual accounting for federal credit were debated and culminated in the federal credit reform act of 1990 , which is the basis for the treatment of federal credit today .

the four stated purposes of fcra were listed in section 501: ( 1 ) measure more accurately the costs of federal credit programs ; ( 2 ) place the cost of credit programs on a budgetary basis equivalent to other federal spending ; ( 3 ) encourage the delivery of benefits in the form most appropriate to the needs of beneficiaries ; and ( 4 ) improve the allocation of resources among credit programs and other spending .

four major proposals to expand credit reform have been discussed in recent years .

some of these proposed expansions are also included in legislation described in the next section on proposed legislation in the 113 th congress .

two bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress that included major proposals to reform the budgetary treatment of federal credit .

many of these bills were also introduced in prior congresses .

some of the reforms in these proposals were discussed extensively in the prior section of this report .

the honest budget act of 2013 was introduced by representative martha roby on march 19 , 2013 .

this legislation included provisions that would modify fcra "to measure more accurately the costs of federal credit programs and financial investments by accounting for them on a fair value basis. .

"cost" is defined as "the sum of the treasury discounting component and the risk component of a direct loan , loan guarantee , or financial investment or a modification thereof. .

beginning with fy2017 , the provisions of the bill would expand fcra to include "financial investment commitments," which would include "an investment by the government in any securities ( debt or equity ) , stock , bonds , or futures , options , swaps , or other derivatives , issued by a non - federal entity…. .

the budget and accounting transparency act of 2014 was introduced by representative scott garrett on may 8 , 2013 .

the bill passed the house by a 230-165 vote on april 7 , 2014 .

title i of this legislation contains provisions intended to replace fcra with measures to more accurately record the costs of federal credit programs by accounting for them on a fair value basis .

this bill defines the term "cost" as "the sum of the treasury discounting component and the risk component of a direct loan , loan guarantee , or a modification thereof. .

further , title ii of the legislation states that not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this act , the directors of the congressional budget office and the office of management and budget shall each prepare a study and make recommendations to the committees on the budget of the house of representatives and the senate as to the feasibility of applying fair value concepts to budgeting for the costs of federal insurance programs .

provisions of this bill , if enacted , would go into effect in 2017 .

appendix a. concepts of present value and future value the concepts of present value and future value can be explained by using simple examples .

a dollar received now is more valuable than a dollar received a year from now because a dollar today will be worth more a year from now because of the interest that dollar can earn over that period .

since dollars today are worth more than dollars in the future , we need some means of weighting cash flows that are received at different times so they can be compared .

the mathematics of interest: the future value of an investment can be expressed in mathematical terms by means of the following formula or equation: fn = p ( 1 + r ) ⁿ where: fn = the balance ( or future value ) at the end of period n , p = the amount invested now , r = the rate of interest per period , and the n exponent is the number of periods .

examples: ( 1 ) assume $100 is deposited in a bank saving account for one year , at an interest rate of 5% .

then p = $100 , r = 0.05 , and n = 1 .

under these conditions , the future value at the end of year 1 or f1 = $105 .

the $100 present outlay is called the present value of the $105 amount to be received in one year .

it is also known as the discounted value of the future $105 receipt .

 ( 2 ) assume that the $105 is left in the bank for a second year at an interest rate of 5% .

thus , the initial $100 compounds over a two year period .

then p = $100 , r = 0.05 , and n = 2 .

under these conditions , the future value at the end of year 2 or f2 = $110.25 .

thus , at the end of the second year the original $100 deposit will have grown to $110.25 .

the $100 present outlay is called the present value of the $110.25 amount to be received in two years .

it is also known as the discounted value of the future $110.25 receipt .

the present value of any sum to be received in the future can be computed by turning the equation for future value or fn = p ( 1 + r ) ⁿ around and solving for p: p = fn / ( 1 + r ) ⁿ .

appendix b .

federal credit data appendix c. budgetary treatment of federal credit before fy1992 before the implementation of the federal credit reform act of 1990 , the unified budget treated federal credit in two different ways .

generally , the unified budget measured credit by its cash flows .

after 1980 , it included a separate credit budget that measured and selectively controlled gross credit flows .

unified budget the federal unified budget used cash - basis accounting .

before fy1992 , a new federal direct loan was treated as a budget outlay in the current fiscal year , and repayments of principal and payments of interest were treated as offsetting collections ( negative outlays ) in the future fiscal years in which they occurred .

if a loan recipient paid a fee , this fee was treated as an offsetting collection .

loan defaults reduced repayments of principal and interest , and therefore offsetting collections .

administrative expenses were reported as outlays .

in a given fiscal year , the budgetary cost of a loan program , not the individual loans , was its net cash flow .

this equaled new loans made plus any administrative expenses associated with these loans ( rarely recognized in the loan accounts ) less any loan fees , repayments of principal , and payments of interest .

the federal acceptance of a contingent liability when a loan guarantee was provided was not included in the federal budget because no cash flow occurred .

the administrative costs of a guarantee program were outlays in the fiscal year in which they occurred .

some guarantee programs charge fees to the recipient , and these fees were considered offsetting collections .

any federal outlays necessary to compensate lenders for any default losses covered by a federal guarantee were not shown in the budget until they were actually paid .

credit budget in january 1980 , the office of management and budget introduced a federal "credit budget" to help monitor and control the growth of federal credit , including new direct loan obligations and new loan guarantee commitments .

federal credit was measured at the time that the government signed a binding contract to provide credit assistance .

initially , the credit budget consisted of nonbinding targets .

before fy1992 , limits in the credit budget were included in the budget resolution and in annual appropriation acts for discretionary credit programs but not mandatory credit programs .

although the credit budget improved credit visibility , the credit budget did not measure or control the size of subsidies .

the federal credit reform act of 1990 decreased the importance of the credit budget because control of credit subsidies largely replaced limits on gross credit flows as a determinant of the amount of new federal credit for each program .

estimated limitations on credit loan levels are proposed in each presidential budget , although the term "credit budget" is not used by omb .

these limitations on credit loan levels are set too high to realistically affect the amount of credit extended .

appendix d. budgetary treatment of a hypothetical direct loan ( 1 ) for a proposed direct loan program , cbo is required to estimate the subsidy cost if a bill including the loan program is considered on the house or senate floor .

if legislation enacted includes a new loan program , omb becomes responsible for estimating the subsidy cost .

if a direct loan program "l" has been enacted into law , agency "a" establishes a credit program account and a non - budget financing account .

 ( 2 ) omb in consultation with agency a estimates that the net present value of the cost of credit subsidies equals ( in this example ) 20% of loans disbursed under program l operated by agency a .

 ( 3 ) if program l is a discretionary loan program , an appropriations bill for the fiscal year is passed by congress and signed into law by the president .

this bill includes an appropriation of ( in this example ) $100 million for the subsidy budget authority of program l. within agency a , this $100 million is appropriated to the credit program account for program l. furthermore , this appropriations bill must include an estimate of the dollar amount of new direct loan obligations supported by the subsidy budget authority appropriated to agency a for program l. for example , if program l has an estimated subsidy rate of 20% , the dollar amount of new direct loan obligations supportable would be $500 million .

 ( 4 ) agency a signs a contract to loan $10 million to a borrower under the auspices of program l. the estimated subsidy cost of this loan is $2 million ( 20% of $10 million ) .

 ( 5 ) the borrower meets the terms and conditions of the loan contract .

agency a pays $2 million from its credit program account for l into its financing account for l. the financing account for program l borrows $8 million ( unsubsidized portion of the loan ) from the u.s. treasury .

at the same time that these budgetary transfers occur within agency a , the loan of $10 million is disbursed from the financing account for program l to the borrower .

the subsidy payment of $2 million that goes into the financing account is scored as an outlay for agency a and for the federal budget .

the $8 million borrowed from the treasury is a non - budget means of financing , and consequently , does not affect the budget deficit , outlays , or revenues .

but this $8 million , if the budget is in deficit , does increase the national debt .

 ( 6 ) agency a services the loan .

cash flows between the public and the non - budget financing account for fees , interest , defaults , etc. , do not affect the budget deficit , outlays , or revenues .

but the net cash flows of the financing account do affect the national debt .

 ( 7 ) repayments of principal and payments of interest are paid by the borrower into the financing account for program l. the financing account uses these monies to pay the interest and repay the principal on the $8 million borrowed from the treasury .

appendix e. budgetary treatment of a hypothetical loan guarantee ( 1 ) for a proposed loan guarantee program , cbo is required to estimate the subsidy cost if a bill including the loan guarantee program is considered on the floor .

if legislation enacted includes a new loan guarantee program , omb becomes responsible for estimating the subsidy cost .

if a loan guarantee program "g" has been enacted into law , agency "a" establishes a credit program account and a financing account .

 ( 2 ) omb in consultation with agency a estimates that the net present value of the cost of credit subsidies equals ( in this example ) 10% of loans guaranteed under program g operated by agency a .

 ( 3 ) if program g is a discretionary loan guarantee program , an appropriations bill for the fiscal year is passed by congress and signed into law by the president .

this bill includes an appropriation ( in this example ) of $60 million for the subsidy budget authority for program g. within agency a , this $60 million is placed in the credit program account for program g. furthermore , this appropriations bill must include an estimate of the dollar amount of guaranteed loan commitments supported by the subsidy budget authority appropriated to agency a for program g. for example , if program g has an estimated subsidy rate of 10% , the dollar amount of new guaranteed loan commitments supported would be $600 million .

 ( 4 ) agency a signs a contract to guarantee a loan of $15 million to the borrower .

the estimated subsidy cost of this guarantee is $1.5 million ( 10% of $15 million ) .

the loan guarantee fee ( if any ) is paid by the borrower to the financing account for program g at the time the loan guarantee is obligated .

 ( 5 ) after the borrower ( lender , or other party to the agreement ) meets the terms and conditions of the loan guarantee contract , the borrower obtains the loan from the lender in the private sector .

agency a pays $1.5 million from its credit program account for g into its financing account for g. at the same time that this budgetary transfer occurs within agency a , the agency provides the guarantee in order for the borrower to obtain the loan from the private lender .

the subsidy payment of $1.5 million that goes into the financing account is scored as an outlay for agency a and for the federal budget .

the borrower must pay to the lender interest on the principal and repay the principal .

 ( 6 ) agency a services the loan guarantee .

the cash flows between the public and the non - budget financing account do not affect the budget deficit , outlays , or revenues .

but the net cash flow from the financing account affects the national debt .

 ( 7 ) the subsidy amount and any loan guarantee fee earn interest , which is paid by the treasury .

if the borrower defaults on all or part of the guaranteed loan then the financing account is responsible for covering the cost of compensating the lender .

appendix f. direct loan data , fy2015 appendix g. loan guarantee data , fy201 .

