the federal budget deficit has exceeded $1 trillion in each of the last three fiscal years and is expected to exceed that level in fy2012 .

concern over these large deficits , as well as the long - term trajectory of the federal budget , has resulted in significant debate during the 112 th congress over how to achieve meaningful deficit reduction and how to implement a plan to stabilize the federal debt .

at the same time , the economy is recovering from its largest downturn since the great depression , and concerns have been expressed that growth in the united states may falter to the point where the u.s. economy again experiences recession .

this has resulted in some renewed debate over whether additional stimulus may be needed .

over the next few months through the early part of calendar year 2013 , congress will be facing choices on how to deal with numerous expiring provisions , across - the - board spending cuts , and other short - term considerations that will have major effects on the federal budget .

some have referred to this as the "fiscal cliff. .

choosing how to address these issues will have a significant impact on the size of the budget deficit and the pace of economic recovery going forward .

further changes to other spending and revenue policies could also address some of the longer - term drivers of projected budgetary imbalance , while simultaneously impacting the economy .

this report provides a brief overview of the major tax and spending policy changes set to take effect under current law at the end of 2012 or early in 2013 .

collectively , these policies have been referred to by some as the "fiscal cliff. .

the report also includes links to other crs reports which provide more information and analysis of the individual provisions discussed below .

a variety of revenue and spending provisions are set to expire around the end of calendar year 2012 , including the bush tax cuts and other related tax provisions , extended emergency unemployment benefits , the social security payroll tax reduction , the "doc fix," and other tax extenders .

if congress and the president allow all of these measures to expire as scheduled under current law and let the spending cuts under the budget control act ( bca ) take effect ( see discussion below ) , the budget deficits beginning in fy2013 will gradually fall as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) and are projected to remain at sustainable levels through fy2022 .

the decline in projected budget deficits is a result of declines in spending levels and increases in revenue levels as a percentage of gdp , relative to the levels seen over the past few fiscal years .

under current law , the budget deficit is estimated to fall $502 billion between fy2012 and fy2013 ( see table 1 ) as a result of fiscal policy changes set to take place at the end of 2012 and early in 2013 .

this estimated deficit reduction assumes that current law will be implemented as scheduled .

if , however , congress changes the trajectory of these policies by increasing spending ( i.e. , by eliminating the bca automatic spending cuts ) or decreasing revenue ( i.e. , by extending a portion of the bush tax cuts ) , these policies would increase the deficit relative to the baseline .

however , the amount by which the deficit would increase as the result of such policy changes could be different than the figures shown below .

this is due to various factors that are taken into account when compiling a cost estimate .

because these factors could be different than the ones assumed in the figures below , the budgetary impact of reversing these policies may not be directly comparable to their impact on the deficit under current law .

the full effects of the economic and budgetary impact of these policies may not be felt immediately .

immediate effects would be felt by individuals who have been receiving emergency unemployment compensation who would face the expiration of long - term benefits .

the effects of tax changes , such as the expiration of the two - percentage - point payroll tax rate reduction , would be spread out over the course of the year .

likewise , for taxpayers experiencing an increase in tax liability as a result of the expiration of bush tax cut provisions , these effects may be spread out over the course of the tax year through adjusted tax withholdings , or may be realized when 2013 taxes are paid early in 2014 .

the effects on the spending side may also be muted in the early part of 2013 .

the automatic cuts scheduled to be implemented as part of the budget control act will result in agency budget authority being immediately reduced on january 2 , 2013 .

the effects of these reductions will be seen throughout the remaining nine months of the fiscal year , and in future fiscal years , as outlays that would have otherwise occurred , do not .

though these gradual effects may provide congress with additional time to act to address these policies , delaying such action can increase uncertainty throughout the economy and will further delay the return of the federal budget to a sustainable path .

despite the fact that these spending reductions and revenue increases are spread over the entire year , cbo estimates that if all of these policies go into effect as scheduled under current law , the economy will contract during the first two quarters of calendar year 2013 .

in addition to the policies discussed above , there are several other policy items that congress may consider late in 2012 or early in 2013 .

many budget analysts are concerned about future levels of federal debt and acknowledge that the current spending and revenue collection cannot continue at current or projected future levels .

however , making significant changes to spending or revenue policies at this time may be harmful to the ongoing economic recovery .

the effects on the economy of certain policies enacted to combat the economic downturn , such as extended emergency unemployment benefits and the spending and revenue provisions of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , are waning under current law .

cbo recently projected that economic output ( as measured by gdp ) will not return to its potential until fy2018 .

further , they estimate that allowing the policies included in table 1 to take effect as scheduled under current law , would result in real gdp growth of 0.5% in calendar year 2013 .

in contrast , cbo estimates that reversing these policy changes as scheduled under current law would lead to real gdp growth of 4.4% in calendar year 2013 .

there are also timing issues associated with various tax and spending policies scheduled to take effect under current law that have potential implications on the economy .

policies that are felt immediately , such as those that would reduce unemployment benefits , are more likely to have an immediate adverse effect on the economy than those policies that are spread out over the course of the year or beyond , such as the bca's automatic spending cuts and income and payroll tax increases .

thus , the timing associated with various tax and spending policies scheduled to change under current law at the end of 2012 or early in 2013 has important consequences for the expected economic effects of individual policy choices .

the contraction economists expect will occur should current law fiscal policies take effect can likely be dampened with action taken to prevent spending cuts or tax increases .

there are differences , however , in the level of expected growth and employment given different policy choices .

a 2010 cbo report concluded that policies designed to increase aid to the unemployed are more effective at boosting unemployment than across - the - board income tax reductions .

similar results were presented by mark zandi of moody's analytics in 2010 testimony before the senate finance committee .

this result reflects the general tendency for policies that increase income of lower - income households to have greater short - run stimulative impacts than policies that benefit higher - income households .

lower - income households are more likely than higher - income households to spend additional disposable income , thus providing a greater contribution to aggregate demand in the short - run .

while spending cuts and tax increases are generally contractionary , there are differences in the potential magnitude of the growth and employment effects of allowing different fiscal policies to take effect as scheduled .

federal reserve chairman ben bernanke , among others , has told congress that they should take steps to "work to address the nation's fiscal challenges in a way that takes into account both the need for long - run sustainability and the fragility of the recovery. .

he stated that the spending and tax policies set to take effect in 2013 could endanger the recovery and recommended that congress work to implement a credible medium - term plan for deficit reduction .

 table a - 1 below provides a list of the major expiring provisions discussed above , the budget control act's automatic spending reductions scheduled to begin in january 2013 , and other short - term considerations , which will confront congress around the end of the calendar year .

it illustrates how specific deficit reduction plans or budget outlines propose to deal with these fiscal issues .

the table examines the debt reduction task force ( domenici - rivlin ; november 2010 ) , the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform ( simpson - bowles ; december 2010 ) , the president's fy2013 budget ( february 2012 ) , and the house fy2013 budget resolution ( h.con.res .

112 ; march 2012 ) .

using any of the proposals or recommendations in the plans listed in table a - 1 to sort out fiscal issues comes with certain constraints .

first , outside of the president's budget proposal and the house budget resolutions , none of these plans were accompanied by legislative language .

therefore , specific language would have to be written and agreed to .

second , budget resolutions do not become law .

therefore , separate legislation would have to be enacted in order to make the policy changes specified in the resolution , even if the house and senate were to come to an agreement on the resolution itself .

if an agreement were to be reached but certain provisions in the budget resolution did not become law , the spending , revenue , and deficit levels projected could change significantly .

finally , given the fairly lengthy time horizon over which these proposals were written and that fiscal conditions changed significantly , it is difficult to compare the amount of deficit reduction between plans .

both the domenici - rivlin and simpson - bowles plans include comprehensive tax reform as part of broader debt or deficit reduction packages ( see table a - 1 ) , and thus do not present explicit recommendations regarding current fiscal policy choices .

the substantial tax policy considerations being faced at the end of 2012 continue to stimulate interest in fundamental tax reform .

depending on its design , tax reform may or may not contribute to deficit reduction .

comprehensive tax reform that is revenue - neutral would not directly contribute to a longer - term deficit reduction strategy .

