mali faces multiple overlapping crises .

a separatist rebellion launched in late 2011 by members of the northern - based minority ethnic tuareg community , known as the national movement for the liberation of azawad ( mnla ) , aggravated intra - military and political tensions in the country .

in march 2012 , junior military officers overthrew a democratically elected government in a coup , a month ahead of scheduled national elections .

the coup led mali's military and state presence in the north to collapse , effectively leaving a vacuum for armed groups .

islamist extremist groups , who had initially fought alongside the separatists , took advantage of the ensuing chaos to expand their presence in mali's vast , saharan north .

the civilian - led interim government that took office in the wake of the 2012 coup is headed by president dioncounda traoré , former speaker of the national assembly .

it has suffered from internal divisions , military interference , and limited popular legitimacy .

years of corruption and mismanagement also appear to have hollowed out many state institutions .

furthermore , mali's leaders face a national recession and revenue crisis .

a regional food security crisis , exacerbated by malian population displacements , also continues to cause suffering .

as of late 2012 , three loosely connected islamist extremist groups — al qaeda in the islamic maghreb ( aqim ) , the aqim splinter faction movement for unity and jihad in west africa ( mujwa / mujao ) , and the malian tuareg - led ansar al deen — had asserted control over all major towns in northern mali , an area roughly the size of texas ( figure 1 ) .

these groups appeared increasingly entrenched , having gradually ousted tuareg separatist leaders .

aqim and associated groups were reportedly leveraging this expanded terrain to run training camps , pursue connections to other extremist organizations , bolster arms stocks , and recruit new fighters .

international concerns heightened with reports of foreign fighters traveling to northern mali , and given long - running reports of involvement by sahel - based extremists in transnational narcotics trafficking .

aqim - associated groups imposed harsh behavioral codes on local residents and carried out amputations and at least one execution by stoning , inspired by an extremely conservative interpretation of sharia ( islamic law ) .

they also destroyed historic and cultural sites , including unesco world heritage - designated ancient mosques and tombs , and recruited child soldiers , among other abuses .

france launched military operations in northern mali on january 11 , 2013 , after islamist fighters — following months of stalemate — suddenly advanced toward the south and defeated malian military forces in the central town of konna .

france's decision marked an abrupt , major shift in international responses to the situation in mali , as policymakers had previously emphasized that any solution in mali had to be african - led .

french president françois hollande justified the intervention based on the malian government's request for help , portraying french action as necessary to prevent mali's capital from falling into terrorist hands and to protect some 6,000 french residents .

french troop reinforcements in bamako also appeared aimed at deterring actors who might try to further destabilize or attack mali's interim government .

since then , french forces have made rapid gains in reclaiming cities and towns in the north .

u.s. logistical support for french operations has included military transport for french troops and equipment , aerial refueling for french airstrike campaigns , and intelligence sharing .

most core terrorist / insurgent fighters have reportedly withdrawn to mali's remote , mountainous northern border , although some , namely malian nationals , appear to have blended into local communities .

french and chadian troops have engaged in particularly intense combat operations in aqim strongholds in the far north , where they claim to have killed several hundred insurgents , including at least one senior aqim regional commander , an algerian national known as abu zeid .

despite these successes , the durability of french gains remains to be seen .

recent insurgent attacks in gao and timbuktu , including several suicide bombings and attacks in urban areas , point to stark potential challenges .

the difficult terrain and social complexity of northern mali also present particular difficulties for counterinsurgency operations .

the tuareg rebel conflict has not been brought to a close , inhibiting the extension of malian state authority to french - cleared areas , while long - standing friction between tuaregs and other ethnic groups in the north has reportedly fed local support for islamist extremists in some areas .

tuareg communities are also internally divided over religious ideology and support for separatism .

the future role of french forces in mali is uncertain .

french president françois hollande has stated plans to begin withdrawing troops in late april from the current level of 4,000 , to about 1,000 by year's end .

this timeline may reflect domestic pressures and a fear of being drawn into an enduring conflict .

thousands of african troops have deployed to mali under the u.n. - authorized african - led international support mission to mali ( afisma ) , but their capacity to counter an insurgency or prevent terrorist attacks is likely to be limited .

the poor human rights records of some of the regional militaries involved may also be counterproductive .

meanwhile , mali's ongoing political divisions , along with its own military dysfunction and abuses , have rendered mali's fragile state authorities unreliable , and in some cases undesirable , partners for international actors .

the u.n. security council is currently considering options for transitioning afisma into a fully u.n. - conducted operation .

debate appears centered on the likely capacity and appropriate mandate for u.n. troops , as well as on a proposal for a separate , rapid - reaction force — of as - yet - undetermined composition — to continue counterterrorism operations .

mali's instability stems from both internal and external factors .

these include poor governance , the corrosive impact of drug trafficking and other illicit commerce , military fragmentation and collapse , limited implementation of previous peace accords with tuareg rebel groups , and an uptick in regional arms and combatant flows from libya since 2011 .

high - level corruption , reportedly tied , in part , to criminal trafficking networks , contributed to public distaste for the government and to initial support for the coup against then - president amadou toumani touré .

rank - and - file soldiers blamed corruption and mismanagement for defeats at the hands of tuareg rebels in early 2012 .

such sentiment may have been the proximate driver of the 2012 coup , but military dysfunction runs much deeper .

the military remains in disarray due to internal tensions and political uncertainty .

the military's personnel levels and equipment stocks , already relatively low , have reportedly been eroded by mismanagement , defections ( namely of tuareg troops who defected to the mnla in early 2012 ) , desertions , and the collapse of the operational command in the north in march 2012 .

over the past year , the military has initiated a recruitment drive and has reportedly provided support to allied irregular militias , which are organized largely along ethnic lines .

factionalization of the military and police , among other problems , have been illustrated by violent clashes and reports of abuses carried out within and by the security forces .

the withdrawal of violent extremists from northern towns has led to some human rights improvements .

however , the conditions under which the north could conceivably be reintegrated into the malian state in a sustainable way remain unclear , and the path to achieving such an outcome uncertain .

malian elites do not appear to have reached consensus on how to achieve national reconciliation amid deepening ethnic tensions , which have torn at mali's social fabric within the north and between north and south .

should a bona fide national reconciliation process take place , the secular structure of the post - colonial malian state , in a country that is over 90% muslim , could also be up for negotiation .

tuareg grievances over cultural rights , political autonomy , and a historic lack of government investment in the north remain relevant for many .

yet the tuareg community is internally diverse , and is divided over issues of political islam and ethnic separatism .

moreover , tuaregs are a minority even within the north , and often acrimonious inter - ethnic relations present an additional wrinkle for efforts to resolve the various aspects of mali's crisis .

under international pressure , president traoré has stated that he is willing to negotiate with the mnla .

however , many malians strongly oppose talks with the mnla , whom they hold responsible for mali's calamities .

efforts by burkina faso and algeria in 2012 to facilitate negotiations with the mnla and certain islamist armed groups appear have halted in light of recent developments and what appears to be limited malian government commitment to pursuing talks .

more broadly , efforts by ecowas and african union ( au ) to lead the international response to mali's crisis have been hampered by regional divisions , rivalries , and a lack of planning and military capacity .

the current status of the kidal region , over which the mnla has reasserted its authority in the wake of french operations to dislodge islamist extremist groups , presents particular challenges to both national reconciliation and reunification .

the malian military has not deployed to kidal in the face of mnla objections to its presence .

instead , france continues to conduct counterterrorism operations in conjunction with chadian — i.e. , foreign — troops .

how long this situation may be tolerated by mali's national authorities and military commanders — and what options they might have for addressing it — remains to be seen .

mnla forces have also clashed with arab militias , pointing to possible future tensions .

mnla leaders have sought to position themselves as ideal partners for western counterterrorism operations , pointing to their unique knowledge of the saharan terrain and secularist ideology ; yet opportunism , rather than ideology , appears to have motivated mnla leaders' behavior over time .

in congressional testimony in february 2013 , assistant secretary of state for african affairs johnnie carson characterized the crisis in mali as "one of the most difficult , complex and urgent problems west africa has faced in the past two decades. .

carson argued that the united states must address four major challenges in mali "comprehensively and simultaneously": ( 1 ) the presence of violent extremists in northern mali , ( 2 ) mali's political transition , ( 3 ) national reconciliation and dialogue with the north , and ( 4 ) the humanitarian crisis in mali and the sahel .

despite this stated "simultaneous" approach , the prospect of a safe - haven for aqim and other extremists and criminal actors in mali would appear to be a principal concern for u.s. policymakers .

as noted above , the united states has provided support for french and african military operations , bolstered u.s. surveillance capacities in the region , and provided new aid to neighboring states to repel insurgent infiltration , while reportedly debating direct u.s. targeted strikes on terrorist targets .

the administration initially appeared hesitant to support france's intervention , possibly due to concerns that it could aid terrorist recruitment or otherwise further destabilize the region .

in early february , however , vice president joseph biden stated that "the united states applauds and stands with france" and that "the fight against aqim may be far from america's borders , but it is fundamentally in america's interest. .

with regard to the other components of the u.s. response , administration officials have urged mali to hold peace talks with groups that reject terrorism and accept mali's territorial integrity , and to hold elections as part of a larger political transition , while continuing to provide humanitarian aid .

the administration has also imposed a travel ban on at least 87 individuals either involved in or supportive of the 2012 coup .

prior to france's military intervention , administration officials had urged an african - led approach to mali while expressing serious concern over ecowas's lack of capacity , and over the potential unintended consequences of regional military intervention .

nonetheless , the administration has pledged at least $96 million to support afisma .

of this , the state department has identified at least $86 million in peacekeeping operations ( pko ) funds — a foreign assistance account with broad authorities related to support for stabilization activities — for contracted airlift , training , equipment , and vital supplies for afisma personnel .

an additional $5 million in international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) funding has been identified for training formed police units deploying under afisma .

separately , the defense department has airlifted some chadian troops into mali , as part of support to french operations .

in public statements , administration officials have , at times , expressed divergent assessments of the threat emanating from northern mali , and of the urgency required to address it .

for example , assistant secretary of state for african affairs johnnie carson testified before congress in june 2012 that "aqim has not demonstrated the capability to threaten u.s. interests outside of west or north africa and it has not threatened to attack the u.s. homeland," adding that "we are nevertheless working to counter its influence. .

in contrast , general carter ham , the commander of africom , stated in december that aqim "aspire[s] to conduct events more broadly across the region , and eventually to the united states. .

defense secretary leon panetta stated in december that "the main goal of al qaeda is to attack the united states... and if we're not going to allow it to happen , we've got to go after them in yemen , in somalia and yes , in mali if necessary. .

other recent statements are reported above ( see "assessing aqim" ) .

international policymakers face complex challenges in addressing the situation in mali , because the threads of mali's political and security crises are intertwined , and are also tied to a difficult regional context .

notably , given the malian military's internal problems and capacity shortfalls , it is unclear whether malian forces will be able or willing to follow french military strikes by securing and holding territory liberated from insurgent groups .

similar concerns apply to probable regional troop contributors , who face significant capacity , logistics , and financial shortfalls .

international military operations could also prompt a backlash among northern communities , terrorist attacks by extremists , or additional frictions within the malian military .

as noted above , the path to achieving territorial reunification — which malians may prioritize above international terrorism concerns — is fundamentally uncertain .

long - running debates over the framework and effectiveness of tsctp appear to have been accompanied by significant interagency friction over how aggressively to respond to regional security threats .

these debates appear set to continue amid ongoing examination by congress of the legal and policy environment for u.s. counterterrorism efforts in mali and the sahel .

emerging policy questions include: what is the relative importance of the situation in mali compared to other u.s. policy priorities and national security concerns ? .

what is the likely scope and duration of french operations in mali , and what end - state do these operations seek ? .

what role should the united states play as these operations continue ? .

to what extent are security gains likely to be durable ? .

to what extent has western military intervention in mali served as a magnet for foreign fighters , and what has been its impact on local extremism ? .

what benchmarks may be considered as prerequisites to any transition to a u.n. - conducted stabilization or peacekeeping operation ? .

what is the appropriate role for such an operation ? .

what are the capabilities and political commitment of regional troop contributors ? .

what policy and funding lessons can be drawn from ongoing u.s. - and u.n. - supported , african - led military operations elsewhere on the continent , including in somalia and in darfur , sudan ? .

do aqim and associated groups in northern mali primarily pose a threat to regional security , or do they pose a more direct threat to the united states ? .

what has been the impact of international military operations in mali on the level of threat these groups pose to u.s. interests ? .

where might core terrorist actors move as they are pushed out of northern malian towns ? .

how are aqim and associated groups reacting to international military strikes ? .

what are their capabilities ? .

to what extent do these groups benefit from any local support ? .

what types of external support do they receive , if any ? .

what is the likely timeframe for elections in mali , and under what conditions would elections be perceived as credible ? .

in the interim , should the legal and policy restrictions on u.s. security assistance and cooperation for the malian security forces be revised , or maintained ? .

what are the implications for international policymakers of coup leader capt .

sanogo's continued role in malian politics and security sector reform ? .

what is the likely impact of international training — such as the nascent european union mission to restructure the malian security forces — on the cohesiveness and behavior of the malian military ? .

what can or should the united states do to encourage civilian - led peace processes and improved governance in mali ? .

