congress has recently demonstrated significant ongoing interest in the issue of "patent assertion entities" ( paes ) , which are popularly referred to as "patent trolls. .

the leahy - smith america invents act of 2011 ( aia ) included an order for further study of pae litigation , and in march 2013 , the house judiciary subcommittee on courts , intellectual property and the internet held a hearing on "abusive patent litigation" and paes .

furthermore , in july 2012 , both the house and the senate held hearings regarding patent disputes at the international trade commission ( itc ) , which has seen a surge in patent complaints as federal courts have become less patent holder - friendly after passage of the aia in 2011 and a landmark supreme court ruling in 2006 .

the much - publicized proliferation of paes was among the central factors that prompted the aia , but at the end of the day , congress passed a few provisions arguably addressing paes while leaving several other pae - related issues unresolved , apparently in light of lively debate over what , if anything , should be done about them .

the pae business model focuses not on developing or commercializing technologies but on buying and asserting patents against companies that have already begun using them , often after independently developing them without knowledge of the pae's patent , according to a report by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) .

paes emerged alongside the burgeoning tech industry around the turn of the 21 st century and gained notoriety with lawsuits claiming exclusive ownership of such ubiquitous technologies as wireless email , digital video streaming , and the interactive web .

they have had the attention of congress , the press , and the public since at least 2006 , when a successful pae suit almost caused the shutdown of blackberry wireless service .

such victories in court are rare for paes .

according to one empirical study , they lose 92% of merits judgments , but few cases make it that far .

the vast majority end in settlements because litigation is risky , costly , and disruptive for defendants , and paes often offer to settle for amounts well below litigation costs to make the business decision to settle an obvious one .

observers expect that the aia will reduce the volume of meritless lawsuits , but not dramatically .

while the provisions for post - grant examination and transitional scrubbing of business method patents will help with assertions of invalid patents , they do not address the supposed use of valid patents to extract undue royalties from defendants that are either locked in to the patented technology or not infringing the patent at all .

additionally , post - grant examination is not available for patents granted prior to the aia , and the aia's restrictions on joinder do not apply in a case brought before the itc ( thus , paes could still name multiple parties as respondents in a single itc complaint even if they have no relation to each other ) .

reform advocates fear that paes impede innovation , undermine the patent system , and wreak havoc on businesses that play a vital role in the american economy .

according to one study , pae activity cost defendants and licensees $29 billion in 2011 , a 400% increase over $7 billion in 2005 , and the losses are mostly deadweight , with less than 25% flowing to innovation and at least that much going towards legal fees .

another recent study suggests that pae activity could harm competition to the extent that operating companies use or "sponsor" paes as a means of imposing costs on rivals and achieving other anticompetitive ends .

defenders of paes argue that they actually promote invention by increasing the liquidity and managing the risk of investments in applied research and invention , as well as by compensating small inventors .

paes' strongest allies include universities and other non - practicing entities that benefit from having paes as buyers for their patents and are not as vulnerable to lawsuits because they ordinarily do not make or sell anything that could be infringing .

other defenders of the status quo raise concerns about unintended consequences and collateral effects of changes to the law .

the federal trade commission and numerous scholars suggest that pae activity does indeed have beneficial effects but that , under current law , these benefits are significantly outweighed by the costs .

what remains unclear is the extent of the imbalance between costs and benefits and whether congress should attempt to rebalance any disparity .

in section 34 of the aia , congress instructed the government accountability office to study the costs , benefits , and consequences of litigation by "non - practicing entities" and "patent assertion entities" and report back with findings and recommendations on how to "minimize any negative impact" of such litigation by september 2012 ; however , as of the date of this report , the study has not yet been released .

this report reviews the current debate and controversy surrounding paes , examines the reasons for the rise in pae litigation , and explores the legislative options available to congress if it decides that paes are an issue that should be addressed .

patent law finds its constitutional basis in article i , section 8 , clause 8 , of the u.s. constitution and its statutory basis in the patent act of 1952 .

patents provide the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , or importing claimed inventions for a limited period of time , generally 20 years .

inventors may acquire patents by submitting an application to the u.s. patent and trademark office ( pto ) , where officials will examine it to determine whether the statutory requirements are met .

this process is commonly known as "prosecution. .

applications consist of "claims" establishing the metes and bounds of the patent property right , which is typically broader than the specific invention , and a "specification" that describes the claimed invention .

the specification must be detailed and concrete enough to enable others to make and use the invention without undue experimentation .

claims must consist of a patentable subject matter — "any new and useful process , machine , manufacture , or any composition of matter , or any new and useful improvement thereof" — rather than abstract ideas or law of nature , and satisfy substantive requirements of novelty , nonobviousness , and utility .

the patent holder may enforce its rights by filing infringement suits in federal court against anyone who makes , uses , sells , or imports the patented technology , regardless of whether it was copied or developed independently .

courts presume that patents granted by the pto are valid , but accused infringers may introduce evidence of invalidity or unenforceability .

the patent holder bears the burden of establishing infringement by each alleged infringer .

patent litigation is very expensive ; the average suit in which $1 million to $25 million is at stake costs $1.6 million through discovery and $2.8 million through trial .

upon a finding of infringement , a federal court may issue an injunction if doing so seems more equitable than simply awarding monetary damages .

the statute also provides for the award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit has national jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts .

a patent holder can also enforce its rights by filing a complaint with the international trade commission ( itc ) , which may issue an exclusion order blocking importation of the infringing product into the united states .

the itc is not authorized to issue damages , however .

skyrocketing rates of patent litigation since the turn of the 21 st century have often been tied to the rise of "patent assertion entities" ( paes ) , businesses modeled on "purchasing and asserting patents against manufacturers who may be using the technology" rather than developing or commercializing the technologies themselves .

they are frequently accused of being classic arbitrageurs , taking advantage of the "large gap between the cost of getting a patent and the value that can be captured with an infringement action" in the information technology ( it ) sector .

paes are frequently referred to as "patent trolls," after the villains of folklore known to lie in wait under bridges they did not build , then emerge from the smog to demand tolls from unsuspecting travelers .

the term "troll" is controversial because it is both pejorative and ambiguous , often used imprecisely for any opportunistic or unpopular patent holder .

but it is best understood as an epithet for paes , which object to the label and argue essentially that the fees they collect are legitimate and needed to fund investment in infrastructure — that if they did not take tolls , bridges would be fewer in number and lower in quality .

experts attribute the proliferation of paes over the past 10 to 15 years to the explosion of the information technology ( it ) industry and patent law's struggle to adapt to the unique issues presented by this new frontier of innovation .

they indicate that the pae business model is not about licensing patents generally but high - tech patents in particular , including those on software and business methods or processes related to software , as well as computers and electronics .

why do high - tech patents attract and enable paes ? .

first , inadvertent infringement is said to be inevitable due to notice failure and the so - called "patent thicket," among other things .

second , uneven bargaining power enables paes to negotiate excessive royalties from infringers and undue royalties from non - infringers .

the high value that can be extracted from patents that have been plausibly or actually infringed , together with the relatively low cost of acquiring and warehousing them , invites arbitrage .

on february 27 , 2013 , representatives peter defazio and jason chaffetz introduced the saving high - tech innovators from egregious legal disputes ( shield ) act of 2013 ( h.r .

845 ) , which is intended to make paes responsible for paying alleged infringers' court costs and attorney's fees if they lose their infringement case in court .

a previous version of the shield act had been introduced in the 112 th congress but did not see action .

the patent act currently provides a court with the power to award reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing party "in exceptional cases. .

the shield act of 2013 would amend the patent act by inserting a new section 285a , which would require a court , in an action involving the validity or infringement of a patent , to award full litigation costs ( including reasonable attorney's fees ) to the prevailing party asserting that the patent is invalid or not infringed , if the court determines that the party alleging infringement does not meet one or more of the following three conditions: 1 .

the party is the inventor , joint inventor , or the original assignee of the patent ; 2 .

the party can provide evidence of substantial investment made by the party in the exploitation of the patent through production or sale of an item covered by the patent ; or 3 .

the party is an institution of higher education or is a technology transfer organization whose primary purpose is to facilitate commercialization of technology developed by such institution .

thus , the legislation attempts to specifically target pae litigants by providing a "negative definition" of a pae ( though it never explicitly uses such term ) ; a party that does not satisfy any one of the conditions listed above would be liable to the alleged infringer for full litigation costs , if the party loses the lawsuit .

the shield act would require the party asserting invalidity or noninfringement to file a motion with the court requesting a judgment that the adverse party does not meet any one of the above conditions .

within 120 days of such motion , the court would need to make a determination as to whether the adverse party meets at least one of these conditions .

if the adverse party fails to meet a condition , the party would be required to post a bond in an amount set by the court to cover the alleged infringer's litigation costs , should the court ultimately find that the adverse party's patent is invalid or not infringed .

as representative chaffetz explained in introducing the bill , "patent trolls contribute nothing to the economy .

no industry is immune to these attacks .

instead of creating jobs and growing the economy , businesses are wasting resources to fight off frivolous lawsuits .

this bipartisan legislation will curb future abuse by requiring trolls to bear the financial responsibility for failed claims. .

some have criticized the shield act for not providing additional explanation about the phrase "substantial investment ... in the exploitation of the patent" ; they have also pointed out that a pae could try to meet that particular condition in order to avoid paying the litigation costs: [w]hat does "substantial" mean ? .

presumably it is intended to ensnare npes that decide to make things , but not make enough ( or good enough ) things .

but why should a court get to decide what is enough ? .

and what do we do about start - ups who have patents but have not yet commercialized their invention ? .

are they trolls , too ? .

and what is to stop npes from becoming distributors ? .

they could buy competing products wholesale ( perhaps products where they have secured licenses ) and sell them .

this only makes sense ; by being resellers , they can claim that the competition of the infringing product is harming their sales business .

other commentators have questioned how the shield act's bond requirement would work in practice: how would the "full costs" amount of the required bonds be determined at the beginning of each , separate suit , when different defendants will employ different defense strategies , and incur different "full costs" ? .

will the bond amount be the subject of legal opinions of counsel , or of expert opinions ? .

what banks , sureties , or insurance companies would offer to provide shield act bonds to npes ? .

assuming that some financial institutions would , in fact , offer to provide shield act bonds , what amount and type of collateral would be required and , more importantly , how would typically asset - free , judgment - proof npes provide that collateral ? .

commentators have suggested a number of legislative avenues to address pae activity .

it bears emphasis that pae activity has been concentrated in the realm of it , primarily on patents related to software , the internet , and electronics .

due to the component - driven and intangible nature of it , as well as indications that patents are less essential to promoting innovation in it than in other industries , such as pharmaceuticals , some observers urge congress to undertake targeted reforms and leave the other realms of the patent system as they are .

this could entail distinctions based on type of patent or the industry area , an approach already taken by the shield act .

however , such precision may be precluded , or at least constrained , by an international agreement .

article 27.1 of the agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( "trips" ) , administered by the world trade organization ( wto ) , requires that patents "be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to ... the field of technology. .

but some observers have argued that this provision "does not strictly require a 'single level of ip protection for all technologies or industries.' .

in fact , a wto panel "rejected a strict interpretation of article 27.1 prohibiting any differentiation between fields of technology," and the "accepted view is that 'the pejorative concept of discrimination must be distinguished from differentiation for legitimate reasons .' .

nevertheless , congress may need to carefully examine whether any changes it desires to make to the patent system would be inconsistent with its international obligations .

improving notice where it currently fails is a relatively uncontroversial and high - priority goal of some patent reform advocates .

the "fuzzy boundaries" of it patents and the sheer number of them that are granted and incorporated in any given product make it difficult for firms to avoid infringement and , once faced with a pae assertion , to know whether it is valid without going to court .

there are also a number of disincentives and obstacles for product firms to find and clear patents ahead of time .

many scholars believe solving this notice failure would go far towards reducing the negative effects of paes while keeping the benefits and making the entire patent system work better .

among the most popular ideas is more robust use of §112's definiteness and disclosure rules to deny ( at the pto ) or invalidate ( in court ) abstract or ambiguous it patents , which may entail legislatively overruling federal circuit standards that permit "substantial ambiguity" in it patent claims .

of course it is also an option to let the federal circuit sort these matters out itself .

for definiteness , congress might consider amendments that point the federal circuit to a test that "weeds out claims reasonably susceptible to multiple interpretations," which the ftc says "could reduce ambiguity and improve notice in a broad range of settings. .

many observers want a test that weeds out more claims than the "insolubly ambiguous" standard adopted by the federal circuit in 2001 .

others believe current doctrine is adequate but underenforced .

several reform proposals address the issue of patent applicants keeping claims hidden at the pto by filing continuations .

the most common among them involve reforms of continuation practice , which currently "allows patent owners to hide the true nature of their invention until late in the process" and extend the time during which other companies might unknowingly begin using the patented technology .

there have also been many calls for the pto to make pending applications more open to the outside world so that there are no surprises and more assurance for diligent companies that do search for existing patents .

finally , some scholars propose eliminating what they view as a disincentive for firms to search existing patents in advance .

the "willfulness doctrine" is said to boost pae bargaining power and has the "perverse effect of causing people to try to avoid learning of patents. .

congress might consider legislation that would delay the ability to even plead willfulness until there has been a finding of infringement .

proponents argue this would preserve the doctrine's deterrent and punitive functions while improving notice and removing a tool paes use to raise defendants' costs and risk , as well as their own bargaining power .

the leverage paes can exert by threatening an injunction from a federal court has diminished since the supreme court decided ebay in 2006 , but commentators now indicate that paes have replaced it with the "damocles sword" derived from credibly threatening to get an itc exclusion order on the import of defendants' products .

congress recently heard testimony urging it to prevent the itc from issuing exclusion orders for paes and is currently considering action to that effect .

as noted above , paes play a smaller role in the growth of itc complaints than reformers seem to believe , but it is possible that paes have extracted royalties by threatening itc import bans and rarely needed to actually file .

other procedural changes that shift more of the burdens and costs of litigation onto paes could also reduce their bargaining leverage over defendant product companies .

some scholars have called upon congress to eliminate the presumption of validity , now given to patents out of deference to the pto .

currently rebuttable only by "clear and convincing evidence," the presumption increases costs for defendants and leverage for paes .

it might also extend the use of an invalid patent and the number of defendants a pae can assert it against .

another common suggestion is to change royalty calculation rules , which often provide damages "disproportionate" to the contribution of the infringed patent as a portion or component of the overall product .

critics posit that in the it sector , "if every patented portion of an invention was licensed at the same rate as the infringed patent , the inventor would face a net loss. .

the 110 th and 111 th congresses considered legislation to address this issue , but nothing was passed .

observers indicate that it interests support such changes due to the many components in each of their products while pharmaceutical , biotechnology , and npe or pae interests have opposed it .

congress could consider it - specific royalty reforms .

many changes proposed by scholars target the practice of sitting on a patent until infringement and / or lock - in to a plausibly infringing technology have occurred and only then notifying targets of the patent and offering them licenses .

one idea that has been floated is to decrease the patent period for it patents , which are quickly outdated yet litigated aggressively through the end of their 20-year terms .

a forthcoming study by brian j .

love shows that it may be that a shorter term would primarily harm paes: product companies predominately enforce their patents soon after they issue and complete their enforcement activities well before their patents expire .

npes , on the other hand , begin asserting their patents relatively late in the patent term and frequently continue to litigate their patents to the verge of expiration .

indeed , i find that the average product - company patent has been shelved by its owner before the average npe patent has even been asserted .

npes account for the majority of suits brought in the final three years of the patent term , and the product firms that litigate late in the term are "a unique group of companies that .

 .

 .

blur the line between practicing entities and trolls. .

love's study also finds that high - tech patents represent an outsized portion of patents litigated in the last three years of their terms , comprising 86% for npes and 72% for product firms , even though most 18- or 20-year - old software patents are likely outdated .

an alternative to shortening the patent term would involve changes to the maintenance fees that patent holders pay at certain points in the patent term to keep their rights in force .

fees could escalate over the life of the patent or increase with each renewal and apply across the board or just for inactive patents , entities with big portfolios , or it - related patents .

another possibility is cost - and burden - shifting in the latter half of the patent term .

under other variations , patent owners could face repercussions if they neglect to engage in bona fide use , development , or licensing of their patents for a set number of years .

the conditions triggering such effects might be modeled after that for trademark "abandonment" under the lanham act: non - use with the intent not to use in the reasonably foreseeable future .

not practicing a patent for a number of years could be prima facie evidence of abandonment that patent owners would have to rebut before any infringement suit could proceed .

evidence of efforts to develop , commercialize , or license the patent would rebut the prima facie assumption as long as they are both bona fide — not taken "merely to reserve a right" — and done in good faith .

ex post licensing would not qualify as a use , and availability through a designated clearinghouse of some kind might be required .

as for the effect triggered by the period of non - use , options range from cancellation to the shifting of costs and burdens onto paes , diminishing their leverage and increasing their costs .

other ideas include removing the presumption of validity , subjecting plaintiffs to heightened pleading and production requirements , or freezing the patent until the patent owner begins to use it .

a leading scholar and a leading pae have partnered to advocate consideration of another reform: requiring publication of patent assignment and license terms .

mark lemley of stanford law school and nathan myhrvold of intellectual ventures point out that patents currently exist in an inefficient blind market .

the publication requirement would not solve the uncertainty and notice issues , but: [i]t will permit the aggregate record of what companies pay for rights to signal what particular patents are worth and how strong they are , just as derivative financial instruments allow market to evaluate and price other forms of risk .

it will help rationalize patent transactions , turning them from secret , one - off negotiations into a real , working market for patents .

and by making it clear to courts and the world at large what the normal price is for patent rights , it will make it that much harder for a few unscrupulous patent owners to hold up legitimate innovators , and for established companies to systematically infringe the rights of others .

lemley and myhrvold anticipate concerns that patent holders would not license their patents if they had to disclose the licenses but suggest that this is a less a problem than people might think , concluding that "[t]he only people who stand to lose from mandatory disclosure of licenses are those who are taking advantage of the current state of ignorance. .

