the united states is engaged in negotiations with japan and 10 other countries to form a regional free trade agreement ( fta ) — the trans - pacific partnership agreement ( tpp ) .

in the negotiations , the united states and the other tpp partner - countries seek to build "a comprehensive , next - generation regional agreement that liberalizes trade and investment and addresses new and traditional trade issues and 21 st century challenges. .

the tpp partners also envision the agreement to be a building block towards the establishment of a broader , asian - pacific regional fta , sometimes referred to as the free trade area of the asia - pacific ( ftaap ) .

of the 12 tpp countries , japan is the most recent to join the negotiations .

on march 15 , 2013 , japanese prime minister shinzo abe announced that japan would formally seek to participate in the negotiations to establish the tpp .

the announcement followed an initial expression of interest in november 2011 by then - prime minister yoshihiko noda .

in the intervening months , japanese supporters of the tpp — including representatives of major companies — and tpp opponents — including representatives of the very vocal and politically influential agricultural sector — engaged in debate .

in addition , parliamentary elections led to the formation of a new government under the liberal democratic party ( ldp ) and abe as prime minister .

in his march 15 statement , prime minister abe acknowledged the interests and sensitivities of the agricultural groups , but he also insisted that japan needed to take advantage of "this last window of opportunity" to enter the negotiations , if it is to grow economically .

on april 12 , 2013 , the united states announced its support for japan's participation in the tpp .

the announcement came after a series of discussions on conditions for u.s. support and outstanding bilateral issues .

as a result of the discussions the two sides agreed on measures to address these issues during and in parallel with the main tpp negotiations .

on april 20 , the then - 11tpp countries formally invited japan to participate in the negotiations , and on july 23 japan formally joined .

congress has a direct and oversight role in u.s. participation in the tpp .

it must approve implementing legislation , if a final tpp agreement is to apply to the united states .

some members of congress have already weighed in on whether japan should be allowed to participate in the tpp and under what conditions .

more may do so as the process proceeds .

the obama administration has been proceeding in negotiating the tpp as if trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which expired on june 30 , 2007 , were in force .

tpa is the authority that congress gives to the president to enter into trade agreements that can receive expedited legislative consideration .

the administration has been adhering to consultation requirements and notification deadlines that have been an integral part of previous tpa or fast - track statutes .

on april 24 , then - acting ustr demetrios marantis notified congress of the united states to begin negotiations with japan as part of the tpp .

the tpp is the leading u.s. trade policy initiative of the obama administration and a pillar of its efforts to "rebalance" u.s. foreign policy priorities toward the asia - pacific region by playing a more active role in shaping the region's rules and norms .

as the second - largest economy in asia , the third - largest economy in the world , and a key link in the global supply chain , japan's participation would be pivotal to the credibility and viability of the tpp as a regional trade arrangement .

the inclusion of japan would expand the amount of u.s. trade and foreign investment that the tpp would cover if implemented .

for japan , participation in the tpp could potentially transform its economy by providing unprecedented access to the japanese market for foreign exporters and investors .

it could also force tokyo to confront structural economic problems that have long impeded economic growth .

it would also symbolize japan's continued position as an economic power in east asia , an image that has been tarnished by decades of economic stagnation and the growth of china .

japan's participation in the tpp has important implications for the u.s. - japan relationship .

for example , it already has renewed a focus on long - standing issues , such as access to japan's markets for autos , agricultural products , and insurance , which have remained irritants in the relationship .

new issues will undoubtedly also be raised in the process .

the tpp is an evolving regional free trade agreement ( fta ) .

it was originally formed as the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership — an fta now in effect among singapore , new zealand , chile , and brunei ( the so - called "p - 4" ) .

in the fall of 2008 , the united states , along with australia , peru , and vietnam , joined the negotiations to accede to the arrangement .

malaysia joined as the ninth negotiating partner in october 2010 .

on november 14 , 2009 , president obama committed the united states to engage with the tpp countries to transform the original p - 4 pact into a regional arrangement with broad - based membership and "the high standards worthy of a 21 st century trade agreement. .

after several months of discussions , the nine partners announced a framework for the agreement in time for the ministerial meeting of the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum in honolulu , hawaii , which was held november 8-13 , 2011 .

the tpp partners conducted a series of rounds since that time and are aiming to complete the agreement by the end of 2013 .

as reflected in the framework , the tpp partners envision a comprehensive arrangement covering a broad range of trade and trade - related activities , similar in structure to a number of recently concluded u.s. ftas .

these activities include market access for goods and services ; government procurement ; foreign investment ; technical barriers to trade ; trade remedies ; sanitary and phytosanitary measures ; intellectual property rights ; worker rights ; and environmental protection .

the tpp countries also agreed to pursue cross - cutting issues such as regulatory coherence , competitiveness , and business facilitation , also known as transnational supply and production chains ; the participation of small and medium - sized companies ; economic development ; and potential disciplines on the state - owned enterprises ( soes ) .

the tpp participants also envision the tpp to go beyond typical ftas by being: a regional agreement that facilitates trade by minimizing the "noodle bowl" effect that has been created by different sets of rules under the more than 100 bilateral and regional ftas that exist in the asia pacific - region ; an agreement that addresses trade challenges that are emerging in the 21 st century , for example , cloud computing and soes , that have not been addressed in previous ftas nor fully in the world trade organization ( wto ) because they did not exist or were considered not as important ; and a "living agreement" that will not restrict its membership to the 11 countries but will be open to other countries acceding to it as long as they are willing to commit to its provisions and will take on new issues as they arise .

marantis's april 12 , 2013 , announcement followed a series of u.s. - japanese discussions that began in february 2012 .

regarding autos , as a result of these discussions japan agreed that under the proposed tpp , u.s. tariffs imports of japanese motor vehicles will be phased out over a period equal to the longest phase - out period agreed to under the agreement .

japan also agreed to increase the number of u.s. - made vehicles that can be imported into japan under its preferential handling procedure ( php ) , from 2,000 per vehicle type to 5,000 per vehicle type .

in addition , the two countries agreed to convene separate negotiations that will address issues regarding non - tariff measures ( ntms ) pertaining to auto trade , including transparency in regulations , standards , certification , "green" and other new technology vehicles , and distribution .

in addition , the parallel auto negotiations are to address the establishment of a special "safeguard" provision to deal with injurious surges in auto imports and of a special tariff "snap - back" mechanism to deal with a partner's failure to fulfill the commitments on auto trade .

to address u.s. concerns regarding insurance , japan announced that the government would not approve new or modified cancer insurance products and / or stand - alone medical insurance products for sale by japan post until it has been determined that a "level playing field" has been established in competition between private insurers and japan post .

furthermore , the two sides agreed to hold another separate set of bilateral negotiations , parallel to the tpp talks , to address issues regarding non - tariff measures ( ntms ) in insurance , government procurement , competition policy , express delivery , and sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures .

the parallel negotiations are to achieve "tangible and meaningful" results by the completion of the main tpp negotiations and will be legally binding at the time a tpp agreement would enter into force .

 ( those parallel negotiations were launched on august 7. ) .

the administration notified congress on april 24 of its intention to launch negotiations with japan .

japan officially joined the negotiations on july 23 at the end of the 18 th round of negotiation .

a brief overview of u.s. - japan economic ties can provide context for understanding u.s. and japanese interests in the tpp and the potential implications from various perspectives .

it could also shed light on opportunities and challenges presented by an fta that includes the united states and japan .

a u.s. - japan fta is not a new idea , but it is a policy option that has failed to take hold in the past because of some fundamental issues which have been seemingly intractable .

many of the issues that have continually irritated the u.s. - japan economic relationship could be addressed within the tpp .

u.s. policymakers and other stakeholders have identified three issues that , if resolved , would be considered "confidence - building measures" that could boost u.s. support of japan's inclusion in the tpp .

the issues relate to japanese restrictions on imports of u.s. beef ; market access in japan for cars made by detroit - based u.s. manufacturers ; and preferential treatment for insurance and express delivery subsidiaries of state - owned japan post .

japan's entry into the tpp touches on a range of u.s. trade and foreign policy objectives .

acting ustr demetrios marantis greeted positively prime minister abe's march 15 , 2013 , statement but stipulated: since early last year , the united states has been engaged with japan in bilateral tpp consultations on issues of concern with respect to the automotive and insurance sectors and other non - tariff measures , and also conducting work regarding meeting tpp's high standards .

while we continue to make progress in these consultations , important work remains to be done .

we look forward to continuing these consultations with japan.. .

the united states is also working with japan on "gap issues," to make sure that japan would be prepared to take steps to meet goals of the tpp in areas that japan has not addressed in its previous ftas .

underlying the arguments for japan to join the tpp talks is a growing feeling among many japanese that , after two decades of relatively sluggish growth , japan's economic and political influence is waning in comparison with china and with middle powers such as south korea .

the rapid aging and gradual shrinking of japan's population has added to a sense among many in japan that the country needs to develop new sources of growth to maintain , if not increase , the country's living standards .

japanese proponents of tpp have called for joining the talks for a number of overlapping reasons , some defensive in nature , others more proactive: a desire to promote japanese growth and prevent the hollowing out of japan — that is , the relocation of japanese companies to other countries — by expanding japanese exports , especially to the fast - growing asia - pacific region .

the decade - long stalemate in the wto's "doha round" of trade talks , plus the explosion in bilateral and multilateral ftas over the past decade , has led japan to cautiously pursue its own ftas .

as noted earlier , japan is an important link in asia's global supply chains , and the tpp could facilitate operations within the supply chain .

conversely , greater trans - pacific economic integration could potentially erode japan's place in these manufacturing and export networks .

in his march 15 , 2013 , press conference announcing his decision to seek entry into the tpp negotiations , prime minister abe spoke of the multiple commercial benefits japan would derive from joining , and how doing so would help "leave to our children and our children's children a strong japan...." a feeling that japan is being left behind in negotiating ftas .

although japan has signed 13 ftas — what it calls economic partnership agreements ( epas ) — it has none with a major economic power , with the possible exception of the 2011 japan - india epa , and many of them exclude agricultural trade .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

in contrast , south korea , the country many japanese now compare themselves to , has signed ftas with the united states and the european union ( eu ) , and in 2012 opened negotiations with china .

if japan is left behind in the fta race , the feeling runs , its companies will be left at a competitive disadvantage .

japan has belatedly tried to make up for the gap in 2013 by launching fta negotiations with the eu and with china and south korea on a trilateral fta .

a desire to help shape the rules of economic activity in the asia - pacific and beyond .

in his announcement of japan's bid to participate , prime minister abe said that the tpp would likely serve as "a basis for rule - making" in other multilateral trade negotiations .

if japan waited any longer to join the talks , in his view , it would be too late to help write the tpp's rules .

"now is our last chance," abe said , "losing this opportunity would simply leave japan out from the rule - making in the world .

future historians will no doubt see that "the tpp was the opening of the asia - pacific century. .

a belief that entering the tpp will help promote economic reforms inside japan .

over the years , many experts and government officials have argued that japan needs structural reform to spur its economy .

a number of japanese commentators and officials believe that one way to overcome resistance to reform from vested interests is through negotiating a comprehensive , high - standard fta such as the tpp , which will help reform - minded groups and individuals by giving them political cover .

also , negotiating the tpp could potentially enable japan to gain benefits by trading structural reforms for concessions from negotiating partners .

a hope that entering the tpp will help japan's strategic situation in asia .

joining the tpp would complement japan's moves in recent years to augment the u.s. - japan alliance by strengthening tokyo's relationships with middle powers in and around the asian region .

behind this push is a concern that china's rise is diminishing japan's influence and jeopardizing its security and economic interests .

since leading his party to power in late 2012 , prime minister abe has made one of his top priorities restoring japanese standing , through revitalizing its economy and strengthening relations with the united states .

until abe's march 2013 announcement , the frequent turnover among japanese prime ministers — abe is the seventh premier in as many years — failed to produce the leadership that might unify the pro - tpp camps across the two parties .

these political weaknesses exacerbated the traditional institutional limitations of the prime minister's powers , making it easier for motivated interests to effectively veto government action and stymie the efforts of abe's two predecessors from unambiguously trying to enter the talks .

for the moment , abe appears to have surmounted these obstacles , in part by using his high popularity ratings as leverage against opponents in his ldp and by centralizing decision - making on tpp issues in the prime minister's office .

the latter move could blunt opposition to the tpp within the ldp .

abe came to power in december 2012 after leading the ldp to victory in national elections , ending the dpj's roughly three - year reign .

japan's powerful agricultural institutions , most notably the nationwide agricultural cooperative organization ( ja ) , have been the most vocal opponents of joining the tpp , as has been true of virtually all trade liberalization agreements that japan has pursued for the past 40-50 years .

ja has called for over 800 farm items to be exempt from tariff elimination .

japan's farm sector has taken advantage of the fact that japan's rural areas are over - represented in the diet .

as a result , farm lobbies have significant sway in both the ruling ldp and opposition dpj and have supported an array of policies that benefit the agricultural sector .

for example , many farm products remain protected behind high tariff barriers such as rice ( 778% ) and wheat ( 252% ) .

 ( for others , see table 4 . ) .

additionally , a range of other policies ensure that japanese farming remains small scale , performed increasingly by aging and part - time farmers , and generally unproductive compared to farms in most other countries .

the japanese government provides around ¥1 trillion ( about $12 billion ) annually in direct income to farming households .

the abe government and the ldp reportedly are considering a new subsidy package that could be offered to japan's farm sector to compensate for losses that would be expected if a tpp agreement is reached .

ja has allied with a variety of other powerful interest groups to mount an aggressive campaign against entering the tpp .

the most significant of these other groups may be the japan medical association , which argues that tpp will erode if not eliminate japan's universal healthcare insurance system because it will be forced to pay higher prices for medicines and medical equipment .

many experts argue that until abe's march 2013 announcement , japan's traditional agriculture interests , medical lobby , and other tpp opponents successfully controlled the debate about tpp inside japan .

they have gained the support of scores of lawmakers , including over 200 ldp members ( over half the ldp's parliamentary caucus ) that prior to abe's decision joined a group calling for japan not to join the tpp .

nonetheless , in mid - march , after considerable internal debate the ldp formally announced it supported abe's decision .

around the same time , an ldp panel on the tpp designated five product lines — rice , sugarcane / sugar products , wheat , dairy products , and beef — as "important items" that must be protected .

in 2012 , prior to the elections that swept abe into power , the abe - led ldp had said it opposed entering the negotiations unless the final agreement allowed for some exemptions , a position that many interpreted as designed to appeal to anti - tpp voters .

at the time , the ldp also objected to some investor - state dispute settlement requirements that might be agreed to in the tpp , and argued that government procurement and financial services must have their basis in japan's "special characteristics. .

it is unclear to what extent these views have or will become japanese government positions .

the reservations about tpp among many ldp members indicate that as japan participates in the tpp , the abe government may face difficulties gaining domestic support for making painful concessions , particularly if abe's public approval ratings decline .

in a december 7 , 2011 , federal register notice , the office of the ustr solicited the views of private sector stakeholders on whether japan should be included in the tpp .

ustr received over 100 responses .

around 40% of the responses were from agricultural firms , another 25% came from manufacturing firms , 15% from services providers , and the remainder from various non - government organizations ( ngos ) and business associations .

some of the responses came from japanese companies or associations representing japanese companies .

in a few cases , the respondents expressed outright opposition to japan's participation .

one of the most notable members of this group is the american automotive policy council ( aapc ) .

the aapc represents the three detroit - based auto manufacturers — chrysler , ford , and general motors .

in its statement , the aapc said: the aapc opposes japan joining the trans - pacific partnership negotiations at this time.... japan's trade barriers in the auto sector cannot be addressed easily or quickly , and will needlessly slow down the negotiations .

to date japan has not indicated a willingness to change its decades - long practice of maintaining a closed automotive market .

given the systemic trade imbalance and lack of willingness to reform , a u.s. free trade agreement with japan would only lock - in the already one - way trade relationship that japan's closed auto market has created , and significantly delay , if not prevent proceeding with a high quality tpp trade agreement with other more compatible trade partners in the important and rapidly growing pan - pacific region .

the afl - cio also opposed japan's participation in the tpp , having stated: given the numerous unknowns about the yet unfinished trans - pacific fta , it is difficult to provide significant technical advice or even formulate well - grounded opinion with respect to the possible impacts on working families of japan's accession to the trans - pacific fta .

as such , the afl - cio has serious concerns regarding the premature expansion of the trans - pacific fta negotiations to include japan or any other nation before us negotiators first demonstrate an ability to successfully negotiate an agreement that will produce genuine benefits for american workers and increase domestic production .

[japan's] markets are notoriously closed to foreign goods , and this is not the result of high tariff barriers.... to gain significant and substantial market access to japan , the united states trade representative ( ustr ) would have to adopt a new and revolutionary approach... .

if ustr is not willing to 'think outside the box' and abandon its currently slavish approach to free trade , it is difficult to see how japan's accession to the trans - pacific fta can benefit american working families .

in some cases , respondents expressed strong support for japan's inclusion in the tpp .

for example , caterpillar , inc. argues that the tpp would be the vehicle for addressing japan's remaining non - tariff barriers .

the u.s. chamber of commerce and the u.s. - japan business council , in separate submissions , also expressed support for japan's participation in the tpp negotiations .

however , each group asserted that japan would have to address issues that have plagued relations with member companies , including regulatory barriers , favored treatment of insurance and express delivery subsidiaries of japan post , and government procurement , among others .

some members of congress have weighed in on the issue .

for example , in a november 8 , 2011 , bipartisan letter to ustr ron kirk , the chairmen and ranking members of the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee stated that japan's participation "would represent an opportunity for much needed change in japan's approach to international trade. .

they assert that , while japan is a long - time u.s. ally and friend in asia , paramount considerations in evaluating a request relating to a trade agreement must be whether japan is willing and able to meet the high standard commitments inherent in u.s. free trade agreements and whether inclusion would truly open this historically closed market to the benefit of our companies , workers , and farmers .

these comments and others from stakeholders suggest that the debate within the united states and negotiations with japan on the tpp will be difficult and complex .

the legacies of a sometimes contentious bilateral economic relationship have carried over into the tpp negotiations .

japan's participation in the tpp negotiations represents a major change in the shape and dynamic of the u.s. - japan economic relationship .

over the years , trade policymakers , business representatives , and regional specialists in both countries had floated the concept of a u.s. - japan fta .

until the tpp talks began in earnest , the idea had not gained traction because the hurdles — japanese agricultural policy , problems in auto trade , government regulations and practices — have been too high to overcome .

these same hurdles still must be overcome if japan and the united states are able to work successfully in the tpp .

the tpp presents opportunities and challenges for the united states and japan .

on the one hand , if successful , it could reinvigorate an economic relationship that has remained steady but stagnant , by forcing the two countries to address long - standing , difficult issues and allowing them to raise their relationship to a higher level .

on the other hand , failure to do so could indicate that the underlying problems are too fundamental to overcome and could set back the relationship .

it could signify the failure of the united states and / or japan to deal with domestic opposition to a more open trade relationship .

the implications for the overall u.s. - japanese alliance are less certain .

while the tpp would likely be viewed as strengthening the alliance and failure of the negotiations could be considered a setback , the alliance is also built on common national security concerns , such as north korea's nuclear program and the economic and military advancement of china , which could well trump trade problems .

furthermore , japan's entry into the tpp is largely viewed , on the one hand , as an important step in forming a wider asia - pacific regional trade arrangement .

on the other hand , the absence of japan could undermine the credibility of the tpp as a viable regional trade arrangement and a setback for asia - pacific economic integration .

