presidential claims of a right to preserve the confidentiality of information and documents in the face of legislative demands have figured prominently , though intermittently , in executive - congressional relations since at least 1792 , when president washington discussed with his cabinet how to respond to a congressional inquiry into the military debacle that befell general st. clair's expedition .

few such interbranch disputes over access to information have reached the courts for substantive resolution ; the vast majority achieve resolution through political negotiation and accommodation .

in fact , it was not until the watergate - related lawsuits in the 1970s seeking access to president nixon's tapes that the existence of a presidential confidentiality privilege was judicially established as a necessary derivative of the president's status in the u.s. constitutional scheme of separated powers .

litigation over the scope of executive privilege in direct relation to congressional oversight and investigations has also been quite limited .

in total , there have been only four cases dealing with executive privilege in the context of information access disputes between congress and the executive , and only two of those resulted in decisions on the merits .

indeed , the supreme court has never addressed executive privilege in the face of a congressional demand for information .

the nixon era cases initially established the broad contours of the presidential communications privilege .

under those precedents , the privilege , which is constitutionally rooted , could be invoked by the president when asked to produce documents or other materials or information that reflect presidential decision making and deliberations that he believes should remain confidential .

if the president does so , the materials become presumptively privileged .

the privilege , however , is qualified , not absolute , and can be overcome by an adequate showing of need .

finally , while reviewing courts have expressed reluctance in balancing executive privilege claims against a congressional demand for information , they have acknowledged they will do so if the political branches have tried in good faith but failed to reach an accommodation .

however , existing precedent left important gaps in the law of presidential privilege that have increasingly become focal points , if not the source , of interbranch confrontations .

the unanimous panel in in re sealed case ( espy ) , and the subsequent reaffirmation of the espy principles in judicial watch v. department of justice , addressed many of these unresolved questions , albeit in a noncongressional context , in a manner that may alter the future legal playing field in resolving such disputes .

two recent disputes between congress and the executive branch relate directly to the application of executive privilege in the congressional oversight context .

in 2007 , an investigation into the removal of nine united states attorneys drew formal claims of privilege by president george w. bush .

those privilege claims were successfully challenged in a civil suit brought by the house judiciary committee , in which a federal district court held that senior presidential advisers do not enjoy absolute immunity from compelled testimony or production of documents pursuant to a congressional subpoena .

in 2012 , president obama invoked executive privilege in response to a subpoena from the house committee on oversight and government reform that sought information from the attorney general relating to the department of justice's response to the committee's investigation into operation fast and furious .

similar to the u.s .

attorneys controversy , a civil suit was filed to compel the executive branch to comply with the committee subpoena .

that case is currently pending before the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

in interbranch information disputes since the early 1980s , executive statements and positions taken to justify assertions of executive privilege have frequently rested upon explanations of executive privilege offered by the courts .

to better understand the executive's stance in this area , this report will chronologically examine the development of the judiciary's approach to executive privilege and describe how the executive has adapted the judicial explanations of the privilege to support its arguments .

in nixon v. sirica , the first of the watergate cases , the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit rejected president nixon's claim that he was absolutely immune from all compulsory process whenever he asserted a formal claim of executive privilege .

the court held that while presidential conversations are "presumptively privileged," the presumption could be overcome by an appropriate showing of public need by the branch seeking access to the conversations .

in sirica , "a uniquely powerful," albeit undefined , showing was deemed to have been made by the special prosecutor , who argued that the tapes subpoenaed by the grand jury contained evidence vital to determining whether probable cause existed that those indicted had committed crimes .

the d.c .

circuit next addressed the senate watergate committee's effort to gain access to five presidential tapes in senate select committee on presidential campaign activities v. nixon .

the appeals court initially determined that "[t]he staged decisional structure established in nixon v. sirica" was applicable "with at least equal force here. .

thus , in order to overcome the presumptive privilege and require the submission of materials for court review , a strong showing of need had to be established .

the appeals court held that the committee had not met its burden of showing that "the subpoenaed evidence is demonstrably critical to the responsible fulfillment of the committee's function. .

it elaborated that , in view of the initiation of impeachment proceedings by the house judiciary committee , the overlap of the investigative objectives of both committees , and the fact that the impeachment committee already had the tapes sought by the senate committee , "the select committee's immediate oversight need for the subpoenaed tapes is , from a congressional perspective , merely cumulative. .

nor did the court feel that the committee had shown that the subpoenaed materials were "critical to the performance of [its] legislative functions . .

the court could discern "no specific legislative decisions that cannot responsibly be made without access to materials uniquely contained in the tapes or without resolution of the ambiguities that the [presidentially released] transcripts may contain. .

the court concluded that the subsequently initiated and nearly completed work of the house judiciary committee had in effect preempted the senate committee: "more importantly ... there is no indication that the findings of the house committee on the judiciary and , eventually the house of representatives itself , are so likely to be inconclusive or long in coming that the select committee needs immediate access of its own. .

the d.c .

circuit's view in senate select committee , that the watergate committee's oversight need for the requested materials was "merely cumulative" in light of the then concurrent impeachment inquiry , has been utilized by the executive as the basis for arguing that congress's interest in executive information is less compelling when a committee's function is oversight than when it is considering specific legislative proposals .

this approach , however , arguably misreads the carefully circumscribed holding of the court , and would seem to construe too narrowly the scope of congress's investigatory powers .

the senate select committee court's opinion took great pains to underline the unique and limiting nature of the case's factual and historical context .

thus it emphasized the overriding nature of the "events that have occurred since this litigation was begun and , indeed , since the district court issued its decision. .

these facts included the commencement of impeachment proceedings by the house judiciary committee , a committee with an "express constitutional source" of investigative power , whose "investigative objectives substantially overlap" those of the senate committee ; the house committee's present possession of the very tapes sought by the select committee , making the senate committee's need for the tapes "from a congressional perspective , merely cumulative" ; the lack of evidence indicating that congress itself attached any particular value to "having the presidential conversations scrutinized by two committees simultaneously" ; that the need to possess the tapes in order to make "legislative judgments has been substantially undermined by subsequent events," including the public release of the tape transcripts by the president ; the transfer of four of five of the original tapes to the district court ; and the lack of any "indication that the findings of the house committee on the judiciary and , eventually , the house of representatives itself , are so likely to be inconclusive or long in coming that the select committee needs immediate access of its own. .

the appeals court concluded by reiterating the uniqueness of the case's facts and temporal circumstances: "we conclude that the need demonstrated by the select committee in the peculiar circumstances of this case , including the subsequent and on - going investigation of the house judiciary committee , is too attenuated and too tangential to its functions to permit a judicial judgment that the president is required to comply with the committee's subpoena. .

the executive's position arguably ignored the roots of congress's broad investigatory powers , which reach back to the establishment of the constitution and have been continually reaffirmed by the supreme court .

as george mason recognized at the constitutional convention , members of congress "are not only legislators but they possess inquisitorial power .

they must meet frequently to inspect the conduct of the public offices. .

woodrow wilson remarked , quite as important as legislation is vigilant oversight of administration ; and even more important than legislation is the instruction and guidance in political affairs which the people might receive from a body which kept all national concerns suffused in a broad daylight of discussion... .

the informing functions of congress should be preferred even to its legislative function .

the argument is not only that a discussed and interrogated administration is the only pure and efficient administration , but , more than that , that the only really self - governing people is that people which discusses and interrogates its administration .

the supreme court has cited wilson favorably on this point .

moreover , the court has failed to make any distinction between congress's right to executive branch information to use in support of its oversight function versus its responsibility to enact , amend , and repeal laws .

in fact , the court has recognized that congress's investigatory power "comprehends probes into departments of the federal government to expose corruption , inefficiency or waste. .

thus , to read senate select committee as downplaying the status of oversight arguably ignores the court's very specific reasons for not enforcing the committee's subpoena under the unique circumstance of that case and creates a distinction between oversight and legislating that has yet to be embraced by the courts .

moreover , the senate select committee panel's "demonstrably critical" standard for overcoming a president's presumptive claim of privilege is not reflected in any of the subsequent supreme court or appellate court rulings establishing a balancing test for overcoming the qualified presidential privilege .

two months after the ruling in senate select committee , the supreme court issued its unanimous ruling in united states v. nixon ( nixon i ) , which involved a judicial trial subpoena issued to the president at the request of the watergate special prosecutor requesting tape recordings and documents relating to the president's conversations with close aides and advisers .

for the first time , the court found a constitutional basis for the doctrine of executive privilege in "the supremacy of each branch within its own assigned area of constitutional duties" and in the separation of powers .

although it considered a president's communications with his close advisers to be "presumptively privileged," the court rejected the president's contention that the privilege was absolute and precluded judicial review whenever it is asserted .

the court acknowledged the need for confidentiality of high - level communications in the exercise of article ii powers , but stated that "a confrontation with other values arises" when the privilege is asserted based on a broad , undifferentiated claim of public interest in the confidentiality of such communications .

it held that "absent a need to protect military , diplomatic , or sensitive national security secrets , we find it difficult to accept the argument that even the very important interest in confidentiality of presidential communications is significantly diminished by production of" materials that are essential to the enforcement of criminal statutes .

after concluding that the claim of privilege was qualified , the court moved on to resolving the "competing interests" at stake: the president's need for confidentiality versus the judiciary's need for evidence in a criminal proceeding .

evaluating these interests "in a manner that preserves the essential functions of each branch," the court held that the judicial need for the tapes , as shown by a "demonstrated , specific need for evidence in a pending criminal trial," outweighed the president's "generalized interest in confidentiality. .

the court was careful , however , to limit the scope of its decision , noting that "we are not here concerned with the balance between the president's generalized interest in confidentiality ... and congressional demands for information. .

in the last of the nixon cases , nixon v. administrator of general services ( nixon ii ) , the supreme court again balanced competing interests in president nixon's white house records .

the presidential recordings and materials preservation act granted custody of president nixon's presidential records to the administrator of the general services administration , who would screen them for personal and private materials , to be returned to president nixon , and preserve the rest for historical and governmental objectives .

the court rejected president nixon's challenge to the act , which included an argument based on the "presidential privilege of confidentiality. .

although nixon ii did not involve an executive response to a congressional probe , several points emerge from the court's discussion that bear upon congress's interest in confidential executive branch information .

first , the court reiterated that the executive privilege it had announced in nixon i was not absolute , but qualified .

second , the court stressed the narrow scope of that executive privilege .

"in [ nixon i ] the court held that the privilege is limited to communications 'in performance of [a president's] responsibilities ... of his office' ... and made in the process of shaping policies and making decisions. .

third , the court found that there was a "substantial public interest[]" in preserving these materials so that congress , pursuant to its "broad investigative power," could examine them to understand the events that led to president nixon's resignation "in order to gauge the necessity for remedial legislation. .

two post - watergate cases , both involving congressional demands for access to executive information , demonstrate both the judiciary's reluctance to get involved in the essentially political confrontations such disputes represent and a willingness to intervene where the political process appears to be failing .

in united states v. at&t , the d.c .

circuit was unwilling to balance executive privilege claims against a congressional demand for information unless and until the political branches had tried in good faith but failed to reach an accommodation .

in that case , the justice department sought to enjoin at&t's compliance with a subpoena issued by a house subcommittee .

the subcommittee was seeking fbi letters sent to at&t requesting its assistance with warrantless wiretaps on u.s. citizens allegedly conducted for national security purposes .

the justice department argued that the executive branch was entitled to sole control over the information because of "its obligation to safeguard the national security. .

the house of representatives , as intervenor , argued that its rights to the information flowed from its constitutionally implied power to investigate whether there had been abuses of the wiretapping power .

the house also argued that the court had no jurisdiction over the dispute because of the speech or debate clause .

the court rejected the "conflicting claims of the [executive and the congress] to absolute authority. .

with regard to the executive's claim , the court noted that there was no absolute claim of executive privilege in response to congressional requests even in the area of national security: the executive would have it that the constitution confers on the executive absolute discretion in the area of national security .

this does not stand up .

while the constitution assigns to the president a number of powers relating to national security , including the function of commander in chief and the power to make treaties and appoint ambassadors , it confers upon congress other powers equally inseparable from the national security , such as the powers to declare war , raise and support armed forces and , in the case of the senate , consent to treaties and the appointment of ambassadors .

likewise , the court rejected the congressional claim that the speech or debate clause was "intended to immunize congressional investigatory actions from judicial review .

congress' investigatory power is not , itself , absolute. .

according to the court , judicial intervention in executive privilege disputes between the political branches is improper unless the branches have made a good faith effort at compromise without result .

the court held that there is a constitutional duty for the executive and congress to attempt to accommodate each other's needs: the framers , rather than attempting to define and allocate all governmental power in minute detail , relied , we believe , on the expectation that where conflicts in scope of authority arose between the coordinate branches , a spirit of dynamic compromise would promote resolution of the dispute in the manner most likely to result in efficient and effective functioning of our governmental system .

under this view , the coordinate branches do not exist in an exclusively adversary relationship to one another when a conflict in authority arises .

rather , each branch should take cognizance of an implicit constitutional mandate to seek optimal accommodation through a realistic evaluation of the needs of the conflicting branches in the particular fact situation .

the court refused to resolve the dispute because the executive and congress had not yet made that constitutionally mandated effort at accommodation .

instead , the court "encouraged negotiations in order to avoid the problems inherent in [the judiciary] formulating and applying standards for measuring the relative needs of the [executive and legislative branches]. .

the court suggested , however , that it would resolve the dispute if the political branches failed to reach an accommodation .

the court - encouraged negotiations ultimately led to a compromise .

subcommittee staff were allowed to review unedited memoranda describing the warrantless wiretaps and report orally to subcommittee members .

the justice department , however , retained custody of the documents .

the u.s. district court for the district of columbia displayed the same reluctance to intervene in an executive privilege dispute with congress in united states v. house of representatives .

there the court dismissed a suit brought by the justice department seeking a declaratory judgment that the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , anne gorsuch burford , "acted lawfully in refusing to release certain documents to a congressional subcommittee" at the direction of the president .

the administrator based her refusal upon president reagan's invocation of executive privilege against a house committee probing the epa's enforcement of hazardous waste laws .

the court dismissed the case , without reaching the executive privilege claim , on the ground that judicial intervention in a dispute "concerning the respective powers of the legislative and executive branches ... should be delayed until all possibilities for settlement have been exhausted... .

compromise and cooperation , rather than confrontation , should be the aim of the parties. .

as the appeals court had done in at&t , the district court in united states v. house of representatives encouraged the political branches to settle their dispute rather than invite judicial intervention .

the court would intervene and resolve the interbranch dispute only if the parties could not agree .

even then , the courts advised , "judicial resolution of this constitutional claim ... will never become necessary unless administrator gorsuch [burford] becomes a defendant in either a criminal contempt proceeding or other legal action taken by congress. .

ultimately the branches did reach an agreement , and the court did not need to balance executive and congressional interests .

existing precedent left important gaps in the law of executive privilege .

many significant issues remained unresolved , including whether the president has to have actually seen or been familiar with the disputed matter ; whether the presidential privilege encompasses documents and information developed by , or in the possession of , officers and employees in the departments and agencies of the executive branch outside the executive office of the president ; whether the privilege encompasses all communications in which the president may be interested or if it is confined to a particular type of presidential decision making ; and precisely what kind of demonstration of need can overcome the privilege and justify the release of privileged materials .

the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit took up many of these issues in in re sealed case and judicial watch v. department of justice .

the executive branch has developed an expansive view of executive privilege in relation to congressional investigations , taking maximum advantage of the vague and essentially undefined terrain within the judicially recognized contours of the privilege .

thus , executive branch statements have identified four areas that it believes are presumptively covered by executive privilege: foreign relations and military affairs , two separate topics that are sometimes lumped together as "state secrets" ; law enforcement investigations ; and confidential information that reveals the executive's "deliberative process" with respect to policymaking .

typically , the executive has asserted executive privilege based upon a combination of deliberative process and one or more of the other categories .

consequently , much of the controversy surrounding invocation of executive privilege has centered on the scope of the deliberative process category .

the executive has argued that at its core this category protects confidential predecisional deliberative material from disclosure .

justifications for this exemption often draw upon the language in nixon i that identifies a constitutional value in the president receiving candid advice from his subordinates and awareness that any expectation of subsequent disclosure might temper needed candor .

the result has been a presumption by the executive that its predecisional deliberations are beyond the scope of congressional demand .

"congress will have a legitimate need to know the preliminary positions taken by executive branch officials during internal deliberations only in the rarest of circumstances. .

according to this view , the need for the executive to prevent disclosure of its deliberations is at its apex when congress attempts to discover information about ongoing policymaking within the executive branch .

in that case , the executive has argued , the deliberative process exemption serves as an important boundary marking the separation of powers .

when congressional oversight "is used as a means of participating directly in an ongoing process of decisionmaking within the executive branch , it oversteps the bounds of the proper legislative function. .

the executive has also argued that because candor is the principal value served by this category , its protection should extend beyond predecisional deliberations to deliberations involving decisions already made .

"moreover , even if the decision at issue had already been made , disclosure to congress could still deter the candor of future executive branch deliberations. .

executives have also taken the position that the privilege covers confidential communications with respect to policymaking well beyond the confines of the white house and the president's closest advisers .

as indicated in the above discussion , recent appellate court rulings may cast doubt on the broad claims of privilege posited by the executive branch in the past .

taken together , espy and judicial watch arguably have effected important qualifications and restraints on the nature , scope , and reach of the presidential communications privilege .

as established by those cases , and until reviewed by the supreme court , the following elements should be considered in determining when the privilege can be invoked properly: 1 .

the communication must be authored or "solicited and received" by a close white house adviser or the president .

the judicial test requires that an adviser be in "operational proximity" to the president .

this effectively means that the scope of the presidential communications privilege can extend only to the administrative boundaries of the executive office of the president and the white house .

it appears not to apply to communications or documents wholly produced within an executive department or agency .

2 .

the presidential communications privilege may be limited to communications relating to a "quintessential and non - delegable presidential power. .

espy and judicial watch involved the appointment and removal and the pardon powers , respectively .

other core , direct presidential decision - making powers include the commander - in - chief power , the sole authority to receive ambassadors and other public ministers , and the power to negotiate treaties .

however , neither case explicitly stated that the presidential communications privilege could only apply to communications and documents relating to "quintessential and non - delegable presidential power[s]. .

3 .

the presidential communications privilege remains a qualified privilege that may be overcome by a showing that the information sought "likely contains important evidence" and cannot be obtained from other sources .

the espy court found an adequate showing of need by the independent counsel that overcame the privilege .

in judicial watch , the court found the presidential communications privilege did not apply , and remanded to the district court to determine if the deliberative process privilege would apply to specific documents .

definitively applying the teachings of espy and judicial watch to current information access disputes between congress and the executive may be premature because these cases were decided in the context of judicial and foia requests for information from the executive branch .

in the congressional - executive conflict context , it is clear that the miers court unequivocally rejected the executive's claim of absolute witness immunity and adopted the committee's argument that the supreme court's ruling in nixon i allows only a qualified constitutional privilege that may be overcome by a proper showing of need .

furthermore , the court recognized that subsequent supreme court and appellate court rulings have reiterated the qualified nature of the privilege .

however , outside of the district court opinion in miers , there is no other post - watergate case law addressing executive privilege in the congressional - executive dispute context .

indeed , the espy court specifically noted that its narrow holding was limited to the confines of judicial requests for information: finally , we underscore our opinion should not be read as in any way affecting the scope of the privilege in the congressional - executive context , the arena where conflict over the privilege of confidentiality arises most frequently .

the president's ability to withhold information from congress implicates different constitutional considerations than the president's ability to withhold evidence in judicial proceedings .

our determination of how far down into the executive branch the presidential communications privilege goes is limited to the context before us , namely where information generated by close presidential advisers is sought for use in a judicial proceedings , and we take no position on how the institutional needs of congress and the president should be balanced .

in the continuing absence of a post - nixon supreme court decision there is continuing uncertainty as to how executive privilege claims should be analyzed when asserted in response to congressional requests for information .

while holder may ultimately address some lingering questions regarding the application of executive privilege in the congressional oversight context , the district court has yet to reach the merits of that claim .

the following is a brief summary of assertions of presidential claims of executive privilege from the kennedy administration through the obama administration .

1 .

kennedy president kennedy established the policy that he , and he alone , would invoke the privilege .

kennedy appears to have utilized the privilege twice with respect to information requests by congressional committees .

in 1962 , the president directed the secretary of defense not to supply the names of individuals who wrote or edited speeches in response to a request by a senate subcommittee investigating military cold war education and speech review policies .

the chairman of the subcommittee acquiesced to the assertion .

the president also directed his military adviser , general maxwell taylor , to refuse to testify before a congressional committee examining the bay of pigs affair .

see rozell , supra note 1 , at 40-41 .

2 .

johnson although he announced that he would follow the kennedy policy of personal assertion of executive privilege , president johnson did not follow the practice .

rozell , supra note 1 , at 41-42 , catalogues three instances in which executive officials refused to comply with congressional committee requests for information or testimony that involved presidential actions .

these executive officials did not claim that the president directed them to assert the privilege .

3 .

nixon president nixon asserted executive privilege six times .

he directed attorney general mitchell to withhold fbi reports from a congressional committee in 1970 .

in 1971 , at the president's direction , secretary of state rogers asserted privilege and withheld information from congress about military assistance programs .

a claim of privilege was asserted at the direction of the president to prevent a white house adviser from testifying on the international telephone and telegraph ( itt ) settlement during the senate judiciary committee's consideration of the richard kleindienst nomination for attorney general in 1972 .

finally , president nixon claimed executive privilege three times with respect to subpoenas for white house tapes relating to the watergate affair: one subpoena from the senate select committee ; one grand jury subpoena for the same tapes issued by special prosecutor archibald cox ; and one jury trial subpoena for 64 additional tapes issued by special prosecutor leon jaworski .

rozell , supra note 1 , at 57-62 .

4 .

ford and carter president ford directed secretary of state henry kissinger to withhold documents during a congressional committee investigation of state department recommendations to the national security council to conduct covert activities in 1975 .

president carter directed energy secretary charles duncan to claim executive privilege when a committee demanded documents relating to the development and implementation of a policy to impose a petroleum import fee .

rozell , supra note 1 , at 77-82 , 87-91 .

5 .

reagan president reagan directed the assertion of executive privilege before congressional committees three times: by secretary of the interior james watt with respect to an investigation of canadian oil leases ( 1981-82 ) ; by epa administrator anne gorsuch burford with respect to superfund enforcement practices ( 1982-83 ) ; and by justice william rehnquist during his nomination proceedings for chief justice with respect to memos he wrote when he was assistant attorney general for the doj office of legal counsel ( 1986 ) .

rozell , supra note 1 , at 98-105 .

6 .

bush , george h. w. president bush asserted privilege only once , in 1991 , when he ordered defense secretary dick cheney not to comply with a congressional subpoena for a document related to a subcommittee's investigation of cost overruns in , and cancellation of , a navy aircraft program .

rozell , supra note 1 , at 108-19 .

7 .

clinton president clinton apparently discontinued the policy of issuing written directives to subordinate officials to exercise executive privilege .

thus , in some instances , it is not completely clear when a subordinate's privilege claim was orally directed by the president , even if it was quickly withdrawn .

the following documented assertions may arguably be deemed formal invocations of the privilege .

four of these assertions occurred during grand jury proceedings .

a. kennedy notes ( 1995 ) ( executive privilege initially raised but never formally asserted ) ( senate whitewater investigation ) .

s.rept .

104-191 , 104 th cong. , 1 st sess .

 ( 1995 ) .

b .

white house counsel jack quinn / travelgate investigations ( 1996 ) ( house government reform ) .

h.rept .

104-598 , 104 th cong. , 2d sess .

 ( 1996 ) .

c. fbi - dea drug enforcement memo ( 1996 ) ( house judiciary ) .

d. haiti / political assassinations documents ( 1996 ) ( house international relations ) .

e. in re grand jury subpoena duces tecum , 112 f. 3d 910 ( 8 th cir .

1997 ) ( executive privilege claimed and then withdrawn in the district court .

appeals court rejected applicability of common interest doctrine to communications with white house counsel's office attorneys and private attorneys for the first lady ) .

f. in re sealed case ( espy ) , 121 f. 3d 729 ( d.c. cir .

1997 ) ( executive privilege asserted but held overcome with respect to documents revealing false statements ) .

g. in re grand jury proceedings , 5 f. supp .

2d 21 ( d.d.c .

1998 ) ( executive privilege claimed but held overcome because testimony of close advisers was relevant and necessary to grand jury investigation of lewinski matter and was unavailable elsewhere ) .

the september 9 , 1998 , referral to the house of representatives by independent counsel kenneth starr detailed the following previously undisclosed presidential claims of executive privilege ( viii - xiii ) before grand juries , which occurred during the independent counsel's investigations of the hubbell and lewinski matters: h. thomas "mack" mclarty ( 1997 ) ( claimed at direction of president during hubbell investigation , but withdrawn prior to filing of a motion to compel ) .

i. nancy hernreich ( claimed at direction of president , but withdrawn prior to march 20 , 1998 hearing to compel ) .

j. sidney blumenthal ( claim rejected by district court , in re grand jury proceedings , 5 f. supp .

2d 21 ( d.d.c .

1998 ) , and dropped on appeal ) .

k. cheryl mills ( claimed on august 11 , 1998 ) .

l. lanny breuer ( claimed on august 4 , 1998 and denied by judge johnson on august 11 ) .

in re grand jury proceeding .

unpublished order ( under seal ) ( august 11 , 1998 ) .

m. bruce lindsey ( claimed on august 28 , 1998 ) .

h.doc .

105-310 , 105 th cong , 2d sess .

206-09 ( 1998 ) .

n. faln clemency ( claimed at direction of president by deputy counsel to the president cheryl mills on september 16 , 1999 , in response to subpoenas by house committee on government reform ) .

8 .

bush , george w. president bush asserted executive privilege six times , using both written and oral directives to subordinate executive officials to claim the privilege .

1 .

on december 12 , 2001 , president bush ordered attorney general john ashcroft not to comply with a congressional subpoena for documents related to a house committee's investigation of corruption in the fbi's boston regional office .

the documents were ultimately released shortly after the committee held oversight hearings .

h.rept .

108-414 , 108 th cong. , 1 st sess .

 ( 2004 ) .

2 .

judicial watch inc. v. dep't of justice , 365 f.3d .

1108 ( d.c. cir .

2004 ) ( rejecting the claimed applicability of the presidential communications privilege to pardon documents sought under foia from doj's office of the pardon attorney ) .

3 .

removal and replacement of u.s .

attorneys ( 2007 ) .

at the direction of the president , on june 28 , 2007 , the white house counsel advised the house and senate judiciary committees that subpoenas issued to former white house counsel harriet miers and chief of staff joshua b. bolten for documents and testimony relating to the firing of u.s .

attorneys were subject to a claim of executive privilege .

additionally , these present and former white house officials were ordered not to comply with document demands or appear at a hearing .

the house passed contempt resolutions against miers and bolten on february 14 , 2008 .

on february 28 , the speaker transmitted the contempt citation to the u.s. attorney for the district of columbia for presentation to the grand jury .

the attorney general directed the u.s. attorney not to present the citation .

on march 10 , 2008 , the house judiciary committee initiated a civil suit seeking declaratory and injunctive relief to enforce the subpoenas .

see comm .

on the judiciary , u.s. house of representatives v. miers , 558 f. supp .

2d 53 ( d.d.c .

2008 ) .

on july 31 , 2008 , the district court ruled that "the executive's current claim of absolute immunity from compelled congressional process for senior precedential aides is without any support in the case law. .

id .

at 56 .

the court declared that ms. miers was legally required to testify after being issued a valid congressional subpoena and ordered ms. miers and mr. bolten to produce all subpoenaed nonprivileged documents .

additionally , while stopping short of ordering production of a full privilege log , the court did require the executive to provide more detailed descriptions of all documents withheld on the basis of executive privilege .

id .

at 107 .

the appeals court stayed the district court order pending appeal , but the appeals court never issued a ruling on the merits because an accommodation was reached before it could take up the case .

following the expiration of the 110 th congress and the arrival of a new administration , the parties reached an agreement in march 2009 .

the executive provided some of the requested documents to the committee and ms. miers was permitted to testify , under oath , in a closed , but transcribed , hearing .

4 .

on april 9 , and may 5 , 2008 , the house oversight and government reform committee issued three subpoenas total to the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the office of information and regulatory affairs of the office of management and budget ( oira ) .

the subpoenas sought documents related to epa's promulgation of regulations serving national ambient air quality standards for ozone on march 12 , 2008 .

another subpoena requested communications between the epa and oira concerning the agency's decision to deny a petition by california for a waiver from federal preemption to enable the state to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles .

on june 19 , 2008 , the attorney general advised the president that 25 of the documents covered by the subpoena would be properly covered by an assertion of executive privilege .

on june 20 , 2008 , the epa administrator advised the chairman of the committee that he had been directed by the president to assert executive privilege with respect to the withheld documents .

the committee did not pursue a contempt action .

5 .

removal and replacement of u.s .

attorneys ( 2008 ) .

on july 10 , 2008 , karl rove , a former white house deputy chief of staff , refused to comply with a subpoena requiring his appearance before the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on commercial and administrative law , claiming absolute immunity on the basis of white house and doj opinions and directions .

by a vote of 7-1 , the subcommittee rejected his claims of privilege .

on july 30 , 2008 , the full judiciary committee approved a report recommending that mr. rove be cited for contempt by the house .

the full house never voted on the contempt citation .

mr. rove was permitted to testify as part of the accommodation reached between the executive and the house at the conclusion of the miers / bolten dispute discussed above .

6 .

special counsel's investigation of revelations of cia agent's identity .

on july 16 , 2008 , the president directed the attorney general ( at the behest of the attorney general ) to assert executive privilege with respect to a house oversight and government reform committee subpoena to doj .

the subpoena concerned doj's investigation by a special counsel of the public revelation of valerie plame wilson's identity as an employee of the central intelligence agency .

the documents sought and withheld included fbi reports of the special counsel's interviews with the vice president and senior white house staff , handwritten notes taken by the deputy national security advisor during conversations with the vice president and senior white house officials , and other documents provided by the white house during the course of the investigation .

the attorney general requested that the president formally assert the privilege after the committee scheduled a meeting to consider a resolution citing him for contempt of congress .

the chairman of the oversight committee delayed a scheduled committee vote on contempt to allow members to assess the executive privilege assertion .

the committee later requested a privilege log but neither doj nor the white house responded to that request .

9 .

obama president obama has only formally invoked executive privilege once , in relation to a congressional investigation of operation fast and furious .

at the direction of the president , on june 20 , 2012 , deputy attorney general james cole informed the house committee on oversight and government reform that the president was formally asserting executive privilege over documents requested pursuant to a subpoena issued as part of the committee's investigation of operation fast and furious .

a letter from the attorney general to the president , dated june 19 , 2012 , laid out the executive's legal argument for asserting the privilege .

the attorney general argued that the documents withheld included internal executive branch communications generated in the course of deliberative process concerning responses to congressional oversight .

furthermore , he stated that executive privilege encompasses executive branch deliberative communications and that disclosing such documents would "inhibit the candor of such executive branch deliberations. .

letter to the president from attorney general eric holder , june 19 , 2012 .

on june 20 , 2012 , the committee voted to hold attorney general eric holder , the subject of the subpoena as custodian of doj documents , in contempt of congress .

the full house voted in favor of a criminal contempt citation on june 28 , 2012 .

the house committee on oversight and government reform filed a civil lawsuit in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia on august 13 , 2012 , seeking to enforce the subpoena and compel disclosure of the documents being withheld due to the assertion of executive privilege .

the suit withstood a motion to dismiss on the basis of jurisdiction and justiciability , and is currently pending before the district court .

