the department of health and human services ( hhs ) announced a new initiative in july 2012 , under which it would be willing to waive certain federal work participation standards under the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant to permit states to experiment with "alternative and innovative strategies , policies , and procedures that are designed to improve employment outcomes for needy families. .

hhs announced this policy through the release of an information memorandum on july 12 , 2012 .

the work participation standards are numerical performance standards that each state must meet or risk being penalized through a reduction in its block grant .

these are standards that apply to the states , not directly to individuals , though they influence how states design their welfare - to - work programs and apply requirements to individual recipients .

such waivers will be the first "new" waivers to test welfare - to - work strategies in more than 15 years , since the enactment of the 1996 welfare reform law that created tanf .

some in congress have opposed the administration's waiver initiative .

the house has twice ( once in the 113 th congress ; once in the 112 th congress ) passed measures to bar hhs from moving forward with granting waivers of the tanf work participation standards .

in the 113 th congress , the house passed h.r .

890 on march 13 , 2013 .

the bill would prevent the administration's waiver initiative from being implemented , while also barring any future waivers of the tanf work participation standards .

thus , tanf work standards could only be changed by congress .

senator hatch ( the ranking republican member of the committee on finance ) has also introduced measures in both the 113 th ( s.j.res .

9 ) and 112 th congress ( s.j.res .

50 ) to block the waiver initiative .

opponents of the waiver initiative question both its legality and the process used in forwarding the initiative , and claim that granting waivers of the participation standards would weaken the work requirements .

in some respects , the discussion about "waivers" is a continuation of a decades - old controversy about whether welfare - to - work efforts should emphasize quick attachment to work and working off welfare grants or whether they should focus on education and training .

this report is not a legal analysis of the secretary's authority to waive tanf work participation standards .

rather , it describes and provides context for this hhs initiative through discussing the current tanf work participation standards ; the hhs initiative to waive tanf work participation standards ; the history of welfare waivers ; and factors that might be considered in assessing the initiative to waive the tanf work participation standards .

this is not a comprehensive review of tanf or even welfare - to - work issues .

for an overview of tanf , see crs report r40946 , the temporary assistance for needy families block grant: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

for a more comprehensive discussion of welfare - to - work issues , see crs report r42767 , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) : welfare - to - work revisited , by shannon bopp and [author name scrubbed] .

tanf is a broad - based block grant that provides funds to states , the territories , and indian tribes to help them finance cash welfare programs for needy families with children as well as provide a wide range of other benefits and services to either ameliorate the effects of , or address the root causes of , child poverty .

the basic federal block grant for the 50 states and the district of columbia is funded at a total of $16.5 billion per year .

states are required , under a provision known as the maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement , to expend from their own funds a minimum total of $10.4 billion per year in addition to federal funds on tanf or tanf - related programs .

the statutory purpose of tanf is increasing state flexibility to achieve goals to 1. provide assistance to needy families so that children may be cared for in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; 2. end the dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting job preparation , work , and marriage ; 3. prevent and reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies and establish annual numerical goals for preventing and reducing the incidence of these pregnancies ; and 4. encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

states may use tanf funds to finance any activity "reasonably calculated" to achieve these four tanf goals .

this gives states broad leeway in spending tanf funds .

in general , state moe funds can be used for these same activities ( there are some technical differences in the use of federal and state funds ) .

cash welfare accounted for less than 30% of all tanf and moe funds in fy2011 .

tanf provides states with a great deal of flexibility in designing their cash assistance programs .

however , there are federal standards and requirements that apply to states with respect to providing cash assistance , including time limits and work participation standards .

the obama administration announced an initiative on july 12 , 2012 , under which it would be willing to grant certain waivers of the federal tanf work participation standards .

it says these waivers would be granted under section 1115 of the social security act .

hhs said in its announcement that this initiative is a response to president obama's february 28 , 2011 , presidential memorandum that asked agencies to work with state , local , and tribal grantees of federal funds to identify barriers "that currently prevent states , localities , and tribes from efficiently using tax dollars to achieve the best results for their constituents. .

the waiver programs would allow states that undertake alternative welfare - to - work strategies to substitute other performance measures ( eg , outcome measures ) for the tanf statutory work participation standards .

waiver programs would also have to be formally evaluated .

waivers could be granted for state - wide initiatives , or demonstrations and pilots conducted in a portion of the state .

these initiatives could also be either for a state's entire caseload , or a specific population within its caseload ( eg , individuals with disabilities ) .

hhs envisions the typical waiver as having a five - year duration .

the hhs announcement also says states may receive waivers of the existing procedures to verify participation put into place through the deficit reduction act of 2005 .

the legal authority to waive requirements in public assistance programs dates back to 1962 , and the public welfare amendments of 1962 ( p.l .

87-543 ) .

that law established section 1115 of the social security act , and allowed the waiver of the requirements of federal - state public assistance programs , including the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) program that preceded tanf in helping fund cash assistance for needy families with children .

in establishing waiver authority for public assistance programs , the house ways and means committee report said: the public assistance titles of the social security act contain a number of requirements on states for approval of a state plan .

these are necessary and desirable in the administration of a broad program to reach the numbers of people such programs must serve .

these plan requirements , however , often stand in the way of experimental projects designed to test new ideas and ways of dealing with the problems of public assistance recipients .

though waivers under section 1115 were allowed as early as 1962 , they were not sought with much frequency until the late 1980s .

until that point , waivers were primarily related to program administration and service delivery .

however , the late 1980s and the early 1990s were a period of large - scale experimentation in welfare - to - work strategies — much of which occurred at state initiative under "waivers" of pre - 1996 federal requirements .

the obama administration's initiative to allow waivers of the tanf work participation standards raises a number of legal , procedural , and substantive issues .

the legal and procedural issues will not be discussed in this report .

in terms of substantive issues , questions can be raised about the likelihood of the waiver initiative in achieving its goals , what other policy goals might be compromised in pursuing the initiative , and whether there are alternatives to achieve similar goals .

this section addresses these questions .

first , it discusses some of the goals set forth by the administration in its announcement of the waiver initiative , focusing on three goals: testing alternative strategies , measuring employment outcomes , and program integration .

it then discusses what goals others ( states , policymakers ) might also wish to achieve in altering tanf's welfare - to - work rules .

the tanf work participation standards are one of the central features of the welfare reforms that culminated in the mid - 1990s .

since the 1996 law , states have historically sought additional flexibility in terms of the activities that count toward the standards .

some in congress have seen proposals to grant that flexibility as weakening the work requirements that result from the standards , or at least weakening the tie to work activities as opposed to educational activities .

in that regard , the current debate over the obama administration's waiver initiative can be seen as a continuation of a long - running debate on the degree that participation standards should emphasize work as compared with education and training .

the waiver initiative's emphasis on measuring outcomes raises both philosophical and technical questions .

the emphasis on work in welfare programs grew in part out of an argument that if society had an obligation to help low - income persons , recipients also had obligations and a basic societal obligation to work or to prepare for work .

a focus that is solely on outcomes — whether a welfare - to - work strategy succeeds in moving families off the rolls and into jobs — removes some of the focus on engaging recipients in activities to meet their obligations .

however , the performance of tanf work programs has also been criticized on other grounds .

the official tanf work participation rate has hovered around 30% — well below the statutory target of 50% , as "credits" have permitted states to meet the standards with lower levels of engagement .

participation in activities that represent supported work — subsidized employment and on - the - job training — has been relatively low for those on the assistance rolls .

participation in activities that closely resemble work – work experience and community service — has likewise been relatively low .

despite the fact that states can count vocational educational training for only one year in a lifetime of a recipient , it is the third most common activity behind working in a regular unsubsidized job while on the rolls and job search and readiness .

it could be argued that the old dichotomy between "work - first" and education - focused strategies is outdated , given new types of programs such as career pathways that combine work - focused education and training with work .

these programs are available to low - income persons generally , but have yet to be tested and evaluated in a welfare - to - work setting .

the waiver initiative presents an opportunity to re - examine welfare - to - work .

congress has a number of options .

it can choose not to act , allowing the waiver initiative to move forward .

it can bar the waiver initiative and retain the current rules .

it can re - open the debates over welfare - to - work and craft new tanf work performance standards .

congress can also craft its own program of welfare - to - work experimentation .

that is , it can address any legal , procedural , and substantive objections to the obama administration's waiver initiative through legislation that would allow for new welfare - to - work experiments with congressionally prescribed goals and within congressionally prescribed boundaries .

