the issue of religious discrimination in public schools has been a subject of congressional attention in a variety of contexts over the past several years .

in 2010 , legislation was introduced in both the house of representatives and senate addressing religious discrimination in schools in response to a number of incidents targeting students of certain faiths , particularly jewish , muslim , and sikh communities .

that legislation would have amended title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 ( cra ) to prohibit discrimination based on religion in programs receiving federal funds , in addition to the other classes already protected under the cra .

in 2011 , the u.s. commission on civil rights submitted a report to congress addressing discrimination against students on various bases , including religion , noting that bullying constituted a significant problem in schools , including bullying based on students' religion .

most recently , in the 112 th congress , both the house and senate have pending legislation to prohibit discrimination , including harassment and bullying , against students based on the individual's sexual orientation or gender identity: the proposed student non - discrimination act ( snda ) .

snda explicitly preserves "the legal standards and rights available to religious and other student groups under the first amendment and the equal access act. .

because some individuals' religious beliefs disapprove of certain sexual orientations and gender identities , concerns arise regarding whether snda would compromise the ability of individuals with such beliefs to freely exercise their religion .

additionally , because of recent judicial decisions , student religious groups may be concerned about their rights to access school resources if they do not comply with policies requiring acceptance of all individuals , without regard to religious objections .

as congress continues to consider potential reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , issues related to religious discrimination in schools are particularly relevant .

this report analyzes the constitutional and statutory protections that may prevent religious discrimination against students .

it examines the current interpretations of the establishment and free exercise clauses of the first amendment , as well as the protections available to religious student groups under the equal access act and the free speech clause of the first amendment .

the report also discusses the effect of titles iv and vi of the cra , which prohibit discrimination in education and federally funded programs , respectively .

it addresses the supreme court's rulings on student religious groups in the context of access to school facilities and funds .

finally , the report analyzes the extent to which religious student groups may be selective in their membership requirements without violating nondiscrimination requirements .

the u.s. supreme court has considered challenges to school policies regulating the use of schools and school resources under a combination of constitutional and statutory rules discussed above .

under the court's jurisprudence , public schools generally cannot deny religious groups access to the schools or the schools' resources if the same facilities or resources are made available to nonreligious groups .

in addition to protecting individuals' religious exercise and speech rights , the first amendment also protects the ability to associate with others who share similar beliefs .

however , at times , public policy goals may present potential conflicts in the freedom of association , for example , nondiscrimination laws .

some schools have implemented so - called "all - comers policies" to promote inclusion of any interested student in officially affiliated student groups .

these policies are driven by principles of nondiscrimination , but some groups have argued that they cause a different form of discrimination .

that is , while the policies ensure that individual students are not discriminated against , their application arguably effects discrimination against student groups that seek to exercise their right for selectivity in membership .

intended to ensure that students are free from discriminatory conduct such as harassment , bullying , intimidation , and violence , the proposed student non - discrimination act ( snda ) would prohibit discrimination on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation in public elementary and secondary schools .

however , the tenets of some religions disapprove of certain sexual orientations or gender identities , and some religious groups may seek legal protections to ensure that their ability to exercise those religious beliefs would not be infringed if snda were enacted .

to ensure the continued protection of these groups' existing rights , section 9 ( b ) of snda states: "nothing in this act shall be construed to alter legal standards regarding , or affect the rights available to individuals or groups under , other federal laws that establish protections for freedom of speech and expression , such as legal standards and rights available to religious and other student groups under the first amendment and the equal access act. .

therefore , under snda , protections afforded by the first amendment and the equal access act discussed in this report would apply without change .

to the extent that snda implied a restriction on those protections , section 9 ( b ) would instruct courts that the legal rules under the first amendment and equal access act should prevail .

snda would not restrict access to school facilities to student groups , and therefore would not appear to implicate the protections provided by the court's decisions on access to school facilities and resources or the protections available under the equal access act .

other questions arising from snda include whether religious groups would be able to claim exemption from snda .

one of the concerns raised by snda is how the legislation would be applied to religious groups that may disapprove of certain sexual orientations or gender identities .

the free exercise clause prohibits the government from burdening the exercise of religious beliefs , but it never "relieve[s] an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability. .

under this interpretation , religious groups are less likely to successfully claim constitutional exemption from laws of general applicability that incidentally burden their religious exercise .

historically , the court has indicated that religious groups are not guaranteed to avoid burdens on their religious exercise when a law serves a valid and important public purpose .

since 1879 , the court has drawn an important distinction in free exercise cases — that religious exercise includes both beliefs and actions , stating that "laws are made for the government of actions , and while they cannot interfere with mere religious belief and opinions , they may with practices. .

the court's decisions permit the government to regulate individuals' actions stemming from a religious belief , but not the religious belief itself .

according to the court , "the first amendment embraces two concepts , — freedom to believe and freedom to act .

the first is absolute but … the second cannot be .

conduct remains subject to regulation for the protection of society. .

the history of the court's free exercise jurisprudence indicates that religious beliefs cannot excuse "compliance with an otherwise valid law prohibiting conduct that the state is free to regulate. .

the court has upheld laws proscribing behavior that may be compelled by some religious beliefs , including polygamy laws , child labor laws , sunday - closing laws , conscription laws , and tax laws , as well as controlled substances laws .

snda's prohibition against discrimination would be a law of general applicability .

it would apply broadly to regulate the behavior of all students , regardless of their religious affiliation .

it would not impact only a particular religious group , nor would it restrict actions taken only because of religious belief .

for example , a student with no religious affiliation who opposes homosexuality would be equally affected by the enactment of snda as would a student whose opposition of homosexuality stemmed from his or her religious beliefs .

regardless of the source of animus toward a particular sexual orientation or gender identity , discrimination resulting from that animus would be prohibited .

furthermore , snda would not require acceptance of all sexual orientations or gender identities .

it only would require that individuals refrain from discriminating against students based on sexual orientation or gender identity .

in other words , snda would regulate behaviors , not beliefs , consistent with first amendment requirements .

