every four years , on january 20 at noon , the president - elect is sworn in as president of the united states .

pursuant to the constitution , the next presidential inauguration is set for friday , january 20 , 2017 .

each year prior to an inauguration , congres s authorizes the creation of the joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies ( joint inaugural committee ) .

the joint inaugural committee is responsible for the planning and execution of the swearing - in ceremony and for hosting an inaugural luncheon for the president and vice president at the u.s. capitol .

the 2017 joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies was authorized by the 114 th congress ( 2015-2017 ) when s.con.res .

28 was agreed to on february 3 , 2016 .

pursuant to the concurrent resolution , the joint inaugural committee consists of three senators , appointed by the president of the senate , and three representatives , appointed by the speaker of the house .

the resolution further authorizes the committee "to make the necessary arrangements for the inauguration of the president - elect and the vice president - elect of the united states. .

this report provides a history of the joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies , including committee membership , staffing , and inaugural activities .

in 1901 , congress established the first joint inaugural committee for the inauguration of president william mckinley .

supervision of inaugural ceremonies prior to 1901 was conducted by the senate .

sole responsibility for inaugural preparation and supervision had been a senate function because of its standing as a continuing legislative body , while the house must organize anew at the beginning of each congress .

the relevance of this consideration was particularly evident during the times when the president was inaugurated on march 4 , the same day a new congress convened .

there is no evidence indicating that the house seriously challenged this reasoning until 1901 .

since 1901 , when the first joint inaugural committee was authorized , membership on the committee has consisted of three senators and three members of the house of representatives .

currently , appointments to the committee are made by the president of the senate and the speaker of the house respectively .

appointments are generally for the length of committee activities .

for house committee members , however , reappointment is necessary because an intervening election occurs between initial appointment and the inaugural ceremony .

the need to reappoint committee members does not generally apply to the senate , unless a senate committee member leaves the chamber in the intervening election .

although the senate and house have had equal membership on the joint inaugural committee for more than a century , the committee has always been chaired by a senator .

additionally , the panel has always included at least one member of senate committee on rules ( 1901-1945 ) , or the senate committee on rules and administration ( 1949-2009 ) .

the repeated involvement of members of the senate rules committee or the committee on rules and administration in the work of the joint inaugural committee reflects some of the key responsibilities assigned to the committee .

since 1947 , pursuant to the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , the rules and administration committee — under senate rule xxv — has had jurisdiction over "[f]ederal elections generally , including the election of the president , vice president , and members of the congress. .

rule xxv further gives the committee authority over matters relating to the "payment of money out of the contingent fund of the senate or creating a charge upon the same," thereby granting the panel authority over the miscellaneous costs ( eg , capitol police security costs ) associated with the inauguration .

prior to 1947 , the precise legislative responsibilities of committees were not enumerated in senate rules .

committee jurisdictions were determined by committee name and by precedent .

measures establishing the joint inaugural committee have never authorized the employment of specialized staff .

between 1901 and 1992 , congress approved two quadrennial funding resolutions for the inauguration — one covering the expenses associated with the inaugural ceremonies , which stipulated the amount of funds being appropriated for the joint inaugural committee to make arrangements for the official ceremony on capitol hill ; and the other providing funds for the district of columbia to maintain public order and provide fire protection .

the funds appropriated for the joint inaugural committee were used to construct the inaugural platform , to prepare seating for those attending the swearing - in of the president and vice president , and to reimburse other entities for salaries and expenses incurred in arranging the inaugural ceremonies .

only since 1996 have the funds appropriated for the joint inaugural committee included specific language authorizing the committee to reimburse the senate committee on rules and administration for staff detailed to assist in the inaugural preparations .

for the 2009 inauguration the resolution provided the following: that the compensation of any employee of the committee on rules and administration of the senate who has been designated to perform service with respect to the inaugural ceremonies of 2009 shall continue to be paid by the committee on rules and administration , but the account from which such staff member is paid may be reimbursed for the services of the staff member ( including agency contributions when appropriate ) out of funds made available under this heading .

while the appropriations language prior to 1996 did not specify the use of rules and administration staff , william cochrane , the staff director of the senate rules and administration committee for many years , is known to have served also as executive director of the joint inaugural committee , or consultant to it , for the inaugurations from 1973 through 1985 .

the joint inaugural committee has traditionally been responsible for two major inaugural activities: arranging the swearing - in ceremony and hosting an inaugural luncheon .

these two functions are coordinated with the president - elect's inaugural committee , and both occur at the u.s. capitol .

since 1901 , when the first joint congressional committee on inaugural ceremonies was authorized , both the house and senate have played a prominent role in the organization and execution of the inaugural ceremony .

while prior to 1901 , the senate organized the inauguration and invited members of the house to participate , today the house and senate both have a formal role in celebrating the transition of power from one president to the next .

the house and senate , through the joint inaugural committee , organize and implement the arrangements for the 2017 presidential and vice presidential inauguration .

pursuant to s.con.res .

28 and s.con.res .

29 in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) , the 2017 inaugural ceremony will be held at the u.s. capitol , with the swearing - in ceremony on the west front steps and special events held in the rotunda and emancipation hall of the capitol visitor center .

