at the obama administration's request , in december 2011 congress enacted into law a new , joint state department and department of defense ( dod ) global security contingency fund ( gscf ) to assist countries with urgent security and stabilization needs .

the administration proposed the gscf with its fy2012 budget submission as a "pilot project" for state and the dod to jointly fund and plan security - related assistance .

its stated purpose was to enable the united states to better "address rapidly changing , transnational , asymmetric threats , and emergent opportunities. .

"pooled" dod and state department funds would be used to develop interagency responses to build the security capacity of foreign states , to prevent conflict , and to stabilize countries in conflict or emerging from conflict .

congress , demonstrating its interest in the experiment , provided gscf authority as section 1207 of the fy2012 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

112-81 ) for four fiscal years rather than the three years requested .

as enacted , section 1207 also contains two transitional authorities for counterterrorism operations in africa and one for yemen , all expiring at the end of fy2012 .

many see the gscf as an innovative first step in addressing problems inherent in the current agency - based budgeting and program development systems .

although some view the gscf primarily as a means to transfer funds from dod to the state department , with its relatively smaller budget , others look to it as a possible means to foster more timely , coherent , and effective u.s. government responses to emerging threats and opportunities and to provide an impetus for improving interagency coordination in security and stabilization missions .

this report provides basic information on the gscf legislation .

it starts with a brief discussion of the conceptual origins of the legislation and then summarizes the legislation's provisions .

it concludes with a short analysis of salient issues .

although the gscf was proposed as a means to secure flexible funding for emerging needs , the gscf concept has its origins in long - standing perceptions that multiple deficiencies in current national security structures and practices have undermined u.s. efforts abroad .

a core problem is the u.s. government's current agency - centric national security system that inhibits rational budgeting and planning for national security efforts that require contributions from multiple agencies .

analysts have long proposed changes to address deficiencies along the following lines: provide the state department with a flexible funding account to respond to emerging needs and crises situations .

for many years , the george w. bush administration repeatedly sought a state department emergency response fund that would facilitate immediate responses to crises and emerging threats .

congress denied such requests several times , but in 2005 it authorized dod to transfer up to $100 million of its own funds to the state department for such purposes .

 ( section 1207 of the fy2006 ndaa , p.l .

109-163 , as amended. ) .

this "section 1207" authority expired at the end of fy2010 .

congress established a u.s. agency for international development account , the complex crises fund in fy2011 for similar purposes , with a $50 million appropriation in fy2011 and $40 million in fy2012 , but has not made a similar account available to the state department .

develop mechanisms to promote greater interagency cooperation in planning security and stabilization programs .

analysts point to many problems inherent in programming by individual agencies .

because agencies usually do not consult or coordinate with others when planning programs , there is unnecessary duplication and overlap .

and because agencies conduct programs targeted at the issues that fall under their purview , there are often serious gaps .

of particular concern are the "governance gaps," i.e. , the formulation of security assistance programs to train and equip military forces without components to improve the ability of government institutions to manage those forces .

the goal of greater interagency cooperation is to develop coherent security and stabilization programs that address all elements of a problem .

clarif y and rationaliz e security roles and missions .

the appropriate division of labor between the state department and dod , especially for security assistance , is a matter of debate .

since military assistance first became a significant component of u.s. foreign policy after world war ii , oversight of those programs has always been vested in a civilian , usually the secretary of state .

in 1961 , congress made the secretary of state responsible , by law , for "the continuous supervision and general direction" of that assistance .

beginning in the 1980s , however , congress has called on dod to contribute its manpower and funding to an increasingly broad range of national security efforts under new dod authorities .

after the terrorist attacks on the united states of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , dod requested and congress approved multiple new dod authorities .

some fill gaps when civilian funding and personnel are not available .

others , dod argues , provide a means to address critical needs in an effort to protect u.s. troops and minimize u.s. military operations .

the goal is to reach agreement on an appropriate model for post - 9 / 11 civil - military activities and missions , either by strengthening the state department's ability to lead , by creating a new system of shared responsibility , or by strengthening the state department's lead while also encouraging greater sharing of responsibility in order to enhance collaboration among all agencies involved in security sector assistance .

creat e a "unified" budget system for national security missions along functional rather than agency lines .

for over a decade , analysts have urged the u.s. government to consolidate budgets for national security activities .

in particular , they have recommended that the white house present congress annually with either a unified national security budget or a series of unified budgets for a specific multi - agency national security activity , such as counterterrorism or security assistance .

the goal is to rationalize government - wide resource allocation and promote due consideration of the tradeoffs involved in allocating those resources .

unified budgets are also recommended as a means to provide greater transparency and accountability in u.s. government spending , and facilitate congressional oversight of national security programs .

the obama administration presented the gscf as a means to identify potential difficulties when combining state department and dod funds and to test the possibilities for combining agency expertise and efforts to conduct security activities .

if successful , the gscf is seen as a possible precedent for a broader interagency funding and efforts .

the fy2012 ndaa established a gscf account "on the books of the treasury of the united states. .

as amended by the fy2014 ndaa , there is no overall spending limitation .

there is a limit of $200 million on transfers from dod to the gscf , but no limit is set on state department funding .

 ( however , the appropriations legislation sets a limit on state department transfers ; see below. ) .

a proportional limitation provides that the dod contribution for any activity shall be no more than 80% of the cost of that activity , and the state department contribution shall be not less than 20% .

despite the state department's request for a $50 million appropriation , the fy2012 appropriations act provided no new money for the fund , but permitted dod and the state department to transfer up to the $250 million from other accounts , with a limit of $200 from dod and $50 million from state .

under the fy2012 ndaa , monies may be transferred from the gscf to the "agency or account determined to be the most appropriate to facilitate" assistance .

 ( no official was specified as responsible for the determination. ) .

gscf authority expires on september 30 , 2015 , but amounts appropriated or transferred before that date for programs already in progress would remain available until the programs are completed .

congress provided gscf authority notwithstanding any other provision of law , with two exceptions .

these are the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa ) ( p.l .

85-195 ) section 620a prohibition on assistance to governments supporting international terrorism and the faa section 620j prohibition on assistance to foreign security forces for which the secretary of state has determined there is credible evidence of gross violations of human rights ( the "leahy amendment. .

the legislation makes clear that the three - year gscf authorization is not intended to replace other legislation .

gscf programs are required to include elements to promote the observance of and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , as well as respect for legitimate civilian authority .

reporting requirements are extensive and detailed .

there are five separate reporting requirements , one in the appropriations legislation ( a notification before funds are transferred ) and four in the authorization legislation ( one a notification before programs are initiated , one when guidance is issued , one when guidance and processes are fully operational , and one an annual report ) .

section 8003 ( d ) of the fy2014 omnibus appropriations legislation ( p.l .

113-76 ) requires the state department to notify the appropriations committees 15 days prior to making any transfers from the incle , fmf , and pko accounts to the gscf in accordance with regular notification procedures , including a detailed justification , implementation plan , and timeline for each proposed project , but is not subject to prior consultation with the appropriations committees .

section 8068 requires dod to notify the congressional defense committees in writing 30 days prior to making transfers from the operations and maintenance , defense - wide account to the gscf with the source of funds and a detailed justification , execution plan , and timeline for each proposed project .

the fy2014 ndaa amended ndaa reporting requirements slightly .

the authorizing legislation requires the secretaries of state and defense to notify specified congressional committees at four points .

specified committees are the house and senate appropriations committees and armed services committees , the house committee on foreign affairs , and the senate committee on foreign relations .

the secretary of state and the secretary of defense must notify the specified committees not less than 30 days before initiating an activity .

no funds may be transferred into the fund until 15 days after congress is notified .

the notification regarding the initiation of program activities is to include a detailed justification for the program , its budget , execution , plan and timeline , a list of other security - related assistance or justice sector and stabilization assistance being provided to that country that is related to or supported by that activity , and any other appropriate information .

the secretaries of state and defense shall jointly submit a report to the specified committees no later than 15 days after the date on which guidance and processes for implementation of programs have been issued , and shall jointly submit additional reports not later than 15 days after future changes to guidance and processes .

a related notification requirement mandates that the secretary of state , with the concurrence of the secretary of defense shall jointly notify congress 15 days after the date on which all necessary guidance has been issued and the processes for implementing programs "are established and fully operational. .

the secretaries of state and defense must jointly submit an annual report on programs , activities , and funding no later than october 30 of each year .

for programs to be conducted under fy2012 funding , the secretary of state designated seven countries as recipients of gscf assistance: nigeria , philippines , bangladesh , and libya , as well as three central european countries , hungary , romania , and slovakia .

in august and september , 2012 , the state department and dod submitted requests to the appropriations committees to transfer $44.8 million from designated funds to the gscf .

these funds were transferred before the end of fy2012 , according to the state department .

as of the date of this report , detailed programs are still being developed .

 ( see table a - 1 in the appendix for summaries of the programs and funding transferred. ) .

no further information on the progress of the fy2012 programs or on plans for potential fy2014 programs has been made available to crs .

for some policy makers and analysts , the gscf proposal is a positive , long - awaited first step toward the development of integrated , interagency funding streams for agencies that carry out related programs .

for others , the gscf proposal and specific provisions of the bill raise a number of issues , some of which are summarized below .

even though the gscf has been authorized for four years , through fy2015 , congress may monitor its use closely and consider in - course changes .

congressional expressions of concern about the administration's slow progress in implementing fy2012 programs point to cumbersome bureaucratic processes as a source of the problem .

gscf officers have attributed difficulties to the melding of state and dod procedures and the extensive intra - agency coordination required in the state department .

coordination problems may be exacerbated by reliance on transfers from multiple state department accounts , rather than on appropriations , may be another source of the problem .

if the administration cannot plan and implement fy2014-funded programs more expeditiously than the fy2012 programs , congress may wish to study , perhaps through a government accountability office ( gao ) or other program evaluation , whether and how planning and implementation impediments can be overcome .

