the question of whether a political advertisement is issue advocacy ( including lobbying ) or campaign activity is an important one under the tax laws , particularly for tax - exempt 501 ( c ) organizations .

this is because the internal revenue code ( irc ) imposes limitations on the ability of 501 ( c ) groups to engage in campaign activity .

any activity that is truly issue advocacy would not be subject to these limitations .

some 501 ( c ) groups — primarily 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charitable organizations , including houses of worship , charities , and educational institutions — are prohibited under the irc from engaging in any campaign intervention .

they are , however , allowed to take positions on policy issues and conduct an insubstantial amount of lobbying .

others types of 501 ( c ) s — primarily 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organizations , 501 ( c ) ( 5 ) labor unions , and 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) trade associations — may engage in campaign intervention .

however , because these groups' primary purpose must be their tax - exempt purpose ( eg , promoting social welfare ) , campaign activity , along with any other non - exempt purpose activity , cannot be their primary activity .

recently , this standard has received significant attention because 501 ( c ) organizations have reportedly spent millions of dollars on campaign activity and allegations have been made that some should have their tax - exempt status revoked .

any activity that is truly issue advocacy would not be counted as campaign intervention when determining whether a group has violated the primary purpose test .

relatedly , even though some types of 501 ( c ) organizations may engage in campaign activity under the irc , they are subject to tax if they make an expenditure for "influencing or attempting to influence the selection , nomination , election , or appointment of any individual to any federal , state , or local public office or office in a political organization , or the election of presidential or vice - presidential electors. .

the tax is imposed at the highest corporate rate on the lesser of the organization's net investment income or the total amount of these expenditures .

true issue advocacy would fall outside the reach of the tax .

in order to understand what issue advocacy is under the tax code , it is helpful to begin by looking at its opposite — campaign intervention .

the irc and regulations offer little insight into what constitutes campaign intervention .

the irc does not define the term other than to say it "includ[es] the publishing or distributing of statements" on behalf of or in opposition to a candidate .

a treasury regulation defines candidate as "an individual who offers himself , or is proposed by others , as a contestant for an elective public office , whether such office be national , state , or local. .

as to what types of activities are campaign intervention , the regulation adds little besides specifying they include "the publication or distribution of written or printed statements or the making of oral statements on behalf of or in opposition to such a candidate. .

clearly , any advertisement that expressly endorses or opposes a candidate is campaign activity .

it is also clear that there is no rule that campaign intervention occurs only when an organization expressly advocates for or against a candidate .

what is less clear is what happens when an ad merely refers to a candidate .

guidance released by the irs shows that in any situation that falls short of express advocacy , this issue does not lend itself to bright - line rules .

the focus is essentially on whether the activity exhibits a preference for or against a candidate .

preference can be subtle , and the irs takes the position that it is not necessary for the organization to expressly mention a candidate by name — rather , referring to party affiliation or "distinctive features of a candidate's platform or biography" may be sufficient to identify a candidate .

as a result , the line between issue advocacy and campaign activity can be difficult to discern .

when it comes to regulating the political activities of tax - exempt organizations , both the irc and the federal election campaign act ( feca ) have a role to play .

one recurring issue is that similar or identical terms in tax and campaign finance law and policy do not always have the same meanings .

thus , it should not be assumed that the characterization or treatment of an activity for campaign finance purposes necessarily results in the same characterization or treatment for tax purposes , and vice versa .

when thinking about activities that the tax world might consider to be "issue advocacy" or "campaign intervention," the campaign finance world might be concerned about whether the relevant activities are "independent expenditures" or "electioneering communications. .

it seems clear that any "independent expenditure," which by definition involves expressly advocating for or against a candidate , is per se campaign intervention for purposes of the irc .

"electioneering communications" present a trickier situation .

feca defines them as broadcast , cable , or satellite communications that refer to a federal candidate and are made within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

as discussed above , there is no analogous bright - line standard in the irc for determining whether communications that merely refer to a candidate are campaign intervention .

rather , making this type of determination for tax law purposes requires looking at the facts and circumstances of each case to assess whether the communication indicates a preference for or against the candidate .

the communication's timing is only one factor to consider .

because of this mismatched intersection between tax and campaign finance law , it is possible that an issue advocacy communication might , depending on its timing and content , be an electioneering communication under feca , but not be treated as campaign intervention under the irc .

thus , it appears that just because a group reports an ad as an electioneering communication to the federal election commission ( fec ) , this does not necessarily mean the ad would be treated as campaign intervention for purposes of the irc .

the opposite is true as well — not all campaign activity under the irc will necessarily be reported to the fec .

what this means in practice is that , for example , when trying to figure out whether a 501 ( c ) group has violated the primary purpose test by engaging in "too much" campaign activity , the amount reported to the fec might not accurately reflect the amount of campaign activity actually engaged in for tax purposes .

