over 500,000 miles of high - volume pipeline gather and transport natural gas , oil , and other hazardous liquids across the united states .

in addition , nearly 900,000 miles of smaller distribution pipeline deliver natural gas to businesses and homes .

this vast pipeline network is integral to u.s. energy supply and has links to power plants , refineries , airports , and other critical infrastructure .

while pipelines are an efficient and fundamentally safe means of transport , many carry volatile , flammable , or toxic materials with the potential to cause public injury and environmental damage .

consequently , pipeline systems have drawn attention as possible targets for terrorism or other malicious activity .

although physical attacks on pipelines have been a focus in north america and elsewhere , the sophisticated computer systems used to operate pipeline systems are also vulnerable to cyber attacks .

in particular , cyber infiltration of supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) systems could allow "hackers" to disrupt pipeline service and cause spills , explosions , or fires — all from remote locations via the internet or other communication pathways .

in march 2012 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) reported ongoing cyber intrusions among u.s. natural gas pipeline operators .

the incidents drew new attention to an al qaeda video obtained in 2011 by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) reportedly calling for "electronic jihad" against u.s. critical infrastructure .

these cybersecurity events coupled with serious consequences from recent pipeline accidents have heightened congressional concern about cybersecurity measures in the u.s. pipelines sector .

the transportation security administration ( tsa ) is authorized by federal statute to promulgate pipeline physical security and cybersecurity regulations , if necessary , but the agency has not found a need to issue such regulations to date .

an april 2011 white house proposal and the cybersecurity act of 2012 ( s. 2105 ) both would mandate the promulgation of cybersecurity regulations for pipelines , among other privately - owned critical infrastructures sectors .

a revised version of s. 2105 , s. 3414 , would permit the issuance of regulations but would focus on voluntary cybersecurity measures .

whether pipelines would be better protected under cybersecurity regulations or under voluntary standards is the subject of ongoing debate .

this report reviews federal programs specifically addressing pipeline cybersecurity , as well as related private sector initiatives and key policy concerns .

for a more comprehensive analysis of federal cybersecurity legislative frameworks see , crs report r42114 , federal laws relating to cybersecurity: discussion of proposed revisions , by [author name scrubbed] .

for more general analysis of federal pipeline safety and security issues , see crs report r41536 , keeping america's pipelines safe and secure: key issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the pipeline sector has long been considered vulnerable to intentional damage by malicious individuals or organizations — either by physical attacks or by cyber attacks on their computerized scada systems .

cybersecurity risks reflect both general threats to the pipeline sector as a whole and specific threats to scada systems as the focus of attack .

these threats are discussed in the following sections .

the federal program for u.s. pipeline security began under the department of transportation ( dot ) immediately after the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

the aviation and transportation security act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-71 ) , which established the transportation security administration within the dot , authorized the agency "to issue , rescind , and revise such regulations as are necessary" to carry out its functions ( §101 ) .

tsa was transferred to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , newly created under the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

homeland security presidential directive 7 maintained dhs as the lead agency for pipeline security , and instructed the dot to "collaborate in regulating the transportation of hazardous materials by all modes ( including pipelines ) . .

the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) directs tsa to promulgate pipeline security regulations and carry out necessary inspection and enforcement if the agency determines that regulations are appropriate ( §1557 ( d ) ) .

thus , tsa has primary responsibility and regulatory authority for the security of natural gas and hazardous liquid ( eg , oil , carbon dioxide ) pipelines in the united states .

pipeline security activities at tsa are led by the pipeline security division ( psd ) within the agency's office of security policy and industry engagement ( ospie ) .

the psd is staffed by 13 employees funded out of tsa's general budget .

although tsa has regulatory authority for pipeline security under p.l .

107-71 and p.l .

110-53 , its activities to date have relied upon voluntary industry compliance with the agency's security guidance and best practice recommendations .

this guidance includes a number of general cybersecurity provisions .

under its corporate security review program , tsa visits the largest pipeline and natural gas distribution operators to review their security plans and inspect their facilities to evaluate whether each company is following the intent of its security guidance .

pipelines are also included in dhs's multi - modal cybersecurity initiatives , such as its control system security program ( cssp ) .

tsa also has established a public / private partnership - based cybersecurity program supporting the national infrastructure protection plan .

the agency's initial focus was on raising cybersecurity awareness and performing outreach to the various transportation modes , including pipelines .

the interstate natural gas association of america maintains its own extensive cyber security guidelines for natural gas pipeline control systems .

the american petroleum institute likewise maintains an industry standard for oil pipeline control system security .

pipeline operators have scheduled participation in dhs - sponsored control systems cybersecurity training and also participate in the dhs industrial control systems joint working group .

in addition to these efforts , the department of energy operates the national scada test bed program , a partnership with idaho national laboratory , sandia national laboratories , and other national laboratories which addresses control system security challenges in the energy sector .

among its key functions , the program performs control systems testing , research and development ; control systems requirements development ; and industry outreach .

sandia laboratories also performs authorized , defensive cybersecurity assessments for government , military , and commercial customers through its information design assurance red team ( idart ) program .

although congress has been concerned about various issues related to u.s. pipeline security in recent years , a key subject of debate is the adequacy of tsa's voluntary approach to pipeline security generally and cybersecurity in particular .

for example , provisions in the pipeline inspection , protection , enforcement , and safety act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-468 ) required the dot inspector general ( ig ) to "address the adequacy of security standards for gas and oil pipelines" ( §23 ( b ) ( 4 ) ) .

the 2008 ig's report stated that tsa's current security guidance is not mandatory and remains unenforceable unless a regulation is issued to require industry compliance.... [dot] and tsa will need to conduct covert tests of pipeline systems' vulnerabilities to assess the current guidance as well as the operators' compliance .

although the ig report did not elaborate on this recommendation , covert testing of vulnerabilities would likely include testing of cybersecurity measures in place to protect pipeline scada systems and sensitive operating information such as digital pipeline maps , system design data , and emergency response plans .

consistent with the ig's recommendation , an april 2011 white house proposal and the cybersecurity act of 2012 ( s. 2105 ) both would mandate the promulgation of cybersecurity regulations for pipelines , among other provisions .

a revised version of s. 2105 , s. 3414 , would permit the issuance of regulations but would focus on the use of voluntary cybersecurity measures .

s. 3414 would not necessarily confer upon tsa any authority it does not already have to regulate pipeline cybersecurity .

in contrast to the ig's conclusions and the legislative proposals above , the pipeline industry has long expressed concern that security regulations , presumably including cybersecurity , could be "redundant" and "may not be necessary to increase pipeline security. .

echoing this sentiment , a dot official testified in 2007 that enhancing security "does not necessarily mean that we must impose regulatory requirements. .

tsa officials have similarly questioned the need for new pipeline security regulations , particularly the ig's call for covert testing of pipeline operator security measures .

tsa has argued in the past that the agency is complying with the letter of p.l .

110-53 and that its pipeline operator security reviews are more than paper reviews .

tsa officials assert that security regulations could be counterproductive because they could establish a general standard below the level of security already in place at many pipeline companies based on their company - specific security assessments .

because tsa believes the most critical u.s. pipeline systems generally meet or exceed industry security guidance , the agency believes it achieves better security with voluntary guidelines , and maintains a more cooperative and collaborative relationship with its industry partners as well .

the energy sector control systems working group makes related assertions in its roadmap to achieve energy delivery systems cybersecurit y about the effectiveness of cybersecurity standards alone: although standards may elevate cybersecurity across the energy sector , they do so by requiring the implementation of minimum security measures that set a baseline for cybersecurity across an industry .

these minimum security levels may not be sufficient to secure the sector against new and quickly evolving risks .

asset owners compliant with standards may still be vulnerable to cyber intrusion .

thus , in addition to cybersecurity requirements , pipeline companies may also need appropriate management practices , performance metrics , access to intelligence , and other support measures to maximize the effectiveness of their cybersecurity programs .

although tsa believes its voluntary approach to pipeline security is adequate , canadian pipeline regulators have come to a different conclusion .

in 2010 the national energy board of canada mandated security regulations for jurisdictional canadian petroleum and natural gas pipelines , some of which are cross - border pipelines serving export markets in the united states .

many companies operate pipelines in both countries .

in announcing these new regulations , the board stated that it had considered adopting the existing cybersecurity standards "as guidance" rather than an enforceable standard , but "taking into consideration the critical importance of energy infrastructure protection," the board decided to adopt the standard into the regulations .

establishing pipeline security regulations in canada is not completely analogous to doing so in the united states as the canadian pipeline system is much smaller and operated by far fewer companies than the u.s. system .

nonetheless , canada's choice to regulate pipeline security may raise questions as to why the united states has not .

while the pipelines sector has many cybersecurity issues in common with other critical infrastructure sectors , it is somewhat distinct in several ways: pipelines in the united states have been the target of several confirmed terrorist plots and attempted physical attacks since september 11 , 2001 .

changes to pipeline computer networks over the past 20 years , more sophisticated hackers , and the emergence of specialized malicious software have made pipeline scada operations increasingly vulnerable to cyber attacks .

there recently has been a coordinated series of cyber intrusions specifically targeting u.s. pipeline computer systems .

tsa already has statutory authority to issue cybersecurity regulations for pipelines if the agency chooses to do so , but may not have the resources to develop , implement , and enforce such regulations if they are mandated .

tsa maintains that voluntary cybersecurity standards have been effective in protecting u.s. pipelines from cyber attacks .

based on the agency's corporate security reviews , tsa believes cybersecurity among major u.s. pipeline systems is good .

however , without formal cybersecurity plans and reporting requirements , it is difficult for congress to know for certain .

to a great extent , the public must therefore rely on the pipeline industry's self - interest to protect itself from cyber threats .

whether this self - interest is sufficient to generate the level of cybersecurity appropriate for a critical infrastructure sector , and whether imposing formal regulations would be counterproductive , is open to debate .

faced with this uncertainty , legislators are forced to rely upon their own best judgment to reach conclusions about the federal pipelines cybersecurity program .

if congress concludes that current voluntary measures are insufficient to ensure pipeline cybersecurity , it may decide to provide specific direction to tsa to develop regulations and provide additional resources to support them , as such an effort may be beyond the tsa pipeline security division's existing capabilities .

