the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) maintains a cadre of employees known as the postal career executive service ( pces ) .

pces employees are intended to fill "key management positions" within usps , which employed 645,950 people as of the end of fy2011 .

as of may 18 , 2012 , usps employed 640 employees in the pces in addition to the pmg .

of those employees , 36 , known as "officials," serve at the pleasure of the postmaster general ( pmg ) and include senior - level positions like area vice presidents and the deputy postmaster general .

the remaining 604 , known as "executives," perform duties such as district manager or bulk - mail center manager .

the pmg is not a member of the pces .

pay for pces employees and the pmg is capped at $276,840 in fy2012 .

a pces employee or the pmg may earn more than that statutory cap if he or she qualifies for a performance - based pay bonus .

any merit - based pay earned in excess of the pay cap can be retained as "deferred pay" and collected upon retirement .

former postmaster general john e. potter , for example , had an $815,788 aggregate balance in deferred pay as of september 30 , 2011 .

the deferred pay currently is and will continue to be paid out in annual installments — as opposed to a lump sum .

in addition to pay , pces employees receive benefits that are not provided to other federal employees , including free life insurance provided at a value equal to salary ; periodic physical examinations ; financial counseling ; parking ; and membership in up to two airline clubs .

additionally , pces employees have no cap on the number of annual leave days they can accrue .

federal employees in the senior executive service ( outside of the postal service ) cannot accrue more than 90 days of annual leave .

since 1971 , usps has been a self - supporting , wholly governmental entity .

although the usps does receive an annual appropriation , the agency does not rely on appropriations to operate .

its annual appropriation is about $100 million per year , approximately 0.1% of usps's $75 billion operating budget .

after running modest profits from fy2004 through fy2006 , usps lost $25.4 billion between fy2007 and fy2011 .

were it not for congressional action to reduce certain statutorily required health benefits payments , usps would have lost an additional $9.5 billion .

as usps's finances have deteriorated , its ability to absorb operating losses has been diminished .

between fy2005 and fy2011 , usps's debt rose from $0 to $13 billion .

 ( the statutory debt limit is $15 billion ( 39 u.s.c .

§2005 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) . ) .

in july 2009 , the government accountability office ( gao ) added the usps's financial condition "to the list of high - risk areas needing attention by the congress and the executive branch. .

media reports and some members of congress have expressed concerns that the pay of usps executives is too high and should be reduced — especially considering usps's current financial condition .

usps and others , however , have argued that compensation rates are needed at their current levels to attract talented employees to maintain a postal service that delivers mail and packages to homes and businesses throughout the united states with limited appropriations .

the total estimated cost to pay for pces employees' compensation and benefits in fy2012 is $126.2 million , or less than 0.5% of the postal service's annual budget .

postal officers within the pces are estimated to cost the service $11.0 million in fy2012 , or less than 0.02% of the annual usps budget .

the 112 th congress has introduced two bills that would limit usps executive pay in some way .

s. 1789 , for example , would remove certain "fringe benefits" and cap pay at level i of the executive schedule ( $199,700 in 2012 ) .

h.r .

2309 would prohibit pces employees from receiving bonuses in years when usps expenses eclipsed revenues and would cap pay at executive schedule level i in certain years .

on april 25 , 2012 , s. 1789 was passed by the senate .

on january 17 , 2012 , h.r .

2309 was reported by the house committee on oversight and government reform .

on march 29 , h.r .

2309 was reported by the house committee on rules and placed on the union calendar .

no further action has been taken on either bill .

this report examines the authorities governing executive compensation at usps .

it examines pay rates for other public - sector employees as well as certain private - sector employees to analyze how the pay of the postmaster general and other postal service executives might compare .

this report does not address the pay and benefits of bargaining usps employees .

it also does not examine the trends in workforce size and delineation within usps .

federal authorities that govern usps employee pay rates do not use the term pces .

instead , the laws use the terms "officers," "employees," "executives," and "critical senior executives or equivalent positions. .

pursuant to 39 u.s.c .

§1003 ( a ) , usps has the authority to "maintain compensation and benefits for all officers and employees on a standard of comparability to the compensation and benefits paid for comparable levels of work in the private sector of the economy" ( emphasis in original ) .

concurrently , 39 u.s.c .

§1003 ( a ) caps usps pay at the rate for level i of the executive schedule , a pay level that dictates pay for high - ranking federal employees , including most cabinet secretaries .

level i of the executive schedule is $199,700 in 2012 .

postal executives , however , are eligible for annual one - time bonuses that can push their total compensation levels above the executive schedule cap .

pursuant to 39 u.s.c .

§3686 ( a ) - ( b ) , executives may receive bonuses provided the employee's total compensation for the year does not "exceed the total annual compensation payable to the vice president … as of the end of the calendar year in which bonus or award is paid. .

the vice president's pay is $230,700 in 2012 .

the usps board of governors , however , must verify that the performance appraisal system used to determine if the award is warranted "makes meaningful distinctions based on relative performance. .

moreover , 39 u.s.c .

§3686 ( c ) gives the usps board of governors authority to select up to 12 usps officers "in critical senior executive or equivalent positions to receive total compensation … not to exceed 120 percent of the total annual compensation payable to the vice president. .

as noted above , the pay rate of the vice president is $230,700 in 2012 , and the vice president does not qualify for performance - based pay bonuses .

the cap on critical senior executive positions in usps selected to receive this level of compensation , therefore , is $276,840 in 2012 .

within 30 days of selecting those who should receive this salary level , the usps board of governors is required to provide written notification to congress and the director of the office of personnel management of whom they selected .

according to usps , as of may 1 , 2012 , there are eight employees currently serving in critical executive positions who are eligible for this level of compensation .

according to usps , its board of governors has annually contracted a private consulting firm to assist in setting compensation levels for postal executives .

this firm attempts to compare usps executive pay levels to "market pay and compensation design practices for executive officers in other companies. .

according to usps , finding private - sector executives with identical duties that could be used to compare pay rates "was challenging because no other organization shares the same mission , scope of operations , and legislative oversight as the postal service. .

despite these concerns , the private consulting firm found that in 2010 , "usps executive base salaries are significantly below market when compared against published survey data or comparable jobs in the private sector. .

in addition to salary , usps executives and officials can earn bonuses for meeting annual performance goals .

according to usps , the "goals and metrics … vary among executive officers and are weighted to reflect appropriately the degree to which an executive is able to influence the overall performance of the postal service. .

generally , the board of governors determines the bonus metrics for the pmg and the deputy pmg .

the pmg then determines the metrics for performance bonuses for the other usps executives and officials .

because of the postal service's current financial condition , no performance incentives were awarded for fy2011 .

table 1 shows the fy2010 pay levels for selected federal executive officers within usps .

all of the employees in this table are among those selected by the usps board of governors to receive compensation capped at 120% of the vice president's total annual compensation .

in the 112 th congress , two bills that seek to reduce the pay and benefits provided to usps executives have been introduced: s. 1789 and h.r .

2309 .

s. 1789 , the 21 st century postal service act of 2012 , includes a section that seeks to reduce usps executive pay .

pursuant to section 108 of s. 1789 , usps executive pay would be capped at level ii of the executive schedule , which is $179,700 in 2012 .

s. 1789 would authorize the board of governors to select up to six usps employees in "very senior executive positions" to receive pay equivalent to executive level i ( $199,700 in 2012 ) .

the bill limits "fringe benefits" of senior executives to that of other supervisors or managers who are not pces , and prohibits usps from providing an award or bonus to senior executives during years when usps "has not implemented the measures needed to achieve long - term solvency. .

h.r .

2309 would cap pay for what it calls "level two postal service executives" ( level twos ) at level i of the executive schedule ( $199,700 ) in years when usps is in control of a commission on postal reorganization that would be established by the bill .

h.r .

2309 states that this cap on compensation includes "basic pay , bonuses , awards , and all other monetary compensation. .

h.r .

2309 links pay increases for the level twos to the consumer price index .

additionally , no level two would be permitted to receive a "bonus , award , or other monetary compensation" when usps expenditures exceed revenues .

pursuant to h.r .

2309 , level twos could not accrue deferred compensation in years when usps expenditures exceed revenues .

usps noted in its financial statements that it may be difficult to compare the pay of usps executives to that of private sector employees because of usps's unique mission , size , and scope .

the pmg headed a service with 645,950 full and part - time employees as of september 30 , 2011 and revenues of $65.7 billion in fy2011 .

although there are no government agencies or private sector companies that perform duties identical to that of usps , it may be helpful to examine the pay rates of public and private - sector managers at entities that perform some identical services , provide some identical products , require a similar managerial skills , or are of a similar size .

examining the pay rates of these individuals may provide congress with a broader context of usps managerial pay .

the 112 th congress has introduced legislation that would reduce or otherwise limit the compensation of postal executives and officers .

both the house and senate proposals are components of bills that , in their entirety , seek to improve the postal service's condition .

broadly speaking , usps's present financial troubles are caused by falling revenues and rising operating costs .

in recent years , both the economic downturn and the widespread adoption of electronic communication have eroded postage sales .

the usps's operating costs have increased , in part , to the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ) , which requires usps to prefund its future retirees' health benefits at a cost of approximately $5.6 billion per year .

federal law also obligates usps to provide a wide range of services over a large geographic area six days per week at affordable and uniform prices .

this "universal service obligation," as the prc has noted , costs the usps approximately $4.4 billion per year .

meanwhile , the value of the usps's monopoly ( as the sole postal service provider ) , has fallen ( because of the decline in mail volume ) and generates perhaps $3.5 billion in annual revenues .

usps executives are in an unusual position .

they operate an entity with substantial legally conferred advantages ( eg , usps does not pay tax ) , but they have limited control over many of the factors that drive usps's revenues and costs .

this makes it complex to assess the performance of usps executives and align their pay accordingly .

whether the usps runs a profit or deficit in any one year is not entirely dependent upon the actions of the usps's top executives .

congress may decide that current usps executive pay rates are at the optimum level to attract appropriate candidates to usps's executive roles — those who can balance usps's autonomy , legal obligations , and oversight requirements .

in that case , usps would be authorized to pay up to 12 of its critical senior executives compensation greater than that of the vice president — and in some cases the president — ranking the pmg and other senior executives at usps among the highest paid federal employees .

maintaining these levels of pay would arguably more closely align the compensation of the pmg and other high - ranking usps employees with the basic salary of private sector employees at comparable organizations .

alternatively , congress has the authority to modify usps's executive pay structure and total compensation in a variety of ways .

reducing pay for critical usps positions , for example , may bring usps executives' salaries more closely in line with that of other top federal officials .

currently , postal executives may be paid as much as the secretaries of cabinet departments , and up to 12 executives can receive pay at a rate higher than that of the vice president .

postal executives' total compensation , therefore , may prompt questions about whether their jobs are worth more to the federal government than those of other senior federal officials .

it is unclear whether reducing executive compensation would encourage current usps leadership to seek employment elsewhere in government or in the private sector .

pay reductions could also lead to lower levels of interest from qualified candidates for these positions .

however , the same disincentive for federal service would apply to other senior executive positions across the government .

the nation's economic challenges and the usps's persistent deficits are viewed by some as reasons for reducing usps executive pay and eliminating bonuses .

yet , tying postal executive pay to the usps's financial performance raises the question — is appropriate to increase executive compensation in better economic times or when the usps runs profits ? .

finally , usps's use of deferred compensation has drawn considerable attention .

on the one hand , deferred compensation ( and executive perquisites ) enable the usps to offer more appealing compensation packages to individuals it wishes to hire or retain .

on the other hand , deferred compensation and perquisites do not neatly comport with federal statutory pay caps , and might be viewed by some as a way to evade pay limits .

furthermore , deferred compensation also can lead to situations where individuals no longer employed by the usps continue to draw significant compensation .

former pmg potter , for example , will continue to receive deferred pay benefits until 2020 although he retired from usps in fy2010 .

such a prohibition , however , could make postal executive positions less attractive to candidates who are qualified for the jobs or prompt current usps executives to seek employment outside of the service .

