following several high - profile train incidents , congress passed the rail safety improvement act of 2008 ( rsia08 ; p.l .

110-432 ) , which mandated positive train control ( ptc ) on many passenger and freight railroads by december 31 , 2015 .

the law does not describe ptc in technical terms , but defines it as a risk mitigation system that could prevent train incidents by automatically stopping trains when a collision or derailment is imminent .

after freight and commuter railroads raised concerns about their ability to meet the 2015 deadline , congress extended the deadline by three years to december 31 , 2018 , or up to two years beyond that for certain qualifying railroads ( p.l .

114-73 ) .

as of july 2018 , it appears that all railroads will seek qualification for extending the deadline .

while ptc promises benefits in terms of safety , its implementation entails substantial costs and presents a variety of other policy - related issues .

these include the interoperability of individual railroads' systems , access to sufficient radio spectrum to support ptc , the possibility that ptc could be a barrier to market entry , and the suitability of ptc to passenger terminal environments .

the united states railroad network comprises both freight and passenger operations .

the seven largest operators by revenue , known as the class i freight railroads , own about two - thirds of the nation's 140,810 miles of trackage ( see figure 1 ) .

these companies include bnsf , union pacific ( up ) , norfolk southern ( ns ) , kansas city southern ( kcs ) , canadian pacific ( cp ) , canadian national ( cn ) , and csx transportation ( csxt ) .

most of the remaining trackage is controlled by class ii or regional freight railroads ; class iii or short - line railroads ; state and local government agencies ; and amtrak , the federally owned passenger operator .

in many situations , both passenger and freight railroad companies operate over track owned by other railroads .

this may occur under orders issued by the federal surface transportation board or under voluntary agreements between carriers .

amtrak also has the right to operate trains using its own equipment over freight lines .

the majority of freight railroad lines have a single track with passing sidings at various locations to allow trains to pass .

trains may operate in either direction along a track .

high - volume corridors may have multiple tracks that typically operate in a single direction to increase both operating capacity and safety .

ptc is defined in federal law as a "system designed to prevent train - to - train collisions , over - speed derailments , incursions into established work zone limits , and the movement of a train through a switch left in the wrong position. .

the federal government has imposed no specific technical requirements , allowing railroads to adopt whatever ptc systems seem best suited to their particular needs .

however , all ptc systems share certain characteristics , including use of radio communication to provide in - cab signals to the train engineer and the ability for the dispatcher to stop a train in an emergency .

most u.s. railroads currently are implementing what is referred to as an "overlay - type" system , in which the sensors , signals , and transponders are installed over existing track .

the network operating center sends one - way communication in the form of speed restrictions and moving authorities to a train as it passes over a transponder embedded in the track .

this information requires integration with existing signals , switches , sensors , and other wayside infrastructure .

the network operating office does not track real - time train location , but rather receives notice whenever a train passes the wayside infrastructure .

figure 2 illustrates ptc hardware and communication pathways in an overlay - type system architecture .

communication between wayside infrastructure , transponders , and trains is delivered through analog radio signal .

wireless communication options that provide greater data transfer capability , such as wi - fi , are not currently practical .

equipment on the train receives information from transponders to alert the train operator to current and upcoming signals , movements , and work zones .

the train has equipment capable of superseding train engineer authority , so that the ptc system can slow or stop the train to prevent incident in the event of human error .

a more expansive variant of an overlay - type system is communications - based train control ( cbtc ) .

cbtc is a more sophisticated computer - aided dispatching framework which requires train information to be sent to a central location , which then disseminates the information to all entities in the network .

in this architecture , global positioning system ( gps ) is used to track train location and speed , with other instrumentation providing location and speed coverage when the gps cannot locate a signal .

these additional components provide greater precision as well as system redundancy in the event of failure .

similarly , gps and radio communication similar to cell phone technology can be used to identify work zone locations along specific lengths of track .

cbtc is based on digital rather than analog technology , facilitating interoperability among systems used by different railroads .

with cbtc , central control automatically tracks the movements of all the trains in the network , sends speed restrictions and movement authorities to individual trains , and checks for potential derailment and collisions ( see figure 3 ) .

the system uses location and speed information to determine headway distance and the necessary braking distance required to prevent potential incidents .

braking distance can be several miles for large freight trains and is dependent on factors such as train speed , reaction time , wheel - rail friction , brakes wear , track conditions , track grading , mass , and mass distribution of the train .

all these variables are processed with a complex braking algorithm designed to ensure an emergency stop prior to a collision without excessive speed restriction leading to inefficient operation .

the greater capability of cbtc makes it suitable for very high speed passenger lines , and cbtc is being instituted on some european rail lines for that reason .

it has also been adopted by new york city transit and the southeastern pennsylvania transportation authority .

cbtc also has the potential to allow for driverless trains .

however , the system requires seamless communication coverage along the entirety of ptc - equipped track , as temporary communication loss can pose safety risks .

the need for constant communication also requires significant investment in either radio towers or fixed transponders .

these requirements raise the capital cost , making cbtc more expensive than an overlay - type system .

the cbtc system potentially offers greater business benefits to railroad operators than an overlay - type system .

for example , the real - time , two - way communication of train locations combined with speed restrictions and moving authorities can lead to more efficient scheduling , increased capacity , and fuel savings .

nonetheless , u.s. railroads appear to have concluded that the advantages of communication - based train control are not worth the additional cost of installing it at the present time .

it is important to note that both overlay - type systems and cbtc systems are designed principally to reduce collisions between trains .

the systems do not address intrusion into railroad right - of - way .

currently , there is no requirement that they be capable of detecting and notifying trains about crossing - gate failures , vehicles blocking tracks , or trespassers .

however , such capabilities could be incorporated into ptc systems in the future .

based on progress reports submitted by railroads to the fra , the fra surmises that only four railroads ( bnsf and union pacific , and the los angeles and philadelphia area commuter railroads ) will likely have fully installed the necessary ptc equipment by the end of 2018 , but even these railroads would likely need an extension because other railroads operating over their lines would not be fully ptc - compliant .

as of june 30 , 2018 ( latest data available ) , ptc was operating on 66% of the freight route miles required to have ptc and 2% of the passenger network .

ptc was installed and operable on 93% of the freight locomotives and 73% of the passenger locomotives .

among the larger commuter railroads , the fra deemed that caltrain , maryland area regional commuter , and new jersey transit were at risk of not qualifying for a deadline extension because these railroads had installed less than 90% of the ptc hardware required ( as of june 30 , 2018 ) .

most of the current ptc projects rely on fixed transponders in conjunction with gps with one - way information communication to the trains to fulfill the baseline ptc requirements .

only a few systems involve two - way communication with real - time information and computer - aided dispatch .

the smaller railroad companies and commuter lines , in most cases , are relying on the class i railroads to implement ptc before investing in their own systems due to the high risk and the cost of developing their own systems .

in the united states , precursors to full ptc capability were developed voluntarily prior to the 2008 mandate .

development of radio - based cbtc systems and coordinated wayside systems used to locate and communicate with trains began in 1983 .

although systems developed by the association of american railroads and burlington northern railroad achieved technical success , both systems were functional only in fully signalized territory and were deemed not economically viable to deploy on a nationwide scale .

in 1991 , amtrak adopted an automatic train control ( atc ) system along the tracks it owns in the northeast corridor .

that system , as discussed above , repeated signalization in the cab and required the train engineer to acknowledge and enforce the speed limit given by the signals to reduce human error .

that system was later upgraded with the advanced civil speed enforcement system , using transponders to send signals to trains and to enforce speed restrictions and stop orders .

amtrak began transitioning to radio - based communication in 2009 to incorporate work zone safety measures required by rsia08 .

in 1999 , csx transportation began development of a ptc system that uses gps combined with fixed infrastructure at switching points to provide exact track location information , specifically on parallel lines .

this method is particularly useful to improve safety on long stretches of non - signalized track .

csxt is now modifying this architecture to meet the full requirements of ptc .

bnsf , union pacific , norfolk southern , and chicago's metra commuter line are planning implementation of similar systems .

norfolk southern's system is expected to provide for computer - aided dispatch over small segments of track .

in 2009 , the fra estimated the total capital cost of wayside , on - board , radio , and office equipment necessary for full ptc deployment on all affected railroads to be in excess of $10 billion .

it projected annual maintenance costs of $850 million .

in recent years , fixed - capital investment by u.s. railroads has been around $15 billion annually , of which about $10 billion has been for structures and $5 billion for equipment .

the estimated capital cost of meeting the ptc mandate is thus almost equal to the railroads' total capital spending in a single year .

the four largest railroad companies account for almost all of the estimated 60,000 miles of class i track that fall under the ptc mandate .

in 2017 , csx estimated its cost of installing ptc to be $2.4 billion , of which $1.8 billion had been expended through 2016 , while as of 2018 union pacific estimated its total cost for ptc to be $2.9 billion , of which $2.3 billion had been spent by the end of 2016 .

smaller freight companies often share track with the class i railroads .

while this presents interoperability challenges , there is opportunity to use the ptc type approvals from the larger companies' development efforts to save cost .

this is also the case with shared passenger rail in the northeast corridor .

despite this advantage , the infrastructure cost alone for just two of the five largest transit agencies operating on the corridor , metro - north in the new york area and the southeastern pennsylvania transportation authority in the philadelphia area , has been estimated at $350 million and $100 million , respectively .

as the fra has stated ( see text box ) , the expense of ptc could constrain commuter rail development , diverting commuters to less safe forms of transportation .

commuter railroads' cost for installing ptc is likely to be borne primarily by state or local governments .

however , the federal government has provided assistance .

this includes a $967 million rrif loan to the metro - north and long island commuter railroads for ptc implementation , $382 million in combined rrif / transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) loans to the massachusetts bay transportation authority , $199 million in fy2017 in the fast act ( p.l .

114-94 , ยง3028 ) , and $250 million in grants provided in the consolidated railroad infrastructure and safety improvement ( crisi ) program ( funding is not restricted to just commuter railroads ) .

in march 2018 , the dot inspector general issued a report reviewing how railroads had spent federal funding provided for ptc implementation .

some shippers believe that since the majority of the investment in ptc will come directly from the railroad companies , these costs will likely be passed to customers .

they expect price increases due to the cost of ptc implementation , especially if the rail companies are unable to realize business benefits from the new systems .

the chlorine institute , a trade organization representing the chlorine industry , expects the railroad companies to raise costs disproportionately for shipments of toxic - by - inhalation hazardous materials ( tih ) , as concern about the safety of tih transport is perceived as a source of the ptc mandate .

the freight rail transportation network has two primary components: the track and the freight service .

in some cases , the service is provided by the same company that owns the track .

however , since shippers' needs do not correspond to railroads' track ownership , freight operators trade trackage or haulage rights and share revenue from the shipper .

fra regulations require that railroads' ptc systems be interoperable so that any train operating on ptc - equipped track can communicate with the host railroad's ptc system .

prior to rsia08 , several railroad companies were developing communication - based train control independently for their own business reasons , and were not concerned about interoperability .

the federal mandate has required changes in these plans in the interest of interoperability .

up , csxt , and ns have received fra "type approvals" for interoperable electronic train management systems ( i - etms ) in which the ptc system itself is approved for development .

this makes it likely that the systems installed by these railroads will be highly compatible .

bnsf , which has a precursor etms system in place , has type approval for that system , which is to be updated to i - etms when software becomes available .

interoperability issues pertain to passenger service as well .

in the northeast corridor , amtrak operates on amtrak - owned track and track owned by regional transit authorities and vice versa .

amtrak began ptc development prior to rsia08 and has provided the ptc standard and type approval for transit authorities utilizing the corridor .

the freight companies and amtrak are now working to ensure interoperability between their respective systems .

in europe , achieving interoperability in train control systems has been a decades - long challenge among the different national railroad passenger networks attempting to cross borders .

there are several ways the ptc mandate could be used as a barrier to market entry for the railroads .

first , installing track will now be more expensive due to the need to incorporate ptc wayside equipment , which is expected to add approximately $50,000 per mile to the $1 million to $3 million per mile cost of installing new rail lines .

on - board ptc equipment is expected to cost around $55,000 per locomotive , which represents only a minor increase in the cost of a new $2 million locomotive but is substantial compared to the $75,000 cost of used locomotives operated by some short line railroads .

a passenger rail operator providing or proposing service over freight - owned track that otherwise would not be required to install ptc may require the passenger railroad to pay for the cost of installing ptc on the freight locomotives also .

in addition to capital costs , operating and maintenance costs will increase as well .

this could be a barrier to both railroad expansion and startup services .

another barrier to market entry could arise from the need for interoperability and spectrum compatibility .

hypothetically , if two rail networks have different ptc systems because they do not currently share track or services , it may be cost prohibitive to implement a new service over these two lines .

similarly , one company could upgrade or modify its ptc system , forcing further investment by other companies using its track .

also , if the radio spectrum licenses are owned by certain railroads or a consortium of railroads , they could dictate leasing prices to operate necessary ptc systems on that spectrum for a new railroad or service which is not part of the consortium .

control of spectrum and interoperability issues with ptc could be used as tools to prevent new services on existing lines or even using an interoperable spectrum on new lines .

the possibility that ptc could impede competition may be of particular concern for short line and regional railroads which operate on class i track .

class i railroads have a legal obligation to accommodate short line railroads , but in some cases may be reluctant to allow short line trains on their networks .

the president of the american short line and regional railroad association issued the following testimony to the surface transportation board: differential pricing of certain routes or products by class i carriers ... ha[s] eliminated marginal customers who may be a small railroad's only source of business on its line , effectively putting the small railroad out of business .

some small railroads who want to provide service to new customers meet resistance from connecting carriers whose marketing plans are inconsistent with the small railroad's proposed business .

at this point , concerns that ptc could create barriers to railroad competition are hypothetical , as no specific complaints are known to have been presented to the fra or to the surface transportation board , which oversees certain rail competition issues .

the september 29 , 2016 , crash of a new jersey transit train beyond its end of line track bumper post in hoboken , n.j. , killing one commuter and injuring more than 100 others , raised discussion of ptc requirements within passenger terminals .

the driver of this train apparently fell asleep momentarily as the train reached the end of the platform .

current fra regulations allow an exception to ptc installation in passenger terminals under certain conditions , one of which is terminals with a maximum train speed of 20 mph .

a february 2018 ntsb board meeting discussing this and a similar incident noted that ptc is not a technology well - suited to a terminal environment , due to the extremely short stopping distances and the inability for trains in tunnels to send and receive gps signals .

the ntsb recommended that the fra examine other technologies under development that may be able to provide a backup speed check within terminals .

