d uring the final months of recent presidential administrations , federal agencies have typically issued a larger number of rules relative to comparable time periods earlier in the administration .

this phenomenon is often referred to as "midnight rulemaking. .

various scholars and public officials have documented evidence of midnight rulemaking by several recent outgoing administrations , especially for those outgoing administrations that will be replaced by an administration of a different party .

studies have documented an increase in rulemaking activity as measured in several different ways .

this includes , for example , an increase in the number of economically significant rules issued in the final year of several outgoing presidents .

some studies have shown that not only are more regulations finalized at the end of an outgoing president's administration , but more proposed rules ( also known as notices of proposed rulemaking , or nprms ) are issued during that period as well .

additionally , studies have documented an increase in the number of rules reviewed at the office of management and budget during the final months of outgoing administrations , which is suggestive of a last - minute rush to complete the work of the administration .

one possible explanation for the issuance of "midnight rules" is the desire of the outgoing administration to complete its work and achieve certain policy goals before the end of its term of office — what has been termed the "cinderella effect. .

as one george w. bush administration official said , midnight rulemaking is like "cinderella leaving the ball .

… presidential appointees hurried to issue last - minute 'midnight' regulations before they turned back into ordinary citizens at noon on january 20 th . .

because it may be difficult to change or eliminate rules after they have taken effect , issuing midnight rules can also help ensure a legacy for a president — especially when an incoming administration is of a different party .

at times , certain rules issued during the last few months of an administration have been considered by some as controversial .

for example , when president william j. clinton was leaving office , his administration issued energy efficiency standards for washing machines and a rule setting ergonomics standards in the workplace .

shortly before the end of president george w. bush's second term concluded , his administration finalized rules allowing states to determine whether concealed firearms may be carried in national parks and giving agencies greater responsibility to determine when and how their actions may affect species under the endangered species act .

on the other hand , a 2012 study for the administrative conference of the united states ( acus ) concluded that many midnight regulations were "relatively routine matters not implicating new policy initiatives by incumbent administrations," and that the "majority of the rules appear to be the result of finishing tasks that were initiated before the presidential transition period or the result of deadlines outside the agency's control ( such as year - end statutory or court - ordered deadlines ) . .

the study cited some evidence of the strategic use of midnight rules to implement certain desired policies before leaving office , but , in general , the study said that "the perception of midnight rulemaking as an unseemly practice is worse than the reality. .

one approach previous presidents have used to control rulemaking at the start of their administrations has been the imposition of a moratorium on new regulations from executive departments and independent agencies .

such moratoria have sometimes been accompanied by a requirement that the departments and agencies postpone the effective dates of certain rules that were issued at the end of the previous president's term .

proposed rules that have not been published in the federal register as final rules by the time the outgoing president leaves office can be withdrawn by a new administration .

however , once final rules have been published in the federal register , the only way for a new administration to eliminate or change them is to go through the rulemaking process again ( see section below entitled " eliminating or changing midnight rules " ) .

once an outgoing administration's final rule has been published in the federal register , the only way for the incoming administration to change or undo the rule is to undergo another rulemaking process .

importantly , by law , the procedural requirements of rulemaking apply when an agency is issuing , amending , or repealing a rule .

furthermore , as explained by former oira administrator susan dudley , "agencies cannot change [midnight] regulations arbitrarily ; instead , they must first develop a factual record that supports the change in policy. .

under the rulemaking procedures established by the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , agencies are generally required to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) in the federal register , allow "interested persons" an opportunity to comment on the proposed rule , and , after considering those comments , publish the final rule along with a general statement of its basis and purpose .

the apa does not specify how long rules must be available for comment , but agencies commonly allow at least 30 days .

the apa states that in most cases , the final rule cannot become effective until at least 30 days after its publication .

in limited circumstances , agencies may be able to issue rules more expeditiously .

the apa states that full notice and comment procedures are not required when going through notice and comment would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. .

this is known as the "good cause" exception , and it allows agencies to skip notice and comment and proceed directly with issuing a final rule .

agencies can also make their rules take effect in less than 30 days by invoking a similar good cause exception .

when agencies use the good cause exception , the apa requires that they explicitly state that they are doing so and provide a rationale for the exception's use when the rule is published in the federal register .

the legislative history of the apa makes it clear , however , that congress did not believe that the good cause exception to the notice and comment requirements should be an "escape clause. .

a federal agency's invocation of the good cause exception ( or other exceptions to notice and comment procedures ) is subject to judicial review .

after having reviewed the totality of circumstances , the courts can and sometimes do determine that an agency's reliance on the good cause exception was not authorized under the apa .

in sum , if an agency wanted to change or eliminate midnight rules issued by the outgoing administration , the agency would have to follow the apa's general notice and comment requirements for rulemaking , which can be a potentially time consuming process , unless good cause exists .

congress may examine the issuance of proposed and final "midnight" regulations at the end of an administration and conclude that the regulations should be allowed to go forward .

should congress conclude otherwise , though , various options are available — even for rules that have already taken effect .

at any time , congress can use its legislative power to overturn or change a regulation that has been issued by an agency .

congress can also use its legislative power to amend the statutory authority underlying a regulation .

a change in the underlying statutory authority could force an agency to amend a regulation that has been already issued , provide additional instruction to an agency while a rule is under development and before it has been finalized , or outright repeal a rule that had already been issued .

in addition , congress may use the expedited procedures provided in the congressional review act ( cra ) to disapprove agency rules , including , in some cases , rules issued in a previous session of congress .

alternatively , congress can add provisions to agency appropriations bills to prohibit certain rules from being implemented or enforced .

these two options are discussed in detail below .

several midnight rulemaking bills have been introduced into recent congresses that corresponded with a presidential transition ( or potential transition , as was the case in the 112 th congress , which coincided with the presidential election of 2012 ) .

companion bills entitled the midnight rule relief act of 2012 ( h.r .

4607 and s. 2368 ) were introduced by representative reid ribble and senator ron johnson , respectively , in the 112 th congress .

the text of h.r .

4607 and a number of other bills related to rulemaking were incorporated into h.r .

4078 , the red tape reduction and small business job creation act , which was passed by the house on july 26 , 2012 .

s. 2368 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs upon introduction , and the senate did not take further action .

the midnight rule relief act would have established a moratorium on the proposal or finalization of certain types of rules during the period between a presidential election day and inauguration day of a president's final term in office .

specifically , if enacted , it would have prevented an outgoing president from proposing or finalizing certain "major" rules during the covered period .

the exceptions would have included certain rules with statutory or judicial deadlines ; rules exempted by the president to be necessary for various reasons including national security ; and deregulatory measures aimed at repealing an existing rule .

in the 114 th congress , representative tim walberg and senator joni ernst introduced the midnight rule relief act of 2016 ( h.r .

4612 and s. 2582 , respectively ) on february 25 , 2016 .

on june 10 , 2016 , the house committee on oversight and government reform reported h.r .

4612 , and the text reported was considered , with some modifications , as an amendment to h.r .

4361 , the government reform and improvement act of 2016 , and passed by the house on july 7 , 2016 .

s. 2582 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs upon introduction , and the senate has not taken further action at the time of writing of this report .

if enacted , the midnight rule relief act would prevent certain proposed and final rules from being issued during a "moratorium period" following the election of a new president .

the rules that would be precluded from issuance would be "major" rules and rules that would trigger the analytical requirements of the regulatory flexibility act ( i.e. , those rules that may have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities ) .

the bill contains a number of exceptions , such as rules that are required to be issued under statute , rules for which the president issues an executive order determining that the rule is necessary for certain reasons specified in the bill , or rules that are deregulatory in nature ( i.e. , a rule that would repeal an existing rule ) .

in addition , representative darrell issa introduced h.r .

5982 , the midnight rules relief act , on september 9 , 2016 , and the bill was reported without amendment by the house committee on the judiciary on september 21 , 2016 .

if enacted , h.r .

5982 would make it easier for a new congress to disapprove multiple rules issued in the final months of an outgoing administration .

currently , under the congressional review act ( cra , described above ) , congress can overturn a single final rule through enactment of a joint resolution of disapproval once the rule is finalized and submitted to congress .

congress must consider such a disapproval resolution under certain limited time periods , which are stipulated in the cra .

if a rule is submitted late in a session of congress , there may be additional time periods for consideration available in the next session ( see section above entitled " cra "carryover" provisions " ) .

h.r .

5982 would amend the cra to allow a disapproval resolution to contain more than one rule for those late - issued rules finalized by an outgoing administration — i.e. , for rules issued by the outgoing administration that are submitted to congress during the final 60 days of session in the senate or 60 legislative days in the house of representatives before sine die adjournment .

