an "immigration detainer" is a document by which u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) advises other law enforcement agencies of its interest in individual aliens whom these agencies are detaining .

the standard detainer form ( form i - 247 ) allows ice to indicate that it has taken certain actions that could lead to the alien's removal ( eg , determining that there is reason to believe the alien is removable , initiating removal proceedings ) .

the form also allows ice to request that the other agency take certain actions that could facilitate such removal ( eg , holding the alien temporarily , notifying ice prior to releasing the alien ) .

ice and its predecessor , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , have used detainers as one means of obtaining custody of aliens for purposes of removal proceedings since at least 1950 .

however , ice's implementation of the secure communities program in the period between 2008 and 2014 raised numerous questions about detainers .

this program relied upon information sharing between various levels and agencies of government to identify potentially removable aliens .

detainers were then issued for some of these aliens .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) emphasized that it prioritized "criminal aliens," those who posed a threat to public safety , and repeat immigration violators for removal through secure communities , and the former director of ice further instructed that , among "criminal aliens," the focus was to be upon those convicted of "aggravated felonies," as defined in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) ; those convicted of other felonies ; and those convicted of three or more misdemeanors .

however , there were reports of detainers issued for persons who were not convicted of any offense , or whose sole offense was a misdemeanor .

as a result of these and related reports , several jurisdictions adopted policies of declining immigration detainer requests for at least some aliens .

several lawsuits were also filed challenging the detainer practices of state , local , or federal governments .

the obama administration's announcement on november 20 , 2014 , that it is replacing the secure communities program with a new priority enforcement program ( pep ) could effectively resolve certain of these questions and concerns about detainers .

pep is like secure communities in that it "will continue to rely on fingerprint - based biometric data submitted during bookings by state and local law enforcement agencies to the federal bureau of investigation for criminal background checks. .

however , with pep , detainers are to be issued only for aliens who have been convicted of ( rather than just arrested for ) certain offenses that are among ice's priorities for civil immigration enforcement .

further , with pep , detainers are generally to be used only to request that state and local law enforcement officials notify ice prior to the alien's release or transfer to another institution , not to request that state and local officials detain aliens beyond the point when they otherwise would be released for the state or local offense so that ice may assume custody .

any detainers issued to request detention ( as opposed to notification ) must generally specify that ( 1 ) the alien is subject to a final order of removal , or ( 2 ) "there is other sufficient probable cause to find that the person is a removable alien. .

by way of background , this report surveys the various authorities governing immigration detainers , including the standard detainer form ( form i - 247 ) sent by ice to other law enforcement agencies .

the report also discusses key legal issues raised by immigration detainers , including ( 1 ) whether dhs's detainer regulations and practices are within its statutory authority ; ( 2 ) whether states and localities are required to comply with immigration detainers ; ( 3 ) who has custody of aliens subject to detainers ; and ( 4 ) whether detainer practices violate aliens' constitutional rights .

in considering these topics , it is important to note that form i - 247 and dhs's detainer practices have changed several times since 2010 , including as a result of the actions announced by the obama administration on november 20 , 2014 .

among other actions , the administration announced the discontinuance of the secure communities program , which had arguably prompted many recent questions regarding immigration detainers .

ice and its predecessor , the ins , have long issued detainers for potentially removable aliens , although the case law mentioning such detainers may provide only a partial picture of ins's practices , in particular .

for example , in a 1950 decision , a federal district court addressed a challenge to the legality of a deportation order for an alien who was the subject of an immigration detainer requesting his delivery "to the custody of the immigration authorities at the time sentence is fulfilled in the state institute. .

later , in a 1975 decision , the board of immigration appeals , the highest administrative body for interpreting and applying immigration laws , heard an alien's challenge to the conditions under which federal prison authorities held him , allegedly as the result of an immigration detainer which requested that the prison notify ins at least 30 days prior to his release .

between them , these two cases illustrate ins's use of detainers to request that a law enforcement agency transfer an alien to ins custody at the completion of the alien's criminal sentence and notify ins prior to the alien's release .

however , they do not indicate whether ins used detainers for other purposes , such as to request that a person be held after he or she would otherwise have been released for any criminal offense so that ins could investigate the person's removability and / or take custody .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) did not expressly address the issuance of detainers prior to 1986 .

however , the ins appears to have issued detainers prior to this date pursuant to various powers and responsibilities delegated to it by the ina .

specifically , the ina ( 1 ) grants the attorney general ( currently the secretary of homeland security ) "the power and duty to control and guard the borders and boundaries of the united states against the illegal entry of aliens ; " ( 2 ) establishes certain categories of aliens who are barred from admission to the united states , or may be removed from the united states after their admission ; and ( 3 ) generally grants immigration officials broad discretion as to their enforcement priorities .

the ins cited all these provisions , among others , as authority when it ultimately promulgated regulations governing the issuance of detainers , as discussed below , and it seems to have consistently viewed these provisions as broadly authorizing its detainer practices .

neither ins nor ice appears to have relied upon the "inherent authority" of law enforcement to issue detainers , although at least one jurisdiction has recognized such authority .

then , in 1986 , congress enacted the anti - drug abuse act , which , among other things , amended section 287 of the ina to address the issuance of detainers for aliens arrested for "violation[s] of any law relating to controlled substances. .

section 287 generally specifies the powers of immigration officers and employees and , as amended , provides that [i]n the case of an alien who is arrested by a federal , state , or local law enforcement official for a violation of any law relating to controlled substances , if the official ( or another official ) — ( 1 ) has reason to believe that the alien may not have been lawfully admitted to the united states or otherwise is not lawfully present in the united states , ( 2 ) expeditiously informs an appropriate officer or employee of the service authorized and designated by the attorney general of the arrest and of the facts concerning the status of the alien , and ( 3 ) requests the service to determine promptly whether or not to issue a detainer to detain the alien , the officer or employee of the service shall promptly determine whether or not to issue such a detainer .

if a detainer is issued and the alien is not otherwise detained by federal , state , or local officials , the attorney general shall effectively and expeditiously take custody of the alien .

after the 1986 amendments , the ins amended its regulations to address the issuance of detainers .

the ins initially promulgated two separate regulations , one ( codified in 8 c.f.r .

§287.7 ) governing detainers for controlled substance offenses and another ( codified in 8 c.f.r .

§242.2 ) governing detainers for other offenses .

the final versions of these two regulations were virtually identical , and in 1997 , the two regulations were merged into one .

this regulation is located at 8 c.f.r .

§287.7 , the former location of the regulation governing detainers for controlled substance offenses .

however , it notes that detainers "are issued pursuant to sections 236 and 287" of the ina .

section 236 authorizes or requires the detention of certain aliens pending their removal , while section 287 generally specifies the powers of immigration officers and employees ( as well as expressly authorizes the issuance of detainers for controlled substance offenses ) .

these detainer regulations currently provide that "[a]ny authorized immigration officer may at any time issue a form i - 247 … to any other federal , state , or local law enforcement agency," and identify specific personnel authorized to issue detainers ( eg , deportation officers ; immigration inspectors ) .

these personnel are the same personnel who are authorized to make warrantless arrests for violations of federal immigration law under certain conditions , as discussed below .

in addition , the regulations: require that other agencies requesting the issuance of a detainer provide dhs with "all documentary records and information" related to the alien's status ; limit the period for which aliens may be held at dhs's request so that dhs may assume custody to 48 hours ( excluding weekends and federal holidays ) ; and specify that dhs is not financially responsible for an alien's detention unless it issues a detainer for , or assumes custody of , the alien .

the standard detainer form ( form 1-247 ) has apparently been in use since at least 1984 , and has been amended several times , including in response to criticisms of the secure communities program .

this form enables ice to notify another agency that it has ( 1 ) determined that an individual is an alien subject to removal based on certain grounds specified on the form ( eg , a prior felony conviction ) , or otherwise noted by immigration officials ; ( 2 ) initiated removal proceedings and served a notice to appear or other charging document on the alien ; ( 3 ) served a warrant of arrest for removal proceedings ; or ( 4 ) obtained an order of deportation or removal for the alien .

it also allows ice to request that the other agency take one or more of the following actions: maintain custody of the subject for a period not to exceed 48 hours , excluding saturdays , sundays , and holidays , beyond the time when the subject would have otherwise been released from ... custody to allow dhs to take custody of the subject .

.. .

provide a copy to the subject of th[e] detainer .

notify [dhs] of the time of release at least 30 days prior to release or as far in advance as possible .

notify [dhs] in the event of the inmate's death , hospitalization or transfer to another institution .

consider this request for a detainer operative only upon the subject's conviction .

cancel the detainer previously placed by [dhs] on ____________________ ( date ) .

the option of requesting that a copy of the detainer be provided to the alien who is the subject of the detainer was added in june 2011 , in response to concerns that aliens who were subject to detainers were not always aware of this fact .

the option of requesting that the detainer be considered operative only upon the alien's conviction was also added in june 2011 , because of criticism that ice has issued detainers for aliens whose charges were dismissed , or who were found not guilty .

ice also issued guidance and made other changes pertaining to its use of detainers in response to certain criticisms of the secure communities program .

first , in august 2010 , ice issued an interim policy on detainers that prohibited immigration officers from issuing detainers unless a law enforcement agency "exercised its independent authority to arrest the alien," as well as discouraged officers from "relying" on the hold period purportedly authorized by the detainer form and federal regulations .

then , in december 2011 , ice established a toll - free hotline that detained individuals could call if they believed they were u.s. citizens or victims of a crime .

later , in december 2012 , ice issued guidance that detainers were to be issued only when the subject of the detainer was reasonably believed to be an alien subject to removal from the united states and met certain other criteria .

most recently , on november 24 , 2014 , when announcing that dhs was discontinuing the secure communities program , the secretary of homeland security directed that detainers are generally to be issued only for aliens who have been convicted of ( rather than just arrested for ) certain offenses that are among ice's priorities for civil immigration enforcement .

further , the secretary directed that detainers are generally to be used only to request that state and local law enforcement officials notify ice prior to the alien's release or transfer to another institution .

they are generally not to be used to request that state and local officials detain aliens beyond the point when they would otherwise be released unless the detainer specifies that ( 1 ) the alien is subject to a final order of removal , or ( 2 ) "there is other sufficient probable cause to find that the person is a removable alien. .

the issuance of a detainer for an alien begins a process that could result in the removal of the alien , although ice does not pick up or attempt to remove all aliens for whom it issues detainers .

ice issued 270,988 detainers in fy2009 and 201,778 detainers in the first eleven months of fy2010 ( both years in which the secure communities program was operational ) .

it is unclear , however , how many individuals subject to detainers were ultimately removed .

it is also unclear how many of these detainers resulted in an alien being held by state or local authorities beyond the time when he or she would otherwise have been released from custody .

numerous questions about detainers were raised in the period between march 2008 , when the secure communities program began , and november 2014 , when the obama administration announced it is discontinuing the secure communities program and replacing it with a new priority enforcement program ( pep ) .

these questions include ( 1 ) whether dhs's detainer regulations and practices are beyond its statutory authority ; ( 2 ) whether states and localities are required to comply with immigration detainers ; ( 3 ) who has custody of aliens subject to detainers ; and ( 4 ) whether detainer practices violate aliens' constitutional rights .

this report discusses each of these questions individually below .

however , it is important to note that certain questions may have less salience after the discontinuance of secure communities than they did while secure communities was operational .

in particular , certain questions about holds of aliens pursuant to detainers may have been mooted by the obama administration's announcement that ice will generally request such holds only "in special circumstances" when the alien is subject to a final order of removal , or when there is other sufficient probable cause to believe that the alien is removable .

numerous questions about immigration detainers have been raised recently as a result of the secure communities program .

these questions include ( 1 ) whether dhs's detainer regulations and practices are beyond its statutory authority ; ( 2 ) whether states and localities are required to comply with immigration detainers ; ( 3 ) who has custody of aliens subject to detainers ; and ( 4 ) whether detainer practices violate aliens' constitutional rights .

the obama administration's recent announcement that it is discontinuing the secure communities program and replacing it with a new priority enforcement program ( pep ) seems likely to lessen the salience of at least some of these questions .

immigration detainers will still be used with the pep program , but generally only when an alien has been convicted of ( rather than just arrested for ) certain "priority" offenses .

further , under pep , detainers will generally be used only to request that state and local law enforcement officials notify ice prior to the alien's release from custody for the state or local offense , rather than to request that state and local officials hold the alien for a period of up to 48 hours ( excluding weekends and holidays ) so that ice may assume custody .

detainers may , however , continue to be used to request holds in cases where ( 1 ) the alien is subject to a final order of removal , or ( 2 ) there is probable cause to believe the alien is removable .

even this more limited use of detainers could continue to raise questions in particular cases , though .

note also that future administrations could adopt different policies as to the use of immigration detainers , and some members of congress have recently introduced legislation that could potentially result in increased use of such detainers .

