the u.s. army corps of engineers manages numerous water resource projects , such as dams and locks , across the united states .

many of these projects include facilities critical to managing floodwaters , supporting navigation , and producing hydropower .

many of these projects serve multiple purposes , including as sites popular for multiple kinds of recreation .

current corps regulations prohibit possession of loaded firearms by private individuals at areas of corps projects that are open to the public unless they are used for hunting in areas that are open to hunting or for shooting at authorized shooting ranges .

the regulation applies at corps projects regardless of their location in states allowing open or concealed carry of loaded firearms .

corps firearms regulations and their enforcement are the subject of ongoing lawsuits .

legislation in the 113 th congress was introduced to ban promulgation and enforcement of regulations that prohibit private individuals from possessing firearms , including assembled or functional firearms , at corps projects .

the proposed language would have eliminated the agency's ability to enforce or promulgate regulations on restricting firearms in project areas that are open to the public if possession is in compliance with state law .

however , individuals still would have been prohibited from possessing firearms at a "federal facility" under title 18 , section 930 , of the united states code .

this report examines the corps' current regulations , related legislative proposals , and firearms - related safety and security issues at corps projects .

the report also compares the corps' authorities and regulations with authorities and regulations of the department of the interior's ( doi's ) bureau of reclamation , which also operates federal water resources projects with significant recreation .

the corps can issue firearms warnings or citations .

during the five years fy2008 through fy2012 , warnings for firearms , explosives , other weapons , and fireworks averaged 33 annually from an average annual total of 22,207 warnings ; similar citations averaged 21 annually from an annual average of 2,195 .

like corps projects , many of doi's bureau of reclamation water resources projects are sites of both significant infrastructure and public recreation and access .

the proposed legislation discussed in this report only would have affected corps firearms regulations .

information on reclamation authorities and regulations related to firearms presented herein is provided to illustrate how the other federal agency with large water resource projects manages firearms on its lands .

currently , reclamation facilities are governed differently than those of the corps with respect to the regulation of firearms and law enforcement .

table 1 summarizes reclamation's authorities and regulations , the corps' authorities and regulations , and changes if the proposals considered in the 113 th congress had been enacted .

the table also includes related public access and law enforcement authorities for corps and reclamation water resources projects .

reclamation regulations ( 43 c.f.r .

ยง423.30 ) allow firearm possession in compliance with federal , state , and local law on reclamation lands and waterbodies , with two exceptions: possession is not permitted at or in a reclamation facility , and prohibitions and regulations may apply in designated special - use areas .

unlike the corps' current regulations , these reclamation regulations distinguish between facilities , lands , and waterbodies .

at reclamation facilities ( eg , buildings , dams , electric power facilities , switchyards , recreation facilities , fish and wildlife facilities ) , firearms are prohibited .

at reclamation lands and waterbodies , firearms are allowed to the extent provided by applicable federal , state , and local law .

therefore , the possession of loaded firearms by private individuals is allowed at most of a reclamation project's land and water footprint , whereas current corps regulations allow such possession only in areas designated for hunting and shooting at corps projects .

reclamation regulations ( 43 c.f.r .

ยง423.30 ( b ) ) restrict discharge of a weapon unless for hunting or at an authorized shooting or archery range ; discharge must also be in compliance with federal , state , and local law .

as previously noted , corps regulations do not explicitly address the discharge of weapons .

reclamation regulations ( 43 c.f.r .

ยง423.32 ) permit hunting on reclamation lands and waterbodies in accordance with federal , state , and local laws unless the area has been closed for public use or has been designated as a special - use area .

in november 2001 , in section 1 of the reclamation recreation management act of 1992 ( p.l .

107-69 ) , congress provided criminal penalties for violation of regulations to maintain law and order and protect persons and property at reclamation projects and lands .

law enforcement at reclamation projects can be provided by doi armed law enforcement officers or by other law enforcement personnel through cooperative agreement or contract .

reclamation and doi utilize a variety of personnel for security and public safety at reclamation projects: federal special agents provided through doi's law enforcement authority and uniformed guards acting as special policemen with law enforcement authority , an armed security response task force that does not have law enforcement authority , armed state and local law enforcement personnel , and personnel from private security companies for both armed and unarmed functions .

the vast majority of criminal offenses occurring on reclamation property , nonetheless , are handled by state police , sheriff's offices , or local law enforcement .

most law enforcement functions at corps projects also are provided by state and local law enforcement authorities , but the corps does not have the option of its own department's or agency's armed federal law enforcement personnel .

at reclamation projects ( in some contrast to nps and nwrs units , which have federal personnel with more law enforcement functions ) , reclamation rangers function much like corps rangers ; both do not have significant law enforcement authority or carry firearms .

many corps projects function as popular recreation sites in addition to providing navigation , flood damage reduction , hydropower , and other benefits .

current corps regulations prohibit possession of loaded firearms by private individuals at corps projects unless for hunting or at designated shooting ranges .

the 113 th congress considered legislation that would have eliminated the secretary of the army's ability to enforce or promulgate regulations restricting the possession of loaded firearms in areas of its projects that are open to the public , as long as an individual is lawfully permitted to possess a firearm and such possession is in compliance with state law .

possession of firearms , however , would have remained prohibited at a "federal facility" consistent with title 18 , section 930 , of the united states code .

that is , if the proposed language had been enacted , the corps would have been prohibited from promulgating or enforcing restrictions on loaded firearms on roughly 4.4 million acres of corps fee - owned lands that are open to the public but currently closed for hunting .

for the roughly 4.4 million acres that are open to hunting or designated as shooting ranges , the proposed legislation , if enacted , apparently would have essentially lifted the restriction that possession of a loaded firearms be limited for use in hunting or for shooting at designated shooting ranges .

that is , under the proposed legislation , consistent with state law and firearms restrictions in title 18 , section 930 , of the united states code , loaded firearms would have been allowed at all corps project areas open to the public .

