the small business administration ( sba ) administers several programs to support small business owners and prospective entrepreneurs .

for example , it provides education programs to assist with business formation and expansion ; loan guaranty programs to enhance small business owners' access to capital ; and programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting , including oversight of the service - disabled veteran - owned small business federal procurement goaling program .

the sba also provides direct loans for owners of businesses of all sizes , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters .

the military reservist economic injury disaster loan ( mreidl ) program is also of interest to veterans .

it provides direct loans of up to $2 million to small business owners who are not able to obtain credit elsewhere meet ordinary and necessary operating expenses that they could have met but are not able to because an essential employee has been called up to active duty in his or her role as a military reservist or member of the national guard due to a period of military conflict .

the sba provides management and technical assistance to more than 100,000 veterans each year through its various training partners ( eg , small business development centers , women's business centers , score [formerly the service corps of retired executives] , and veterans business outreach centers [vbocs] ) .

in addition , the sba's office of veterans business development ( ovbd ) administers several programs to assist veteran - owned small businesses .

the sba's ovbd received an appropriation of $12.7 million for fy2018 .

the sba has always assisted veteran small business owners and aspiring veteran entrepreneurs .

in recent years , they have focused increased attention on assisting veterans transition from the military to the civilian labor force .

for example , the sba's ovbd , in partnership with syracuse university , launched the operation boots to business: from service to startup initiative for transitioning servicemembers in july 2012 .

the program consists of a two - day introductory course on entrepreneurship followed by an eight - week , online course to prepare servicemenmbers and military spouses "for post - service career success as business owners. .

congress provided the sba's ovbd an additional $7 million in fy2014 to expand the boots to business initiative "nationwide to the 250,000 yearly transitioning servicemembers in all branches of the military. .

the initiative's two - day introduction to entrepreneurship course is currently offered at 213 military institutions worldwide and is "a standard portion of the curricula offered at the revised transition assistance program ( tap ) to servicemembers. .

tap is administered by the department of defense ( dod ) in cooperation with the department of labor ( dol ) , department of veterans affairs ( va ) , department of education ( doe ) , department of homeland security ( dhs ) , office of personnel management ( opm ) , and the sba .

congress has approved additional appropriations to continue the initiative , and it was expanded in 2014 to include veterans of all eras , active duty servicemembers ( including national guard and reserves ) , and their partner or spouse via the boots to business: reboot initiative .

in fy2017 , 17,320 servicemembers participated in the boots to business program .

during the 114 th congress , legislation was introduced and reported favorably by the senate committee on small business and entrepreneurship to provide the boots to business initiative statutory authorization ( s. 1866 , the veterans small business ownership improvements act of 2015 ) .

similar legislation was introduced during the 115 th congress ( s. 121 , the veterans small business ownership improvements act , and h.r .

5193 , the veteran entrepreneurship training act of 2018 ) .

to date , nearly 70,000 servicemembers have participated in the initiative .

the expansion of federal employment training programs targeted at specific populations , such as women and veterans , has led some members and organizations to ask if these programs should be consolidated .

in their view , eliminating program duplication among federal business assistance programs across federal agencies , and within the sba , would lower costs and improve services .

others argue that keeping these business assistance programs separate enables them to offer services that match the unique needs of underserved populations , such as veterans .

instead of consolidating these programs , their focus is on improving communication and cooperation among the federal agencies providing assistance to entrepreneurs .

this report examines the economic circumstances of veteran - owned businesses drawn from the bureau of the census's 2012 survey of business owners ( sbo ) .

it also provides a brief overview of veterans' employment experiences , comparing unemployment and labor force participation rates for veterans , veterans who have left the military since september 2001 , and nonveterans .

the report also describes employment assistance programs offered by several federal agencies to assist veterans transitioning from the military to the civilian labor force and examines , in greater detail , the sba's veteran business development programs , the sba's efforts to enhance veterans' access to capital , and the sba's veteran contracting programs .

it also discusses the sba's military reservist economic injury disaster loan program and p.l .

114-38 , the veterans entrepreneurship act of 2015 , which authorized and made permanent the sba's recent practice of waiving the sbaexpress loan program's one time , up - front loan guarantee fee for veterans ( and their spouse ) .

from 1972 to 2012 , the u.s. bureau of the census's sbo was sent every five years , for years ending in "2" and "7," to a stratified random sample of nonfarm businesses in the united states that file internal revenue service tax forms as individual proprietorships , partnerships , or any type of corporation , and with receipts of $1,000 or more .

it asked for information about the cha racteristics of the businesses and their owners .

about 66% of the 1.75 million businesses that received the 2012 sbo responded .

the sbo provided "the only comprehensive , regularly collected source of information on selected economic and demographic characteristics for businesses and business owners by gender , ethnicity , race , and veteran status. .

the sbo provided estimates of the number of employer and nonemployer firms and their sales and receipts , annual payroll , and employment .

data aggregates were provided by gender , ethnicity , race , and veteran status for the united states by north american industry classification system ( naics ) classification ; the kind of business ; and state , metropolitan and micropolitan statistical area , and county .

this information was combined with data collected through the census bureau's main economic census and administrative records to provide a variety of searchable data products on census's website , https: / / www.census.gov / programs - surveys / sbo.html , including the most detailed economic information available on veterans and veteran - owned firms .

the census bureau has discontinued the sbo and is currently collecting data on business receipts , payroll , and employment by demographic characteristics , such as gender , ethnicity , race , and veteran status through its new , annual american business survey ( abs ) .

the first set of data from the abs is scheduled to be released in december 2019 .

although now somewhat dated , the 2012 sbo provides the most detailed economic information available on veterans and veteran - owned firms .

the department of labor's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) provides monthly updates of the employment status of the nation's veterans .

the bls reports that as of january 2019 , there were about 19.0 million veterans .

there were 9.4 million veterans in the civilian labor force ( i.e. , they were either employed or unemployed and available for work , except for temporary illness , and had made specific efforts to find employment sometime during the four - week period ending with the reference week ) .

of those veterans in the civilian labor force , about 9.0 million were employed and about 344,000 were unemployed .

in recent years , the unemployment rate among veterans as a whole has generally been lower than the unemployment rate for nonveterans 18 years and older .

however , veterans who have left the military since september 2001 have experienced higher unemployment than other veterans and , in some years , higher than nonveterans as well .

in january 2019 , the unemployment rate for nonveterans 18 years and older was 4.3% , which was higher than for veterans as a whole ( 3.7% ) , for veterans who left the military prior to september 2001 ( 3.3% ) , and for veterans who left the military since september 2001 ( 4.2% ) .

veterans who have left the military since september 2001 also have a higher labor force participation rate ( 78.0% ) than other veterans ( 40.0% ) and nonveterans aged 18 and older ( 62.7% ) .

the higher labor force participation rate for veterans who left the military since september 2001 was not wholly unexpected .

they entered the civilian workforce more recently and have had less time to develop a reason ( eg , health issue , family responsibility , discouragement , retirement ) to withdraw from the civilian workforce than other veterans and nonveterans aged 18 and older .

the lower labor force participation rate for other veterans was also not wholly unexpected .

they entered the civilian workforce earlier and have had more time to develop a reason to withdraw from the civilian workforce than veterans who left the military since september 2001 and nonveterans aged 18 and older .

several federal agencies , including the sba , sponsor employment and business development programs to assist veterans in their transition from the military into the civilian labor force .

as discussed , the expansion of federal employment and business development training programs targeted at specific populations , such as women and veterans , has led some members and organizations to ask if these programs should be consolidated .

others question if the level of communication and coordination among federal agencies administering these programs has been sufficient to ensure the programs are being administered in the most efficient and effective manner .

the sba administers several loan guaranty programs , including the 7 ( a ) and the 504 / cdc programs , to encourage lenders to provide loans to small businesses "that might not otherwise obtain financing on reasonable terms and conditions. .

since 1978 , federal agency heads have been required to establish federal procurement contracting goals , in consultation with the sba , "that realistically reflect the potential of small business concerns" to participate in federal procurement .

each agency is required , at the conclusion of each fiscal year , to report its progress in meeting the goals to the sba .

the sba negotiates the goals with each federal agency and establishes a small business eligible baseline for evaluating the agency's performance .

the small business eligible baseline excludes certain contracts that the sba has determined do not realistically reflect the potential for small business participation in federal procurement , such as contracts awarded to mandatory and directed sources , awarded and performed overseas , funded predominately from agency - generated sources , not covered by federal acquisition regulations , and not reported in the federal procurement data system ( eg , contracts or government procurement card purchases valued less than $3,000 ) .

these exclusions typically account for 18% to 20% of all federal prime contracts each year .

the sba then evaluates the agencies' performance against their negotiated goals annually , using data from the federal procurement data system – next generation , managed by the u.s. general services administration , to generate the small business eligible baseline .

this information is compiled into the official small business goaling report , which the sba releases annually .

over the years , federal government - wide procurement contracting goals have been established for small businesses generally ( p.l .

100-656 , the business opportunity development reform act of 1988 , and p.l .

105-135 , the hubzone act of 1997 — title vi of the small business reauthorization act of 1997 ) ; small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals ( p.l .

100-656 ) ; women ( p.l .

103-355 , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ) ; small businesses located within a historically underutilized business zone , or hubzone ( p.l .

105-135 ) ; and small businesses owned and controlled by a service - disabled veteran ( p.l .

106-50 , the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 ) .

the current federal small business contracting goals are at least 23% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards to small businesses for each fiscal year ; 5% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to small disadvantaged businesses for each fiscal year ; 5% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to women - owned small businesses ; 3% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to hubzone small businesses ; and 3% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

there are no punitive consequences for not meeting the small business procurement goals .

however , the sba's small business goaling report is distributed widely , receives media attention , and heightens public awareness of the issue of small business contracting .

for example , agency performance as reported in the sba's report is often cited by members during their questioning of federal agency witnesses in congressional hearings .

as shown in table 5 , the fy2017 small business goaling report , using data in the federal procurement data system , indicates that federal agencies met the federal contracting goal for small businesses generally , small disadvantaged businesses , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses in fy2017 .

federal agencies awarded 23.88% of the value of their small business eligible contracts ( $442.5 billion ) to small businesses ( $105.7 billion ) , 9.10% to small disadvantaged businesses ( $40.2 billion ) , 4.71% to women - owned small businesses ( $20.8 billion ) , 1.65% to hubzone small businesses ( $7.3 billion ) , and 4.05% to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ( $17.9 billion ) .

the percentage of total reported federal contracts ( without exclusions ) awarded to those small businesses in fy2017 is also provided in the table for comparative purposes .

in a related development , on november 17 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

1694 , the fairness to veterans for infrastructure investment act of 2015 .

the bill would have revised the requirement that 10% of the award of contracts for federal - aid highway , federal public transportation , and highway safety research and development programs be set - aside for small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

the bill would have required the set - aside to include veteran - owned small businesses .

in another related development , the u.s. supreme court's decision in kingdomware technologies , inc. v. united states ( decided on june 16 , 2016 ) requiring the va to grant vosbs certain preferences when awarding procurement contracts could result in the va awarding additional contracts to vosbs .

in addition , the prevention of fraud in federal small business contracting programs , and in the sba's loan programs as well , has been a priority for both congress and the sba for many years , primarily because reports of fraud in these programs emerge with some regularity .

of particular interest to veterans , gao has found that "the lack of an effective government - wide fraud - prevention program" has left the service - disabled veteran - owned small business program "vulnerable to fraud and abuse. .

under the small business act , a small business owned and controlled by a service - disabled veteran can qualify for a federal government procurement set - aside ( a procurement in which only certain businesses may compete ) or a sole - source award ( awards proposed or made after soliciting and negotiating with only one source ) if the small business is at least 51% unconditionally and directly owned and controlled by one or more service - disabled veteran .

a veteran is defined as a person who has served "in the active military , naval , or air service , and who was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable. .

a disability is service related when it "was incurred or aggravated ... in [the] line of duty in the active military , naval , or air service. .

federal agencies may set aside procurements for service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses only if the contracting officer reasonably expects that offers will be received from at least two responsible small businesses and the award will be made at a fair market price ( commonly known as the "rule of two" because of the focus on there being at least two small businesses involved ) .

federal agencies may award sole contracts to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses when ( 1 ) the contracting officer does not reasonably expect that two or more service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses will submit offers ; ( 2 ) the anticipated award will not exceed $4.0 million ( $6.5 million for manufacturing contracts ) ; and ( 3 ) the award can be made at a fair and reasonable price .

otherwise , sole - source awards may only be made to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses under other authority , such as the competition in contracting act .

service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses are not eligible for price evaluation preferences in unrestricted competitions .

the va is statutorily required to establish annual goals for the awarding of va contracts to both service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and small businesses owned by other veterans .

the va is authorized to use "other than competitive procedures" in meeting these goals .

for example , it may award any contract whose value is below the simplified acquisition threshold ( generally $250,000 ) to a veteran - owned business on a sole - source basis , and it may also make sole - source awards of contracts whose value ( including options ) is between $250,000 and $5 million , provided that certain conditions are met .

when these conditions are not met , the va is generally required to set aside the contract for service - disabled or other veteran - owned small businesses .

service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses can generally self - certify as to their eligibility for contracting preferences available under the small business act .

however , in an effort to address fraud in va contracting , veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses must be listed in the va's vetbiz database and have their eligibility verified by the va to be eligible for preferences in certain va contracts .

firms that fraudulently misrepresent their size or status have long been subject to civil and criminal penalties under section 16 of the small business act ; sba regulations implementing section 16 ; and other provisions of law , such as the false claims act , fraud and false statements act , program fraud civil remedies act , and contract disputes act .

several bills were introduced during the 112 th congress to address fraud in small business contracting programs in various ways .

of particular interest to veterans , s. 3572 , the restoring tax and regulatory certainty to small businesses act of 2012 , and s. 633 , the small business contracting fraud prevention act of 2011 , would have , among other changes , amended section 16 of the small business act to expressly include service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses among the types of small businesses subject to penalties for fraud under that section .

the bills would also have required service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses to register in the va's vetbiz database , or any successor database , and have their status verified by the va to be eligible for contracting preferences for service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses under the small business act .

in addition , during the 113 th congress , s. 2334 , the improving opportunities for service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses act of 2013 , and its companion bill in the house , h.r .

2882 , and h.r .

4435 , the howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , which was passed by the house on may 22 , 2014 , included a provision that would have authorized the transfer of the vetbiz database's administration and the verification of service - disabled veteran owned small businesses from the va to the sba .

advocates of requiring service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses to register in the vetbiz database and have their status verified by the va ( or the sba ) to be eligible for contracting preferences under the small business act argue that doing so would reduce fraud .

as then - senator snowe stated on the senate floor when she introduced s. 633 , "our legislation attempts to remedy the spate of illegitimate firms siphoning away contracts from the rightful businesses trying to compete within the sba's contracting programs. .

others worry that requiring service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses to register in the vetbiz database and have their status verified by the va ( or the sba ) to be eligible for contracting preferences under the small business act may add to the paperwork burdens of small businesses .

they seek alternative ways to address the need to reduce fraud in federal small business procurement programs that do not increase the paperwork requirements of small businesses .

still others note that the effectiveness of any change to prevent fraud in veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small business procurement programs largely depends upon how the change is implemented .

for example , in july 2011 , the va's office of inspector general concluded that the va's implementation of its veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small business procurement fraud prevention programs needed improvement: we project that va awarded ineligible businesses at least 1,400 vosb [veteran owned small business] and sdvosb [service - disabled veteran owned small business] contracts valued at $500 million annually and that it will award about $2.5 billion in vosb and sdvosb contracts to ineligible businesses over the next 5 years if it does not strengthen oversight and verification procedures .

va and the office of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbu ) need to improve contracting officer oversight , document reviews , completion of site visits for "high - risk" businesses , and the accuracy of vetbiz vendor information pages information .

p.l .

106-50 , the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 , signed into law on august 17 , 1999 , authorized the sba's military reservist economic injury disaster loan ( mreidl ) program .

the sba published the final rule establishing the program in the federal register on july 25 , 2001 , with an effective date of august 24 , 2001 .

the senate committee on small business provided , in its committee report on the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 , the following reasons for supporting the authorization of the mreidl program: during and after the persian gulf war in the early 1990's , the committee heard from reservists whose businesses were harmed , severely crippled , or even lost , by their absence .

problems faced by reservists called to active duty and their small businesses were of a varied nature and included cash - flow problems , difficulties with training an appropriate alternate manager on very short notice to run the business during the period of service , lost clientele upon return , and on occasion , bankruptcy .

these hardships can occur during a period of national emergency or during a period of contingency operation when troops are deployed overseas .

to help such reservists and their small businesses , the committee seeks to provide credit and management assistance to small businesses when an essential employee ( i.e. , an owner , manager or vital member of the business' staff ) is a reservist called to active duty .

the committee believes that financial assistance in the form of loans , loan deferrals and managerial guidance are effective ways to minimize the adverse financial demands of the call to active duty .

they not only ameliorate financial difficulties but also strengthen small businesses .

the house committee on small business also supported the program's authorization , indicating in its committee report that the program will also fulfill a long unmet need to assist our military reservists who are small business owners .

often these individuals , called to service at short notice , come back from fighting to protect our freedoms only to find their businesses in shambles .

h.r .

1568 will establish loan deferrals , technical and managerial assistance , and loan programs for these citizen soldiers so that while they risk their lives they need not risk their livelihoods .

as mentioned previously , the sba provides direct loans for owners of businesses of all sizes , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters .

the sba's mreidl program provides disaster assistance in the form of direct loans of up to $2 million to help small business owners who are not able to obtain credit elsewhere to ( 1 ) meet ordinary and necessary operating expenses that they could have met but are not able to meet ; or ( 2 ) enable them to market , produce , or provide products or services ordinarily marketed , produced , or provided by the business that cannot be done because an essential employee has been called up to active duty in his or her role as a military reservist or member of the national guard due to a period of military conflict .

under specified circumstances , the sba may waive the $2 million limit ( eg , the small business is in immediate danger of going out of business , is a major source of employment , employs 10% or more of the workforce within the commuting area in which the business is located ) .

p.l .

106-50 defines an essential employee as "an individual who is employed by a small business concern and whose managerial or technical expertise is critical to the successful day - to - day operations of that small business concern. .

the act defines a military conflict as ( 1 ) a period of war declared by congress ; or ( 2 ) a period of national emergency declared by congress or the president ; or ( 3 ) a period of contingency operation .

a contingency operation is designated by the secretary of defense as an operation in which our military may become involved in military actions , operations , or hostilities ( peacekeeping operations ) .

the sba is authorized to make such disaster loans either directly or in cooperation with banks or other lending institutions through agreements to participate on an immediate or deferred basis .

the loan term may be up to a maximum of 30 years and is determined by the sba in accordance with the borrower's ability to repay the loan .

the loan's interest rate is the sba's published interest rate for an economic injury disaster loan at the time the application for assistance is approved by the sba .

economic injury disaster loan interest rates may not exceed 4% .

the sba is not required by law to require collateral on disaster loans .

however , the sba has established collateral requirements for disaster loans based on "a balance between protection of the agency's interest as a creditor and as a provider of disaster assistance. .

the sba generally does not require collateral to secure a mreidl loan of $50,000 or less .

larger loan amounts require collateral , but the sba will not decline a request for a mreidl loan for a lack of collateral if the sba is reasonably certain the borrower can repay the loan .

the sba disbursed one mreidl loan in fy2014 , none in fy2015 , three in fy2016 , and three in fy2017 .

since the mreidl's inception through december 31 , 2017 , the sba has disbursed 352 mreidl loans amounting to $32.97 million .

of these 352 loans , 85 loans ( 24.2% of the total number of mreidl loans disbursed ) , amounting to $7.8 million ( 23.8% of the total amount of mreidl loans disbursed ) , have been charged off ( a declaration that the debt is unlikely to be collected ) by the sba .

because the mreidl program is relatively small and noncontroversial , this report does not present a discussion of the congressional issues affecting the program .

congress has demonstrated a continuing interest in federal programs designed to assist veterans transition from military to civilian life .

for example , the sba's veteran business development programs , loan guaranty programs , and federal procurement programs for small businesses generally , including service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses , have all been subject to congressional hearings during the past several congresses .

also , as has been discussed , several bills have been introduced in recent congresses to address the sba's management of these programs and fraud .

given the many factors that influence business success , measuring the effectiveness of the sba's veteran assistance programs , especially the programs' effect on veteran job retention and creation , is both complicated and challenging .

for example , it is difficult to determine with any degree of precision or certainty the extent to which any changes in the success of a small business result primarily from that business's participation in the sba's programs or from changes in the broader economy .

that task is made even more challenging by the absence of performance outcome measures that could serve as a guide .

in most instances , the sba uses program performance measures that focus on indicators that are primarily output related , such as the number and amount of loans approved for veteran - owned small businesses and the number and amount of federal contracts awarded to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

both gao and the sba's office of inspector general have recommended that the sba adopt more outcome - related performance measures for the sba's loan guaranty programs , such as tracking the number of borrowers that remain in business after receiving a sba guaranteed loan to measure the extent to which the sba contributed to their ability to stay in business .

other performance - oriented measures that congress might also consider include requiring the sba to survey veterans who participate in its business development programs or who have received a sba guaranteed loan .

this survey could provide information related to the difficulty the veterans experienced in obtaining a loan from the private sector , their experiences with the sba's loan application process , and the role the sba loan had in creating or retaining jobs .

the sba could also survey service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses that were awarded a federal contract to determine the extent to which the sba was instrumental in their receiving the award and the extent to which the award contributed to their ability to create jobs or expand their scope of operations .

