the u.s. constitution vests congress with the power to raise revenue and borrow money .

those funds may only by drawn from the treasury in consequence of appropriations made by law .

the constitution , however , is largely silent with respect to the president's role in the budget process .

instead , the executive budget process as it exists today is primarily the result of statutes enacted by congress .

the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( p.l .

67-13 ; 42 stat .

20-27 ) established the modern executive budget process .

prior to its enactment , executive budgeting was highly decentralized .

at that time , agencies submitted their budget estimates to congress individually , either directly or through the secretary of the treasury , with varying levels of involvement or direction by the president .

the budget and accounting act altered this practice by establishing a legal framework for a consolidated federal budget proposal to be developed by the president and submitted to congress prior to the start of each fiscal year .

this report outlines many of the budgetary procedures that are performed by the president , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and agencies .

this report provides an overview of the development , submission , and justification of the president's budget proposal .

this report also describes how the president , omb , and agencies execute the federal budget following the enactment of appropriations and other budgetary legislation by congress .

the president's budget , or the budget of the united states government as it is referred to in 31 u.s.c .

section 1105 ( a ) , is a statement of the president's policy priorities and a unified plan for the allocation of federal budgetary resources .

the president's budget is a set of recommendations .

congress is not required to adopt the recommendations contained within the president's budget .

nevertheless , the budget is one of the president's most important policy tools .

though it is not legally binding , the president's budget initiates the congressional budget process and provides congress with recommended spending levels for agency programs , projects , and activities funded through the annual appropriations acts .

the president's budget also includes budgetary projections based on existing law and provides congress with estimations of the effects the president's revenue and direct spending proposals will have on those projections .

under current law , the president is responsible for developing and submitting a consolidated budget to congress no later than the first monday in february prior to the start of the fiscal year .

the development of the president's budget begins approximately 18 months prior to the start of the fiscal year that the budget will cover , which is about 10 months before the president must submit the proposal to congress .

to put this timeline in context , as congress begins action on appropriations bills and other budgetary legislation for the upcoming fiscal year , omb and agencies have already begun planning for the subsequent fiscal year .

the president's budget submission is a multi - volume set of documents , which may vary in size and composition from administration to administration .

this section briefly discusses the components of the president's budget submission to congress , and highlights some of the formal and informal interactions between congress , the president , omb , and agencies .

once appropriations and other budgetary legislation have become law , federal agencies are responsible for executing the budget .

the president , omb , and agencies execute the budget by collecting , obligating , and expending federal resources in accordance with the budgetary laws that have been enacted .

the president , omb , and agencies also possess limited authority to make spending adjustments after appropriations and other spending legislation have been enacted .

the previous section provided an overview of the budget execution procedures that the president , omb , and agencies utilize under normal conditions .

under existing law , there are additional executive budgetary procedures that are triggered under specific , less common circumstances .

under the antideficiency act , agencies are generally prohibited from obligating or spending funds prior to the enactment of their appropriations .

a funding gap occurs when full - year or interim appropriations are not enacted by the start of the fiscal year .

a funding gap may also occur at other times during the fiscal year if an agency's interim appropriations ( i.e. , a continuing resolution or cr ) , expire and an additional cr is not subsequently enacted .

during a funding gap , the only budgetary resources that may be obligated or expended are those that will be used to provide for excepted activities , such as those involving "the safety of human life or the protection of property. .

during periods when enactment of full - year or interim appropriates seems uncertain , omb may instruct executive agencies to prepare for funding gaps and government shutdowns .

circular a - 11 provides general guidance on how executive agencies should proceed if their regular appropriations or crs are not enacted or if their existing crs have expired .

for example , circular a - 11 instructs agencies to develop shutdown plans that identify "excepted" activities which will continue and "non - excepted" activities which will be terminated in the event of a funding gap .

in addition , the circular instructs agencies to determine which of their employees will be subject to furlough and which will be retained .

if a funding gap is imminent , omb may issue additional guidance to agency heads .

sequestration involves the cancellation of budgetary resources under a statutorily prescribed presidential sequester order .

a sequester order identifies the specific budgetary resources that can no longer be obligated or expended despite their being enacted into law .

under the provisions of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; p.l .

99-177 ) , as amended by the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 ( statutory paygo act ; p.l .

111-139 ) , a sequestration of nonexempt direct spending may be triggered if the new revenue and new direct spending legislation enacted during a congressional session are not "deficit neutral. .

under the bbedca and statutory paygo , omb is responsible for tracking the cumulative deficit impact of enacted budgetary legislation .

if a sequestration is triggered , omb is responsible for calculating the uniform percentage by which the budgetary resources of nonexempt programs will be reduced .

under the provisions of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , automatic spending reductions , including sequestration of nonexempt discretionary and direct spending , are triggered if legislation to reduce the deficit by $1.2 trillion by the end of fy2021 is not enacted by january 15 , 2012 .

the bca also includes provisions requiring sequestration in the event that the statutory discretionary spending caps established by the bca are exceeded .

under the bca , omb is responsible for calculating and preparing the sequestration order using the formula provided in the bca and following the same procedures as those specified in the bbedca .

once prepared , the sequestration order is to be issued by the president .

under both the bca and the bbedca , once issued , the implementation of a sequestration ( and execution of the resulting spending cuts ) are the responsibility of omb and each agency , respectively .

circular a - 11 summarizes the requirements of the bbedca and the statutory paygo act , and briefly discusses how agencies should manage and record sequestrations issued under those statutes , in order to avoid potential antideficiency act violations .

however , the circular does not specifically discuss how agencies might manage sequestrations that may be issued under the provisions of the bca .

