tax reform is a perennial issue before congress .

one area of increasing attention is the taxation of u.s. companies on the income they earn abroad .

recently , proposals have been made to , in some cases , decrease taxes and in others to increase these taxes .

businesses leaders have been urging a movement toward a territorial tax , which would generally eliminate u.s. income taxes on active foreign source income .

such a proposal ( presumably based on one developed by grubert and mutti ) was included in the president's advisory panel on tax reform in 2005 , more recently in a draft proposal by ways and means committee chairman dave camp , and in a bill , s. 2091 , introduced by senator enzi .

the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform ( referred to as the fiscal commission ) also proposed a territorial tax in general terms .

proposals have also been made to move in the opposite direction and increase the taxation of foreign source income , including s. 727 , introduced by senators wyden and coats , which would use the significant revenues gained to help finance a corporate income tax rate cut .

president obama has included increased taxes on foreign source income in his budget outlines and , more recently , in his framework for business tax reform , as a revenue source for rate reduction .

because of various features in the current tax system , the u.s. tax system already bears a close resemblance , in terms of revenue collected , to a territorial tax .

tax on the income of foreign subsidiaries is deferred until repatriated ( paid as dividends to the u.s. parent ) and tax can be avoided by not repatriating income .

the system limits credits claimed for foreign taxes paid to u.s. tax on foreign income .

the limit , however , is on an overall basis , permitting unused credits from high - tax countries to shield income from low - tax countries , or income that bears little foreign tax , from being taxed in the united states .

because firms have flexibility in timing repatriations , the residual effective tax rate on foreign income is estimated at only 3.3% .

some types of income , such as royalties , are treated more favorably under the current system than they would be under a territorial tax .

economists have traditionally analyzed the foreign tax system in terms of economic efficiency .

economic theory tends to support , on efficiency grounds , a worldwide system in which income from u.s. investment earned abroad is subject to the same tax , or as close to the same tax as possible , as that on domestic investment .

it does not support a territorial tax , and most proposals in the past were to move closer to an effective worldwide tax ( see appendix ) .

at the same time , if such a change is not feasible , another question becomes whether moving to an explicit territorial tax would be better or worse than the present system .

the fundamental issues are the effects on disincentives to repatriate income , to what extent the revision will divert investment from the united states , the effects on artificial profit shifting , transition issues , administrative and compliance considerations , and the revenue consequences .

there is no single blueprint for a territorial tax and the answers to these questions depend , to some extent , on specific design choices .

this report first explains how the international tax system works and describes the magnitude and distribution of foreign source income and taxes .

the report then focuses on alternative features of a territorial tax and their consequences .

it also contains , in a final section , a brief discussion of options that move in the opposite direction and other alternatives that do not fit into either the territorial or worldwide approach ( such as current taxation of foreign source income but at a lower rate ) .

the current u.s. tax system is a hybrid .

it has some elements of a residence - based or worldwide tax , where income of a country's firms is taxed regardless of its location .

it also has some elements of a source based or territorial tax , where all income earned within a country is taxed only by that country regardless of the nationality of the firms .

the provisions that introduce territorial features are deferral and cross - crediting .

there are a number of complex interactions that will affect both the design of a territorial or other tax revision and the consequences of those changes .

before discussing the issues and consequences of reforms , it is useful to get a "lay of the land. .

how important are the various sources of foreign income , how much tax do they generate currently , and how much might they generate with various reforms ? .

because individual tax return data are not available , this issue can only be explored by combining aggregate data available and various analyses that have been done by researchers with access to tax returns .

this section discusses the current sources of foreign income , the potential magnitude of foreign income not reported , the sources of tax liability , and the potential size of foregone taxes due to deferral and cross - crediting .

several issues arise when considering moving from the present hybrid tax system to a territorial tax: the effect on repatriations , the effect on the location of real investment , the consequences for artificial profit shifting , transition , administrative and compliance issues , and the revenue consequences .

moving to a territorial tax goes far beyond a simple matter of exempting foreign source income from u.s. tax .

there are issues of transition , the treatment of current flow through income , and the retention and perhaps revision of anti - abuse rules .

in this section , three proposals are outlined: the grubert mutti proposal , the discussion draft provided by ways and means committee chairman , and senator enzi's bill , s. 2091 .

the latter two proposals are similar in general approach .

note that the grubert mutti proposal is a general outline , while the ways and means discussion draft and s. 2091 are in legislative language and are more detailed .

as noted in the prior discussion , there are alternatives to a territorial tax that could address issues associated with repatriation and profit shifting as effectively or perhaps more effectively than the territorial tax provisions .

these alternatives fall into three main groups: ending deferral and possibly limiting cross - crediting to move closer to a true worldwide system , reforming the existing system in more limited ways , particularly to address profit shifting , and a hybrid between ending deferral and a territorial tax , such as a minimum tax , which would eliminate the repatriation tax trigger .

by traditional theory all of these approaches would probably attract capital back to the united states and improve efficiency in the allocation of capital , although they may create a need to further address shifting of headquarters .

these proposals are summarized briefly .

many of them are addressed in more detail in other crs reports .

note that many of the same issues that arise with a territorial tax would need to be addressed in some cases , such as dealing with the transition , and dealing with operations outside of cfcs .

ending deferral , as shown in table 5 , is estimated to raise $18.4 billion in fy2014 .

a deferral option is also included in the cbo budget options study and is estimated to raise $11.1 billion in revenue in fy2014 .

the smaller revenue gain may reflect a provision that eliminates the current interest allocation provision for purposes of the foreign tax credit limit .

it would tax income of foreign subsidiaries , while allowing foreign tax credits as in current law .

current taxation would eliminate any disincentive to repatriate , and would also reduce the benefits and scope for profit shifting .

cross - crediting would still be available .

it would be more consistent with efficient resource allocation , although issues of shifting headquarters might need to be addressed further .

as with territorial tax proposals , transition issues would arise which could be addressed in a fashion similar to that in the ways and means discussion draft .

the revision would require the measurement of earnings under u.s. law , which could add complexity , although such measurement would also be needed for most base erosion measures as well .

as with the territorial tax , issues would arise in extending the treatment to 10 / 50 corporations that have a large u.s. shareholder but are not controlled by a group of large u.s. shareholders , since information on earnings may not be available .

this change would , however , permit the elimination of subpart f .

a greater level of taxation and a more effective provision to discourage artificial profit shifting , which would also eliminate disincentives to repatriate , is to combine ending deferral with a per country limit on foreign tax credits , preventing tax haven income from being shielded by foreign tax credits .

this proposal is part of s. 727 , the wyden and coats general tax reform plan , and is combined with a repatriation holiday similar to that enacted in 2004 .

this provision was estimated to raise $64.3 billion in fy2014 ( see table 5 ) .

this larger revenue gain aided in the reduction of the corporate tax rate in that bill to 24% .

this provision would require country - by - country measures of foreign taxes paid as well as income ( focusing on income earned within that country and not adjusting for intercompany dividends ) .

provisions would need to be enacted to prevent firms from using holding companies to avoid the per country limit and check the box and look through rules would probably need to be revised .

the president has made several proposals that address international tax issues .

the fy2013 budget outline contains several revisions which overall would raise $16.8 billion in fy2014 .

note that some of these are complex to explain , and are described in more detail in a treasury department document .

disallowing interest deductions of parent companies to the extent that income is deferred .

this provision is similar to the allocation proposal in grubert and mutti but confined to interest and affecting deferred income .

an earlier tax reform proposal by chairman rangel ( h.r .

3970 in the 110 th congress , 2007 ) would have allocated a broader range of deductions , not just interest .

this provision would reduce , although not eliminate , the disincentive to repatriate .

 ( $5.9 billion ) .

limiting foreign tax credits available to the same share of total credits as the overall share of income that is repatriated .

this approach would limit tax minimization by repatriating income to absorb foreign tax credits .

 ( $5.5 billion ) .

treating excess intangibles profits as u.s. income , the same provision as option a is the ways and means discussion draft , although the budget proposal does not specify the magnitude of the cost mark - up .

 ( $2.5 billion ) .

the proposal would also clarify some rules relating to the valuation of intangibles .

 ( $0.1 billion ) .

u.s. insurance companies can reduce taxes by purchasing reinsurance from foreign affiliates , with a deduction of the premiums by the u.s. firm but no tax on the income of the foreign affiliate .

this provision would disallow these deductions under certain circumstances .

 ( $0.2 billion ) .

stricter limits on interest deductions would apply to u.s. subsidiaries of firms that inverted ( moved their headquarters abroad ) prior to the anti - inversion rules adopted in 2004 .

 ( $0.4 billion ) .

foreign taxes paid in part to receive a benefit ( i.e. , the firm is paying a tax in a dual capacity ) would not be credited unless the income tax is generally imposed on the country's own residents as well as foreign persons .

the current rule does not require the tax to be imposed on the country's residents .

this provision typically relates to taxes being substituted for royalties in oil producing countries .

 ( $1.0 billion ) .

a codification of regulations that impose on a foreign corporation or nonresident alien tax on gain from a partnership interest to the extent the gain reflects property effectively connected with u.s. business .

 ( $0.2 billion ) .

a provision to prevent a foreign affiliate from avoiding characterization as a dividend by making the distribution through a related affiliate with limited earnings and profits , causing the distribution to adjust the cost basis of stock rather than create dividend income .

 ( $0.3 billion ) .

preventing foreign tax credits from offsetting tax on the gain from certain types of asset acquisitions .

 ( 0.1 billion ) .

a provision that prevents the reduction of earnings and profits without the reduction in foreign tax credits that can currently occur in some transactions .

 ( $20 million ) .

the administration also presented a framework for tax reform that mentioned five elements: the allocation of interest for deferred income ( first bullet point above ) , a tax on excess intangibles ( third bullet point ) , a minimum tax on foreign source income in low tax countries , disallowing a deduction for the cost of moving abroad and providing a 20% credit for costs of moving an operation from abroad to the united states .

the minimum tax on foreign source income , which would be a potentially important provision , is not discussed in detail .

a minimum tax that could be imposed in the framework of an effective territorial system is discussed below .

a variety of more limited ways of reducing or partially eliminating deferral include eliminating deferral for specified tax havens , eliminating deferral in countries with tax rates that are below the u.s. rate by a specified proportion , eliminating deferral for income from the production of goods that are in turn imported into the united states , eliminating deferral for income from the production of goods that are exported to any other country from the foreign location , and requiring a minimum payout share .

these provisions would partially achieve the goals of a general elimination of deferral .

another approach to addressing income shifting , whether in the current system or a revised territorial system , is through formula apportionment .

with formula apportionment , income would be allocated to different jurisdictions based on their shares of some combination of sales , assets , and employment .

this approach is used by many states in the united states and by the canadian provinces to allocate corporate income .

in the past , a three factor apportionment was used , but some states have moved to a sales based system .

studies have estimated a significant increase in taxes from adopting formula apportionment .

the ability of a formula apportionment system to address some of the problems of shifting income becomes problematic with intangible assets which , unlike production income , cannot be allocated based on tangible assets .

there is also a problem of coordinating with other countries so that income would not be double - taxed or never taxed .

using the basic territorial approach embodied in the ways and means draft discussion , it would be possible to generate a relatively straightforward hybrid approach , by a modification of base erosion option b to impose a simpler general minimum tax with no exceptions for active trade or business .

such a revision would technically begin with an elimination of deferral and per country foreign tax credit limit .

income , however , would be taxed at a lower tax rate .

this approach would avoid the incentives to shift to a slightly higher tax jurisdiction .

moreover , it would be simpler , because it would not require any measure of a specific type of income , would not require a measure of effective tax rate , and would not require a determination of the type of activity to allow an exception .

it would use u.s. rules for measurement of income , but would apply a lower statutory rate to taxable income .

foreign tax credits would need to be allowed on a country by country basis .

for example , suppose the statutory rate to be applied were half the u.s. rate , or given current rates , 17.5% .

in that case any income from a country with an effective tax rate on taxable income at that level ( and probably a lower effective rate overall ) would not be subject to u.s. tax .

such a tax regime would only affect tax havens and low tax jurisdictions .

an alternative would be to require income to be repatriated ( or deemed repatriated ) but subject some share of it to u.s. tax and exempt the rest .

an appropriate share of foreign tax credits would be disallowed .

for example , if half of income is taxed , the system would be 50% a territorial tax and 50% a world wide tax without deferral .

foreign tax credit limits could be allowed on an overall basis or country by country .

this approach bears some resemblance to the foreign tax credit pooling proposal in the president's budget except there is no discretion about repatriation .

comments made on the combining of a minimum tax with a territorial system suggested that the tax rate would be important , with two observers suggesting a rate of 20% , similar to the rate used by japan , and indicating that a 10% tax rate is too low .

both of these proposals would have the effect of eliminating the repatriation disincentive as well as reducing the incentive to shift profits ( or at least the cost ) .

unlike proposals to tax this income at full u.s. rates , such a minimum tax is less likely to shift income to other jurisdictions that have higher rates than the united states .

in any proposal aimed at tax havens , there is a possibility that the haven or low tax country would raise its taxes and capture some of the profits .

this problem is more significant with a minimum tax that it would be with full elimination of deferral , which would remove the incentive to profit shift altogether .

tax havens attracting other country's firms might be reluctant to raise taxes and it might be possible to deny credits for taxes that are increased for that purpose .

as this history indicates , most of the proposals made over the years , whether adopted or not , moved not toward a territorial tax and a reduction in taxation of foreign source income , but toward a worldwide tax and increased taxation .

deferral of tax on income from foreign incorporated subsidiaries dates from the earliest years of the income tax based reflecting legal principles of the time .

the earliest income tax allowed a deduction for foreign taxes , which was replaced by an unlimited credit in 1918 .

in 1921 an overall limit on the foreign tax credit .

similar to current law , was adopted .

beginning in 1932 , a per country limit was allowed or required , although regulations that sourced income to holding companies allowed firms to achieve overall limits on their own .

the per country limit was eliminated in 1976 , although income was sorted into passive and active baskets to prevent this type of cross - crediting .

a number of proposals for changing the system were made but were not ( or have not yet been ) adopted .

eliminating deferral was proposed by president kennedy and president carter .

the kennedy proposals led to the anti - abuse rules ( subpart f ) that tax passive and easily shifted income currently .

the burke hartke proposal in the 1970s would have repealed deferral and allowed a deduction rather than a credit for foreign taxes .

a per country limit was proposed by the reagan administration as part of the tax reform act of 1986 , but the legislation expanded the number of baskets from two to several instead .

the baskets were reduced to two again in legislation in 2004 .

the main consequence according to tax data , was to include income from financial services in the general basket .

legislative proposals which would have increased taxation of international income by allocating parent company expenses , such as interest , to deferred income and not allowing it as well as allowing overall foreign taxes to be considered proposals similar to those of president obama were included in tax reform legislation proposed by then ways and means committee chairman rangel in 2007 .

a predecessor to the wyden coats bill was the wyden gregg bill in the 111 th congress .

international tax provisions are discussed in detail , through 1989 , in william p. mcclure and herman b. bouma , "the taxation of foreign income from 1909 to 1989: how a tilted playing field developed," tax notes , june 19 , 1989 , pp .

1379 .

