in recent years , there has been significant congressional interest in compensation of the federal workforce .

the increased interest has been driven at least in part by the federal fiscal situation and in part by the state of the economy since the recession began in 2007 .

issues related to the compensation of federal employees often center on the pay differential between federal workers and their private sector counterparts .

for years , the annual president's pay agent ( ppa ) study , which is covered in greater detail later in this report , has shown a large wage penalty for federal workers compared to private sector workers in similar occupations .

a spate of recent studies , which use a different analytical approach and data sources , has partially contradicted the findings of the ppa study by concluding that at least some federal workers enjoy a wage premium over comparable private sector workers .

these studies and accompanying reporting on the comparison of compensation of federal workers to private sector workers provide an indication of the disparate findings , which makes it difficult to determine how compensation of federal employees actually compares to that of workers in the private sector .

this report attempts to clarify why the recent studies have arrived at different conclusions and examines limitations of the approaches employed in the different studies .

based on the review of studies considered in this report , it appears there is no single study that addresses the question of compensation comparability using a widely agreed - upon methodology .

that is not to say individual studies are not methodologically sound ( some are ) , but rather that the questions asked and the assumptions made are not necessarily the same across studies , which at times arrive at vastly different conclusions .

any modeling of the relationship between the compensation of federal and private sector workers involves making assumptions , which in turn influence the results .

some assumptions are conceptual ( eg , should "job security" count as a "benefit ? .

" ) , while others are empirical ( eg , what is the most appropriate model specification for the underlying data structure ? ) .

finally , there are data limitations that prevent , or at least seriously curtail , researchers from specifying models as fully as possible .

for example , there is not a dataset available at this time that allows an analyst to combine detailed characteristics of individual workers and detailed characteristics of jobs performed in the federal and private sectors .

there have been several attempts in recent years to address the issue of compensation between the federal workforce and the private - sector workforce .

in evaluating claims about federal pay , there appear to be two basic approaches to comparing compensation in the federal and private - sector workforces — the human capital approach and the jobs analysis approach .

these two approaches are not mutually exclusive but may be difficult to combine given data limitations .

in addition , the two approaches could even produce opposite results .

each approach is outlined below , followed by an examination of a few recent studies comparing federal and private sector compensation .

the studies reviewed were chosen because they are official government studies ( president's pay agent , congressional budget office ) or have received significant attention in policy debates .

the discussion above shows what the components of a study attempting to isolate the compensation effect of working for the federal government might include .

if every factor that affected compensation could be measured and observed , then the premium or penalty of working in the federal government could be quantified .

in reality , of course , it is not possible to observe , let alone measure , every factor affecting individual compensation .

the differences between the human capital studies ( cbo , american enterprise institute , heritage foundation ) and the jobs analysis study ( ppa ) make it difficult to compare easily across studies .

table 1 below , however , shows the main features of the five studies summarized in this report .

greater detail is provided below on the cbo and ppa studies .

as noted previously , to isolate the effect of sector — federal or private — on compensation , many other factors that influence compensation need to be considered ( i.e. , controlled for ) .

the data in table 2 show the different control variables in the compensation studies .

table 2 indicates the differences , and thus a large part of the reason for discrepant findings , between the human capital studies and the jobs analysis study .

the human capital studies control , to varying degrees , for educational attainment , certain demographic characteristics , firm size , residency , and occupation .

importantly , however , data limitations do not allow a great degree of precision in controlling for occupation or job responsibilities in the human capital studies ( see elaboration on this in " the congressional budget office " review below ) .

on the other hand , the ppa study , while not controlling for characteristics of individual workers , focuses in much greater detail than the human capital studies on the content of jobs .

the list of control variables in table 2 shows the numerous options that researchers have in designing a study to compare compensation across sectors and that different studies control to varying degrees for different variables .

controlling for educational attainment and experience are particularly important , given their impact on earnings .

as cbo notes in its study , educational attainment "plays a particularly large role" in explaining compensation differences and the compensation differentials vary greatly by individuals' education levels .

workers with higher levels of education tend to earn more ( both in the federal and private sectors ) and federal workers have more educational attainment , on average , than private sector workers .

similarly , controlling for occupation and firm size are important in making comparisons between the federal and private sector workforce .

there are many occupations in the federal government that have no , or limited , counterparts in the private sector , thus making it important to consider the types of jobs that workers in each sector are actually performing .

similarly , the federal government is not like most private sector firms — it is a large "employer. .

nearly all federal workers are employed at entities with at least 1,000 employees , while only about 40% of private sector workers are employed in firms of that size .

because employees of large firms tend to earn more than workers at small firms , firm size is an important control variable .

comparative compensation studies pose a range of challenges and choices .

as the review in this report has shown , there are multiple choices that researchers face even within the context of the two main frameworks of comparison — human capital models and jobs analysis models .

for example , researchers may choose to include or exclude control variables , such as educational attainment or experience .

in general , in a well - specified model , the more the researcher can ( or chooses to ) control for , the more the model might isolate the effect of employment sector on compensation .

in addition to choices about modeling , data limitations play a role in determining the robustness of comparisons .

for example , the human capital models rely on some version of the current population survey , which by design does not allow detailed comparisons of actual job responsibilities and characteristics .

on the other hand , the extensive occupational crosswalks used in the ppa do not , by design , include demographic characteristics of the individuals filling those jobs .

no two studies reviewed are perfectly comparable , making it difficult to neatly summarize the findings across studies .

of the five studies under review , one reports an overall average wage penalty for federal workers ( ppa ) , one reports neither an overall average wage premium nor a penalty for federal workers ( cbo ) , and three ( heritage , aei , and cato ) find overall average wage premia for federal workers compared to private sector workers .

only two of the studies — cbo and aei — report earnings differentials by level of educational attainment , however .

while the aei report shows a clear wage premium across levels of educational attainment , the more methodologically rigorous cbo study finds a more nuanced outcome .

that is , federal workers with less than a bachelor's degree have on average a wage premium compared to private sector counterparts , while federal workers with post - graduate educational attainment experience a wage penalty relative to private sector counterparts .

summarizing benefit differentials is more difficult than summarizing wage differentials because of the way different studies measure benefits and the assumptions required to make estimates .

unlike estimating wages , estimating benefits often requires integrating multiple data sources and making choices about what constitutes a "benefit. .

despite the greater uncertainty associated with estimating benefits , the largest differentials occur in this component of compensation .

of the three studies that attempt to estimate benefit differentials , all three find benefit premia for federal workers compared to private sector workers .

as with wage differentials , the cbo study finds a declining benefit premium as educational attainment rises .

that is , the benefit premium declines from 72% for federal workers with a high school degree or less to 2% for federal workers with a professional degree or doctorate .

the cbo study finds an average benefit differential of 48% for federal workers compared to private sector workers .

the heritage and aei studies do not report benefit premium by level of educational attainment , but both report a benefit premium for federal workers ( these two studies include different components in estimating "benefits," making a straightforward comparison difficult ) .

results from these studies provide useful information .

it is hoped that a review of their approaches is helpful in explaining and facilitating evaluation of competing findings related to the compensation of the federal workforce .

a few closing thoughts based upon this review are presented below: arguably , there is no "average" employee in the federal or private sector .

the range of worker and job characteristics is sufficiently broad across sectors that claims about "average" workers generally conceal much of the variation driving differences in compensation .

for purposes of policy , the most informative studies show variation in compensation differentials by some control variables , particularly by some measure of human capital ( eg , education ) or detailed occupation .

benefit comparisons are more difficult to model than wage comparisons .

while estimates of wages are relatively straightforward ( and available from the cps and other data sources ) , data on benefits are less available and require assumptions on the part of researchers .

for example , placing an average value on employer - subsidized health insurance requires assumptions about the coverage of the insurance , which may not be readily available .

likewise , placing a value on "job security" requires difficult - to - quantify assumptions about preferences of individual workers ( eg , risk aversion , job commitment ) .

benefit differentials tend to be the largest component of compensation differentials that are identified across the reviewed studies , and they are more difficult to interpret because they are measured in less precise ways than wages .

the existence of a wage gap does not necessarily indicate a premium or penalty that is attributable to an observed and measureable characteristic , such as sector of employment .

rather , there are unobservable characteristics that can legitimately influence wages and that may drive differences between workers in different sectors .

in the literature on the pay gap between men and women , for example , researchers have encountered difficulty measuring potential explanatory factors such as discrimination , level of investment in careers , and preferences for certain types of work .

in all of the reviewed studies , findings are presented as federal compensation compared to private sector compensation , with the implicit or explicit assumption that federal pay should match private sector pay .

the assumption that private sector pay is "correct" because it is determined by "market forces" is a conceptual assumption rather than an empirical reality .

benchmark comparisons are useful but the assumption underlying these studies is that compensation in the federal sector is either too high or too low compared to this benchmark .

an alternative assumption , which is generally not present in the studies , might be that private sector pay may need to be altered to be in line with federal compensation in some instances .

in fields such as finance and law , where private sector compensation can vastly exceed public sector compensation , the private sector benchmark may not consistently be the "right" figure in those areas .

additionally , there may be some types of work , involving specialized technical knowledge , where consistency of service and longer tenures are valued and perhaps worthy of a premium .

some federal occupations have no clear private benchmark .

this reality makes it unclear what the finding of a compensation premium or penalty for such occupations compared to the private sector means .

similarly , in some occupational areas ( eg , intelligence , regulatory ) , the federal government is the major employer and must attract workers in a competitive environment ; in these occupational areas , a private benchmark may not be informative .

across the board adjustments to compensation of federal employees may have unintended consequences .

findings in the cbo study , in particular , demonstrate the wide compensation differentials that exist across human capital characteristics .

adjustments that are made uniformly may narrow differences between some federal and private sector workers but widen differences for other workers .

this could have the possible effect , for example , of making it more difficult to attract higher - skilled workers into the federal government if an across - the - board compensation adjustment caused higher - skilled , higher - paid workers to lose ground relative to their private sector counterparts .

