the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) is the primary federal program that supports workforce development .

wia includes four main titles: title i — workforce investment systems — provides job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals .

title i programs , which are primarily administered through the employment and training administration ( eta ) of the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , include three state formula grant programs , multiple national programs , job corps , and demonstration programs .

in addition , title i authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated ; title ii — adult education and literacy — provides education services to assist adults in improving their literacy and completing secondary education ; title iii — workforce investment - related activities — amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 to integrate the u.s. employment service ( es ) into the one - stop system established by wia ; and title iv — rehabilitation act amendments of 1998 — amends the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which provides employment - related services to individuals with disabilities .

the authorizations for appropriations for most programs under the workforce investment act ( wia ) of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) expired at the end of fiscal year ( fy ) 2003 .

since that time , wia programs have been funded through the annual appropriations process .

in the 108 th and 109 th congresses , bills to reauthorize wia were passed in both the house and the senate ; however , no further action was taken .

in the 112 th congress , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) released discussion drafts in june 2011 of legislation to amend and reauthorize wia .

while markup of this legislation was scheduled , it was ultimately postponed indefinitely .

no legislation has been introduced .

the house committee on education and the workforce , however , has ordered reported h.r .

4297 — the workforce investment improvement act of 2012 .

this bill was introduced on march 29 , 2012 , by representative virginia foxx of north carolina , the chair of the subcommittee on higher education and workforce training , ( for herself , representative howard p. "buck" mckeon of california , and representative joseph heck of nevada ) .

a legislative hearing on h.r .

4297 was held before the full committee on education and the workforce on april 17 , 2012 .

on june 7 , 2012 , the committee , after considering 23 amendments to h.r .

4297 , ordered the bill reported by a vote of 23 to 15 .

this report summarizes each of the wia titles and highlights the major features of h.r .

4297 pertaining to each title .

the report also compares the proposed provisions of h.r .

4297 to current law in the following tables: table 1 .

major provisions of title i .

this table covers provisions governing the "workforce investment systems" that provide for , among other things , state formula grants , state and local planning procedures , and the establishment of the one - stop delivery system .

wia established the one - stop delivery system as a way to co - locate and coordinate the activities of multiple employment programs for adults , youth , and various targeted subpopulations .

the delivery of these services occurs primarily through more than 3,000 career centers nationwide .

table 2 .

major provisions of title ii .

this table covers provisions for adult education and literacy activities .

table 3 .

major provisions of title iii .

this table covers changes to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which was also amended in title iii of wia .

wagner - peyser provides authorization for the employment service .

table 4 .

major provisions of title iv of wia and title v of h.r .

4297 .

this table addresses amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 , in particular to the vocational rehabilitation and other employment - related provisions of that act , which authorizes various employment services for individuals with disabilities .

title i of the workforce investment act — workforce investment systems — authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated .

title i also authorizes funding for the three major state formula grant programs ( adult , youth , and dislocated worker ) , job corps ( a dol - administered program for low - income youth ) , and several other national programs that are directed toward subpopulations with barriers to employment ( eg , native americans ) .

h.r .

4297 takes a fundamentally different approach from current law to the federal role in the delivery of workforce development services by consolidating multiple programs into a single block grant that is allocated to states by formula .

at the same time , h.r .

4297 maintains the one - stop delivery system as the delivery mechanism for employment and training services .

the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) is the current law that authorizes funds supporting programs related to basic education ( i.e. , instruction at the secondary school level and below ) for individuals who are beyond school age , not enrolled in school , and lacking a high school diploma or equivalent .

the program also funds educational services for english learners .

the largest portion of aefla funds are grants to states that are subsequently allotted to local entities that conduct educational programs .

h.r .

4297 reauthorizes title ii programs through 2018 .

it limits the annual authorized appropriation level to fy2012 levels and changes several aefla provisions to emphasize the relationship between adult education and employment .

aefla is also amended to align with the new wia performance indicators .

title iii of the workforce investment act — workforce investment - related activities — makes amendments to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 ( 29 u.s.c .

49 et seq .

 ) , which authorizes the employment service ( es ) .

the es is the central component of most states' one - stop delivery systems , as es services are universally accessible to job seekers and employers and es offices may not exist outside of the one - stop delivery system .

although the es is one of the required partners in the one - stop delivery system , its central mission — to facilitate the match between individuals seeking work and employers seeking workers — makes it critical to the functioning of the workforce development system under wia .

title iii adds section 15 ( "employment statistics" ) to wagner - peyser , which requires the secretary of labor to develop , provide , and improve various types of labor market information .

h.r .

4297 repeals sections 1-14 , which authorize the employment service .

funding from the es is consolidated into the new workforce investment fund .

the rehabilitation act , as amended , authorizes grants to support programs related to employment and independent living for individuals with disabilities .

most programs under the rehabilitation act are administered by the rehabilitation services administration ( rsa ) of the department of education ( ed ) .

in fy2012 , the vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) grants to the states program accounted for the majority of the funds that were appropriated under the rehabilitation act .

vr is a mandatory one - stop partner program .

title v of h.r .

4297 reauthorizes the vr grants to the states program through fy2018 and limits authorization to the prior year's appropriation plus an increase equal to inflation .

it also increases emphasis on students transitioning out of school by requiring state plans to address how they will serve this population and requiring that 10% of each state's federal allotments be set aside for services to transitioning students .

h.r .

4297 also repeals several smaller programs that were authorized under the rehabilitation act .

