the federal government generally supports the open publication of unclassified , federally funded research results .

it does so because wide dissemination may drive innovation , job creation , technology development , and the advance of science .

many federal grants and contracts supporting scientific research urge the publication of research results .

only in cases where security concerns rise to the level of classification does the federal government bar publication of fundamental research .

this current federal policy , established in national security decision directive 189 , is that fundamental research results should be widely available , and that in the rare case where it is necessary to restrict access , classification is the appropriate mechanism .

advances in technology that have lowered technical barriers in modern biological sciences , making it easier for people , including potential adversaries , to reproduce biological experiments raise questions whether the use of classification as the standard for determining the tradeoff between dissemination and security .

recent events regarding influenza research serve as a case study of the challenges the federal government faces in balancing funding scientific discovery with limiting security concerns .

in late 2011 , two groups of researchers receiving federal funding separately sought to publish manuscripts in scientific journals describing their successful attempts to increase the transmissibility of a highly pathogenic strain of influenza .

this strain of influenza , h5n1 , is sometimes referred to as avian or bird flu in the popular press .

it causes severe disease in humans , but is not highly contagious between humans .

the federal government moved first to restrict publication of the manuscripts .

following additional discussions and deliberations , the federal government recommended publishing modified versions of the manuscripts .

some stakeholders believe the research results should not have been published .

they assert that broad dissemination of such research results increases the likelihood that a highly contagious form of the virus will be introduced , either accidently or deliberately , into the human population .

others state that the public health benefits from such research outweigh concerns regarding malicious use .

the h5n1 influenza research case study highlights the general tensions among stakeholders and the ramifications of various federal actions and policies .

the controversy surrounding the decisions to publish these manuscripts highlights deficiencies in the federal decision - making processes related to dual - use life science research .

in addition , the debate about the publication of scientific research with potential security implications cuts across multiple policy issues .

these include federal support of research , maintenance of homeland security , and the flow of research information , and may require simultaneous consideration of security , science , health , export , and international policy .

because of the complexity of these issues , analysis according to one set of policy priorities may adversely affect other policy priorities .

in addition , the controversy surrounding the decision to publish these experiments has demonstrated flaws in the existing mechanisms to identify and balance the potential public benefits and security trade - offs .

congress has acted in the past to restrict access to pathogens where it deemed the potential risk of their misuse posed a greater threat than the benefits arising from unrestricted access .

congressional policymakers may decide that research results in some areas pose similar risks and may move to impose similar limits through a variety of mechanisms .

conversely , congressional policymakers may determine the risks of information exchange insufficient to warrant additional regulation .

this report describes the underlying controversy , the potential benefits and harms of publishing these manuscripts , the actions taken by domestic and international stakeholders , and options to improve the way research is handled to minimize security concerns .

the ongoing controversy regarding the appropriateness of funding research on ( and publishing the results of ) h5n1 influenza transmissibility serves as a case study for the broader challenges of balancing the potential benefits and potential harms from such research .

this section outlines the presence of h5n1 influenza in nature ; describes and discusses the transmissibility experiments that led to the current policy debate ; outlines the potential benefits and harms arising from the conduct and publication of such research ; and outlines the various recommendations and actions from various governmental and non - governmental stakeholders .

the h5n1 influenza research case study highlights the general tensions among stakeholders and the ramifications of various federal actions and policies .

the controversy surrounding the decisions to publish these manuscripts highlights deficiencies in the federal decision - making processes related to dual - use life science research .

congressional policymakers may face many issues when considering research with potential security risks , especially in the life sciences .

these issues include the appropriate federal government role in overseeing , funding , and publishing dual - use research activities .

congressional policymakers have a variety of options before them .

they may decide that the current policy framework serves as a good starting point and allow the executive branch to further develop and implement the proposed policies .

alternatively congressional policymakers might increase oversight activities and direct the administration , either through hearings , report language , or legislation , to take specific actions to address scientific or security concerns .

policymakers faced with assessing dual - use issues are particularly challenged by the multi - disciplinary nature of dual - use activities .

dual - use issues cut across traditional policy areas , involving simultaneous consideration of security , scientific , health , export , and international policy .

because of the complexity of dual - use issues , analysis of a topic according to one set of policy priorities may lead to unforeseen complications due to its intersection with other policy priorities .

for example , maximizing security may lead to detriments in public health and scientific advancement , while maximizing scientific advancement may lead to security risks .

accounting for such trade - offs may allow policymakers to establish regulatory frameworks that more effectively maximize the benefits from dual - use research while mitigating its potential risks .

