"toxic" drywall , formaldehyde emissions , mold , asbestos , lead - based paint , radon , pcbs in caulk , and many other indoor pollution problems have concerned scientists , federal policy makers , and regulators during the last 30 years .

some problems have been resolved , others remain of concern , and new indoor pollution problems continually emerge , often unexpectedly .

because people spend a high percentage of their time indoors , and concentrations of pollutants often are higher in indoor air than outdoors , the human health risks indoors generally can be greater relative to risks from exposure to pollutants in the ambient ( i.e. , outdoor ) air .

in 1987 , indoor air quality was identified by epa scientists as one of the greatest sources of environmental risk to human health .

epa's science advisory board , an independent body of experts , reviewed and endorsed this comparative risk ranking and in 1990 called upon the agency to give a higher priority to funding such high - risk environmental problems .

in 1997 , the presidential and congressional commission on risk assessment and risk management again considered the relative risks presented by various environmental problems and concluded that indoor pollution could pose a substantial public health risk .

in 2011 , a report by the institute of medicine warned that many indoor air quality problems might get worse if adaptations to climate change are made without better information and programs aimed at pollution prevention .

for example , methods to make homes better insulated and more energy efficient may result in less circulation with outdoor air , potentially increasing indoor concentrations of pollutants unless effective filtration or treatment technologies can be incorporated .

this report describes common indoor pollutants , discusses federal statutes that have been used to address indoor pollution , and analyzes key issues surrounding some general policy options for federal policy makers .

the focus is on indoor chemical contaminants , rather than on temperature , humidity , or pollution from animals , fungal or bacterial organisms , or plant pests .

indoor pollutants are chemicals that are potentially harmful to people and may be found in the habitable portions of buildings , including homes , schools , offices , factories , and other public gathering places .

indoor pollutants are many and varied .

many exposures may be through indoor ai r .

some substances , like lead or ozone , are also ambient ( outdoor ) air pollutants .

others , like formaldehyde or asbestos , may be found either indoors or out , but are most often of concern when found at unhealthful concentrations indoors .

indoor pollutants may be natural ( for example , carbon monoxide or radon ) or synthetic ( such as polychlorinated biphenyls [pcbs] ) , may originate indoors or outdoors , and may be deliberately produced , naturally occurring , or inadvertent byproducts of human activities .

people may be exposed to indoor contaminants in the air , tap water , or dust by inhalation , skin contact , or mouth .

some examples of common indoor pollutants are discussed below .

no federal agency has broad statutory authority concerning pollution indoors .

on the other hand , numerous federal agencies ( at least 23 in spring 2012 ) have some authority to conduct research or to control particular indoor pollutants , sources of pollution , or environmental quality in particular structures .

for example , the epa has some authority under the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) to address asbestos in schools ; building standards , testing , and research related to radon ; and lead - based paint hazards in housing .

key agencies and authorizing statutes are briefly described below .

for more information about the authorities and activities of federal agencies with respect to indoor air quality , see epa's 1989 report to congress on indoor air quality , volume 2 , chapter 8 .

for additional background information about the research conducted by federal agencies , see the 1999 report by the u.s. general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) , indoor pollution: status of federal research activities , gao - rced - 99-254 .

a more recent summary of federal research and development and outreach activities related to indoor environments is available in report of the surgeon general's workshop on healthy indoor environment , january 12-13 , 2005 .

information is also available on agency websites .

for direct links to some agencies' indoor environmental quality programs , visit http: / / www.epa.gov / iaq / ciaq / members.html .

numerous agencies have contributed to federal efforts to understand and control indoor environmental quality .

given the diverse nature of pollutants and indoor environments , the number of contributing agencies may not be surprising .

however , some analysts have questioned the overall adequacy and efficacy of federal initiatives .

others would prefer a smaller or more focused role for the federal government in addressing indoor pollution , given fiscal limitations or a view that indoor pollution problems might be more amenable to state or local remedies .

these issues , the adequacy and efficacy of existing federal actions and the proper role of federal programs relative to state and local programs , are discussed below .

many options are available to congress with respect to indoor pollution .

options range from maintenance of the status quo to expansion or reduction of federal involvement in research , information dissemination , financial incentives , or regulation .

some policy makers might prefer to do nothing new , leaving the current statutory directives and authorities described above and associated appropriation levels intact and allowing federal agencies to continue to implement their programs as they have in the past .

this approach has the advantages of familiarity and predictability as well as experienced personnel to carry out federal programs .

it would entail no new resources .

congress might choose this alternative if it finds that the programs are adequate to address any potential or acknowledged indoor pollution problems .

on the other hand , any inadequacies or inefficiencies in the current system would be expected to persist .

if congress wants help in understanding whether or not there is a need for current or additional federal programs addressing indoor environments , it might want to form a blue ribbon panel of scientists or stakeholders to examine the state of knowledge about indoor environments and pollutants and how they currently are regulated .

a report could form the basis of future oversight hearings and perhaps also legislation .

a third avenue might be to better coordinate current levels of federal involvement , as recommended by the 1997 presidential and congressional commission on risk assessment and risk management .

the commission recommended legislation that would mandate a coordinated strategy by epa , cpsc , osha , and other federal agencies to address the issue , noting that while outdoor air pollution is extensively regulated , "many problems in offices , public buildings , and homes remain relatively unrecognized and unaddressed. .

the commission observed that a more effective and coordinated approach to dealing with this issue was unlikely to emerge without a mandate from the congress .

alternatively , congress might conclude that enough already is known about the potential risks of indoor pollutants and that current knowledge justifies reducing federal support for , and conduct of , research and other programs .

this option may be appealing if congress finds that the issue does not merit current efforts or that activities would be better coordinated and conducted by local or state government personnel or by the private sector .

the advantages of reduced involvement would be the reduced costs to tax payers , fewer mandates to state and local governments , and possibly reduced distortion of the marketplace for building materials ( if such exists ) , which might be a more efficient guide to consumer preferences for new products and services .

disadvantages might include reduced research and therefore less knowledge as a basis for the design , implementation , and evaluation of agency programs .

depending on where cuts were made , agencies might become less effective at developing or disseminating information , coordinating with other agencies , or regulating indoor environments .

or , to the degree that states , universities , and others may spend more to replace federal efforts , duplicative or inefficient efforts could result in lower cost - effectiveness and possibly a greater use of societal resources .

however , if congress also curtailed federal activities and funding for controlling indoor environments , any inefficiencies due to reduced knowledge might be proportionately less significant .

if congress ended all federal activities aimed at understanding or controlling indoor environments , any public health impacts of exposure to known ( eg , smoke or carbon monoxide contamination of indoor air ) or undiscovered pollutants would remain , or even be exacerbated: employees and visitors to federal buildings would be exposed to pollutants , and workers might be subject to potentially harmful conditions in commercial establishments if state and local governments did not retain their own programs .

the latter result may seem unlikely , given the traditional role of many state and local governments , but indoor environmental controls at the state level are quite variable .

another path might involve a search for specific federal activities that could be eliminated or reduced .

congress could examine current programs in oversight hearings or ask a panel of experts to inform the process by providing a report to congress .

legislative action could follow to reduce authority or funding for initiatives that congress found to be redundant or relatively unimportant .

this approach might be able to save money while sacrificing little or no public health benefit .

other possible paths for congress would involve some commitment to increasing the federal role , perhaps as proposed in h.r .

1066 , discussed above .

an advantage of an increased federal role might be an increased consistency across states in housing or building codes , or in regulation of consumer products .

interstate consistency could facilitate interstate commerce and reduce some obstacles to business development .

building construction and maintenance might be simplified if guidance and regulations were standardized .

on the other hand , increased guidance or regulation might impose a burden on businesses that currently operate in a less regulated environment .

alternatively , an increased role could be effected simply through budgetary actions , perhaps focused on research and information dissemination initiatives .

according to some , federal funding for indoor pollution - related research is disproportionately small relative to the costs that indoor pollution imposes on individuals and society , according to estimates of these costs by epa and other federal and private sector researchers .

items considered in cost calculations include medical treatment and reduced productivity due to workers' absences when ill and impaired performance on the job due to exposure to indoor pollution .

researchers at doe's lawrence berkeley national laboratory estimated these costs to the united states in the tens of billions of dollars and productivity gains that might be achieved at a similarly high level .

for example , nationwide savings and productivity gains from reduced respiratory disease have been estimated at between $6 billion and $19 billion annually .

from reduced allergies and asthma , a subset of respiratory diseases , such savings and gains have been estimated at between $1 billion and $4 billion annually .

from reductions in the health symptoms that are associated with sick building syndrome , such savings and productivity gains have been estimated at between $10 and $20 billion annually .

finally , from direct improvements in workers' performance that are unrelated to health ( because indoor environmental factors can affect comfort and productivity without producing discernible health effects ) estimates of productivity gains have been put at between $12 billion and $125 billion annually .

according to the doe scientists , a comparison of the potential economic benefits of improving indoor environments with the costs of achieving such improvements suggests that benefits exceed costs by a very large factor .

thus , public health and the national economy might benefit from an increased federal role , particularly if increased funding for research and dissemination prompted states to improve indoor environmental quality .

however , there is considerable uncertainty about the effectiveness of expanded federal research and the cost estimates in the referenced analysis .

