congress addresses numerous water issues annually .

issues range from responding to natural disasters , such as droughts and floods , to improving the nation's water resource and water quality infrastructure , and protecting fish , wildlife , and other aquatic resources .

many congressional committees address these issues and are involved in legislating , funding , and overseeing the water - related activities of numerous federal agencies .

more than two centuries of such involvement have resulted in a complex web of federal activities related to water .

as a result , congress often faces challenges related to overlap and gaps in federal water resource activities and in coordination and consistency among federal programs .

further , many federal authorities are discretionary or funded by discretionary appropriations .

consequently , there can be a significant difference between what federal agencies are authorized to do and what they are doing , and no one committee in congress oversees this dichotomy .

the responsibility for development , management , protection , and allocation of the nation's water resources is spread among federal , state , local , tribal , and private interests .

despite multiple calls for the coordination of federal water - related activities , observers seldom focus on the origins of laws and policies authorizing myriad federal activities .

the purpose of this report is to provide insight into the congressional involvement in establishing , overseeing , and funding federal water - related activities .

thus , the report focuses on the complexity of federal activities related to water .

it aims to serve as a guide to federal water - related activities , including the administering agency ( or agencies ) , the primary or overarching authorities for such activities , and house and senate committee jurisdictions .

in most cases , the primary authorities listed are authorizing statutes and accompanying u.s. code citations ; in some instances , constitutional or other authorities are provided .

this analysis does not cover every aspect of federal water policy .

instead , the authors have attempted to address the major federal activities authorized by congress that affect water resource development , management , protection , and use in the united states .

similarly , this analysis does not cover every aspect of house and senate committee jurisdiction affecting water issues .

for definitive evaluation of committee jurisdictions related to water , the views of the house and senate parliamentarian offices are official .

lastly , programs known to have expired and for which reauthorization legislation is pending may be noted ; however , given the breadth of the report and constant executive and legislative branch activity , it is not possible to provide comprehensive status reports for all entries .

historically , the federal government played a large role in development of the nation's water resources — in particular constructing large water resource infrastructure projects ( eg , canals , locks , levees , and dams ) — for navigation , flood damage reduction , and irrigation water supply in the west .

the largest federal dams typically serve multiple purposes , including those noted above , as well as producing hydropower and providing water supplies for municipal and industrial uses .

more recently , congress has authorized activities and programs to augment water supplies via water conservation programs , including groundwater recharge ( aquifer storage and recovery ) , and water reclamation and reuse programs , including desalination .

this section focuses on federal activities related to water resource development , management , and use and includes three tables: table 1 lists activities related to water supply and reservoir development and includes topic areas such as dams and dam safety ; general water supply development ; groundwater supply ; irrigation assistance ; rural water supply ; water conservation ; and water reclamation , reuse and desalination .

table 2 lists activities related to drought and flood management and includes topic areas such as drought planning , mitigation , and response ; emergency flood response ; flood damage reduction ; and flood mitigation .

table 3 lists activities related to hydropower and navigation and includes topic areas such as federal hydropower development ; nonfederal hydropower development ; and navigation .

federal efforts to protect and improve water quality and water resources range from technical and financial assistance programs to help communities build sewage treatment and drinking water treatment works , to regulatory programs for preventing or controlling water pollution .

most federal programs focus on surface water quality , while states have a dominant role in matters related to groundwater protection .

one exception is where congress has authorized epa to regulate the underground injection of fluids to protect underground sources of drinking water .

in addition to protecting and improving water quality , congress has enacted numerous bills to manage , protect , and restore aquatic ecosystems — including estuaries , and wetlands .

over the last 30 years , the united states has provided billions of dollars toward restoring some specific large aquatic ecosystems such as the chesapeake bay , the california bay - delta , the everglades , and the great lakes .

these ecosystems cover large areas and affect millions of people .

ecosystem restoration in a policy context has gone beyond just restoring the natural environment , and now encompasses other objectives such as improving water supply and conveyance , improving navigation , managing natural resources , and implementing watershed management plans .

ecosystem restoration legislation can be intricate and involve several agencies , and therefore involve multiple committees .

fisheries management and oversight of aquaculture also involve many committees .

generally , congress has acted where interstate issues arose ( eg , pollution of rivers ) , where significant gaps in protection existed among the states ( drinking water quality ) , where funding needs were related to federal mandates ( various water infrastructure funding programs ) , or where other national interests were perceived ( eg , conservation of agricultural lands and fisheries , and preservation of wild and scenic rivers ) .

this section focuses on federal activities related to water quality in general , and regional aquatic resource protection and restoration efforts .

the section includes two tables: table 4 lists activities related to surface water quality , drinking water quality , groundwater quality , source water protection , nonpoint source pollution , and wastewater and drinking water quality infrastructure .

table 5 lists activities related to aquaculture , aquatic ecosystem protection and restoration , coastal zones and estuaries , fisheries , invasive species , wetlands , and wild and scenic rivers .

although water rights and allocation traditionally are issues that are regulated by states , the federal government retains significant authority related to federal water resources management and federal water rights .

congress has broad authority under the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution to regulate interstate waterways and promote navigation throughout the nation's waterways .

accordingly , though rarely exercised , congress may allocate interstate waters directly .

alternatively , congress may defer to states to reach an agreement ( i.e. , interstate compact ) on the allocation of water in an interstate dispute , but congress generally must provide its consent to such a compact before it may take effect .

congress also has provided for the establishment of river basin commissions , which typically include representatives from basin states and any relevant federal agencies .

in 1908 , the u.s. supreme court recognized the creation of federal reserved water rights .

the court explained that when congress creates an indian reservation , it also implicitly reserves the water necessary to fulfill the purposes for which the reservation was established .

these rights , sometimes referred to as tribal water rights , are often senior to other water users' rights but typically are not quantified , which may lead to extensive litigation between tribes and other water users or settlement agreements that must be approved by congress .

the court later held that the principle of reserved rights extended not only to reservations for tribal land but also to reservations for other federal purposes , including national forests , wildlife refuges , national parks , wild and scenic rivers , etc .

thus , congressional proposals to make additions to these systems implicate federal authority related to water resources .

many federal laws also indirectly affect water allocation and use .

for example , the development of dam and diversion facilities over time has favored certain purposes or uses over others .

such development has sometimes resulted in unintended consequences , including in some cases , over allocation of water supplies .

implementation of laws aimed at addressing water quality and threatened and endangered species ( eg , the federal clean water act and endangered species act ) may indirectly or directly affect water allocation .

however , because such laws — like many other federal laws — are primarily related to federal project operations , they are not included in this section .

table 6 lists activities related to water allocation and includes such topic areas as water allocation generally and river basin commissions .

table 7 lists activities related to water rights and includes such topic areas as federal reserved water rights and tribal water rights .

federal water research and planning authorities are spread across numerous federal agencies , and the congressional committees with oversight roles and responsibilities are also numerous .

this division derives in part from the distinct roles that water plays in relation to each of these agencies' missions and the committees' jurisdictions .

the evolution of federal water research authorities and planning activities generally mirrors the development of the water - related agencies and authorities discussed in earlier sections of this report .

federal water research and planning began largely to support the development of navigation , flood control , and storage of water for irrigation .

the 1960s saw federal research and planning expand to include reducing pollution problems .

efforts to coordinate water research and planning in the 1960s and 1970s were undertaken as part of broader efforts to coordinate federal water activities .

administrations of the 1980's and 1990's asserted a more limited federal role in water research and planning .

federal water planning was scaled back primarily to support federal projects and activities .

federal research funds were focused on topics closely connected to helping federal agencies meet their missions and to address problems beyond the scope of the states and private sector .

one result has been that federal research in recent decades has principally supported regulatory activities ( eg , water quality research and monitoring of aquatic ecosystem and species ) , while federal research promoting economic growth through water development has decreased .

in the last two decades , new technologies and data ( eg , water - related satellite and radar data ) and concerns ( eg , climate trends , species decline , ecosystem health ) have prompted both the involvement of new agencies and programs in federal water research and the expansion of authorities and topics covered by traditional water agencies .

this section focuses on federal authorities related to water research and planning and includes two tables: table 8 lists authorities related to general water research ; research on use , supply augmentation , efficiency , and engineering works ; monitoring , data , and mapping ; water resource assessments ; water cycle , drought , and climate change ; and water quality and treatment .

table 9 lists authorities related to planning for water development projects , watersheds , and water quality .

while these two tables are not exhaustive , they represent the cross - section of federal research and planning authorities .

appendix a .

committee jurisdiction determining committee jurisdiction committee jurisdiction is determined by a variety of factors .

paramount are house rule x and senate rule xxv , which designate the subject matter within the purview of each standing committee .

house rule x and senate rule xxv , however , are both broadly written and the product of an era in which governmental activity was not as extensive , and relations among policies not as common or intertwined as now .

due to topic omissions and a lack of clarity , as well as overlaps among committees in areas of jurisdiction , the formal provision of the rules is supplemented by an intricate series of precedents and informal agreements governing the referral of legislation .

in general , once a measure has been referred to a given committee , it remains the responsibility of that committee ; if the measure is enacted into law , amendments to the law are presumed to be within the originating committee's responsibility .

relatedly , bills which are more comprehensive than the measure they amend or supersede are presumed to be within the jurisdiction of the committee reporting the more comprehensive measure .

the resultant accretions of subject responsibility greatly broaden the range or shift the scope of jurisdictional subjects assigned to each committee .

several other factors also should be considered in determining committee jurisdiction , although these are not formal or even acknowledged in rules or precedents .

these factors may include the expertise of a measure's sponsor , the timing of a bill , or the appropriations subcommittee that considers appropriations requests for the program authorized .

subcommittees are not officially authorized in either the rules of the house or the senate .

subcommittees are creatures of the full committee that established them .

accordingly , determining official subcommittee jurisdictions is imprecise .

therefore , although some information regarding subcommittee jurisdiction is included in appendix b and appendix c , information on subcommittee jurisdiction is not uniformly provided in this report .

the subcommittees listed in appendix b and appendix c reflect the framework established for the 115 th congress .

house referral in 1974 , with the adoption of the committee reform amendments , the house authorized the speaker to refer measures to more than one committee , in a joint , split , or sequential manner .

in 1995 , with the rules changes adopted in the 104 th congress , the speaker could no longer refer measures jointly ; he was authorized instead to designate a primary committee .

split and sequential referrals were still allowed .

further , the speaker could impose time limitations on any committee receiving a referral .

in 2003 , with the rules changes adopted in the 108 th congress , the speaker was authorized to refer measures to more than one committee without designation of a primary committee under "exceptional circumstances. .

senate referral a measure introduced in the senate , or passed by the house and sent to the senate , will likely be referred to a senate committee .

measures are referred to senate committees in accordance with their official jurisdictions in senate rule xxv , and precedents established by prior referrals .

a series of formal agreements among committees over time also can supplement rule xxv , and generally are regarded as setting precedent for future referrals .

ad hoc agreements may be made to govern the consideration of particular measures , but these are not binding on future referrals .

referral of measures is formally the responsibility of the presiding officer of the senate , but in practice the senate parliamentarian advises on bill referrals .

under senate rule xvii , in general each measure is referred to a single committee based on "the subject matter which predominates" in the legislation .

predominance usually is determined by the extent to which a measure deals with a subject .

however , there appear to be exceptions ; most notably , a measure containing revenue provisions is likely to be referred to the committee on finance , even where the subject does not appear to predominate .

individual jurisdictional issues this section briefly discusses an example of water issues that are either within the jurisdiction of more than one committee or contested among committees .

if the issue is clearly within the purview of one panel , it is not addressed in this section .

jurisdiction over dams and land necessary for their development house rule x identifies several committees to which bills authorizing federal dam construction might be referred .

the natural resources committee has jurisdiction over "irrigation and reclamation , including water supply for reclamation projects , and easements of public lands for irrigation projects , and acquisition of private lands when necessary to complete irrigation projects. .

as such , it has jurisdiction over most activities of the bureau of reclamation ( department of the interior ) .

the committee on transportation and infrastructure is responsible for "flood control and improvement of rivers and harbors ... public works for the benefit of navigation , including bridges and dams ( other than international bridges and dams ) ... water power. .

consequently , most activities of the army corps of engineers fall under the jurisdiction of the house transportation and infrastructure committee .

the committee on agriculture has jurisdiction over "water conservation related to activities of the department of agriculture. .

senate rule xxv also identifies several committees for which bills authorizing federal dam construction might be referred .

the energy and natural resources committee has jurisdiction over "hydroelectric power , irrigation , and reclamation projects," and , hence , most activities of the bureau of reclamation ; whereas , the environment and public works committee ( epw ) has jurisdiction over "public works , bridges , and dams" and "flood control. .

consequently , epw has jurisdiction over most activities of the army corps of engineers .

additionally , the agriculture , nutrition and forestry committee has jurisdiction over "soil conservation ... food from fresh waters ... rural development , rural electrification , and watersheds. .

as is shown in table 1 , multiple committees in each chamber are principally involved in jurisdiction over dams , which is not readily apparent from perusal of the rules language alone .

private dams must be licensed by the federal energy regulatory commission , which is under the jurisdiction of the house energy and commerce and the senate energy and natural resources committees .

further , several different executive branch departments and agencies are responsible for implementing the laws under the jurisdiction of these committees .

this arrangement complicates management of river systems and resources comprising large watershed areas where multiple federal dams are present , such as the columbia and colorado river basins , and the sacramento and san joaquin rivers' delta confluence with san francisco bay , and even smaller systems , especially where anadromous fisheries ( fish that live in both freshwater and marine environments ) are found .

appendix b .

house rule x language table b - 1 includes official excerpts from house rule x .

appendix c. senate rule xxv language table c - 1 includes official excerpts from senate rule xxv .

appendix d. glossary of abbreviation .

