despite the prominence of the u.s. - japan alliance in america's overall strategic posture in the asia - pacific region , local concerns about the u.s. military presence on okinawa have challenged the management of the alliance for decades .

in recent years , okinawan resistance has crystallized around the relocation of a u.s. marine corps air station .

the japanese islands serve as the most significant forward - operating platform for the u.s. military in the region .

with the united states pledging to rebalance its defense posture towards asia , the uncertainty surrounding the medium and long - term presence of american forces on okinawa remains a critical concern for national security decision - makers .

many regional analysts have posed the question of whether this issue is at its core simply a dispute over real estate , or if the controversy threatens the fundamental sustainability of the alliance .

some okinawans contend that the u.s. military presence on the island constitutes a form of discrimination by washington and tokyo and the suppression of local democratic expression .

the relocation of marine corps air station futenma ( mcas futenma ) is the largest and most problematic part of a broad overhaul of the stationing of u.s. forces in japan .

a 2006 agreement between the u.s. and japanese governments to relocate the futenma base from its current location in the crowded city of ginowan to camp schwab in henoko , a less congested part of the island , was envisioned as the centerpiece of a planned realignment of u.s. forces .

the anticipated air station is often referred to as the futenma replacement facility ( frf ) .

the arrangement was designed to reduce the local community's burden of hosting a loud air base that has generated safety concerns and , eventually , to return control of the futenma land to local authorities as a way to boost economic development in the area .

in addition , the relocation would have triggered the transfer of roughly 8,000 marines and their dependents from japan to new facilities in guam .

japan agreed to pay around 60% of the costs , then estimated at $10.3 billion .

the agreement was struck at a moment when the bilateral relationship was strong , but implementation has been a struggle , due largely to political turmoil in tokyo and resistance in okinawa .

in the watershed 2009 elections , the democratic party of japan ( dpj ) defeated the liberal democratic party ( ldp ) , which had held power nearly continuously since the mid - 1950s .

incoming dpj prime minister yukio hatoyama had pledged in his campaign to close mcas futenma and remove its functions from okinawa .

during hatoyama's term , he examined a number of possible options for resolving the futenma conundrum but ultimately discarded them and came to support the henoko frf site .

since then , successive prime ministers have endorsed the 2006 plan , but many okinawans now insist on closure of futenma and relocation outside the prefecture .

in addition , the u.s. congress raised major concerns about the ballooning costs of moving the marines to guam and for several years blocked funds dedicated to the marine corps realignment .

in april 2012 , the united states and japan officially adjusted the policy by "de - linking" the transfer of marines to guam with progress on the new base in the henoko area of camp schwab .

the announcement also stipulated that arrangements to return some land used by u.s. forces would not be contingent on the base relocation .

as under the previous plan , about 9,000 u.s. marines are slated be transferred to locations outside of japan: 5,000 marines to guam , 1,500 to hawaii , and 2,500 on a rotational basis to australia .

alliance officials described the move as in line with their goal of making u.s. force posture in asia "more geographically distributed , operationally resilient , and politically sustainable. .

in december 2013 , then - governor of okinawa prefecture , hirokazu nakaima , contradicted his campaign pledges and approved the central government's request to create a large landfill offshore of camp schwab at the cape henoko site , effectively approving construction of the frf .

prime minister shinzo abe promised to accommodate the governor's requests for a large financial support package , early closure of the mcas futenma and makiminato service area ( see figure 1 ) , and re - negotiation of certain privileges for u.s. military personnel .

the apparent determination of abe to follow through on the relocation of futenma , coupled with abe's strong political foundation for remaining in office , also may have been a major factor in nakaima's decision .

in the november 2014 okinawa gubernatorial election , the incumbent governor hirokazu nakaima lost to his former political ally , who ran on a platform opposing construction of the futenma replacement facility ( frf ) .

the new governor , takeshi onaga , a former member of the conservative ldp , built a broad political coalition of liberals and conservatives by emphasizing his opposition to the base relocation .

since taking office , governor onaga has pursued a multi - pronged approach to halt construction of the frf and dissuade tokyo and washington from proceeding with their plan ( see section " governor onaga's multi - pronged struggle against futenma relocation " ) .

his political stance has reenergized the anti - base movement on okinawa and renewed the political contestation over the u.s. military presence on okinawa and the fate of the futenma base .

onaga has declared his intent to use all the legal and administrative authorities at his disposal to prevent the construction of the frf .

the okinawa prefectural government and the central government have initiated legal proceedings against each other , and observers expect that the byzantine process of rulings , suspensions , lawsuits , and counter - suits could continue for a year or more .

observers believe that it is highly likely that the central government eventually will be able to override governor onaga's objections , but the administrative and legal processes could create significant delays for the project and dredge up doubts about the viability of the frf plan .

okinawa's location has become more strategically important over the past few decades .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

in the post - world war ii environment , japan's northern islands were seen as a bulwark to contain the soviet union's pacific fleet .

post - cold war security threats include the potential flashpoints of the korean peninsula and the taiwan strait , but more recent assertiveness by the chinese people's liberation army navy ( plan ) in the south china sea and east china sea has drawn growing attention from department of defense ( dod ) planners .

the u.s. military presence in japan , and particularly okinawa , allows it to fulfill its obligations under the 1960 treaty of mutual cooperation and security to not only defend japan but to maintain security in the asia - pacific region .

the forward - deployed presence of the u.s. air force and navy also allows for response to humanitarian disasters in the region , as demonstrated by the rapid u.s. assistance after the march 2011 earthquake and tsunami in northeastern japan and after the november 2013 super - typhoon in the philippines .

the deployment of mv - 22 "osprey" tilt - rotor aircraft to okinawa reportedly has enhanced the operational capability of the marines based there , because mv - 22s have a greater range and faster cruising speed than the helicopters they replaced .

the intensification of the territorial dispute between japan and china over small islands in the east china sea has provided another rationale for the approximately 19,000 marines stationed on okinawa .

the main island of okinawa is only 270 nautical miles from the disputed islets , called senkaku in japan , diaoyu in china , and diaoyutai in taiwan .

the potential role of u.s. marines in defending and / or retaking uninhabited islands from a hypothetical invasion force is unclear , but the operational capabilities of the okinawa - based marines are aligned with the needs of such a mission .

although most strategists agree on the importance of okinawa's location for u.s. security interests in east asia , there is less consensus on the particular number of marines necessary to maintain stability .

for example , two prominent analysts suggested a rethinking of u.s. military basing in light of cuts to the u.s. defense budget and okinawan obstacles ; they argue that leaving a force of 5,000-10,000 marines on okinawa while also pre - positioning supply vessels in japanese waters and bringing most of the marines home to california would amply serve u.s. rapid response and deterrence needs .

defense officials continue to assert the need for substantial numbers of u.s. marines to be positioned in asia , but have offered a degree of flexibility in their exact location ; current plans would deploy marines on a rotational basis through guam and australia .

congressional concerns , as discussed below , have focused on cost and implementation , but have not argued that the marine presence itself is unnecessary .

one negative aspect of okinawa's proximity to the asian continent is its vulnerability to missile attack .

harvard university professor and former defense official joseph nye observed in an interview in december 2014 , "fixed bases are still of value .

but with the increase in chinese ballistic missile capabilities , it means you have to be aware of their vulnerability , and if you put all your eggs in one basket , you are increasing your risks. .

reducing the vulnerability of u.s. military facilities to air and missile attack , often referred to as "hardening," has become a central theme for congress when considering priorities for overseas military construction .

the attitudes of native okinawans toward u.s. military bases are generally characterized as negative , reflecting a tumultuous history and complex relationships with "mainland" japan and with the united states .

okinawans are ethnically distinct from most japanese , which may heighten a sense of discrimination .

the ryukyu island chain , once a semi - autonomous kingdom ruled from okinawa , was first officially incorporated into the japanese state around the time of the meiji restoration in the late 19 th century .

these southern islands were largely neglected by the japanese central government until world war ii , when they became bloody battlegrounds in the final stages of the "island - hopping" campaign waged by the u.s. military .

the battle of okinawa from early april through mid - june 1945 resulted in the deaths of up to 100,000 japanese soldiers and 40,000-100,000 civilians , many of whom were forced by the imperial japanese army to commit mass suicide .

a total of 12,281 americans were killed , the highest total of any battle in the pacific campaign .

many okinawans remember these few months as a dark episode in a long history of the japanese central government sacrificing okinawa for the good of the mainland .

the united states maintained possession of the ryukyu islands in the peace settlement ending world war ii .

the u.s. military appropriated existing japanese military installations on okinawa and built several more large bases on the strategically located island .

the united states paid locals for the acquired land , but in some cases this purchase reportedly involved deception or outright coercion , using bulldozers and bayonets to evict unwilling residents .

during the period of american administration , okinawans had no political authority or legal redress for crimes committed by servicemembers — though the worst crimes were prosecuted through court martial .

the korean war and vietnam war eras brought an influx of thousands of additional u.s. soldiers and added grievances to local residents , along with a major increase in revenue for businesses catering to gis .

after the reversion of okinawa to japanese sovereignty in 1972 , the pattern of crimes by american servicemembers abated , but was nevertheless a major concern for the local population .

the japanese central government took measures to placate okinawans , for example by increasing the rent paid to owners of land on u.s. military bases and by prosecuting eligible crimes in japanese courts .

despite these steps and increased funds for prefectural development , many okinawans continue to perceive themselves as the victims of policies drafted in tokyo and washington with little regard for their communities .

attempts to make the u.s. presence in okinawa more sustainable have been underway for years .

as mentioned in the previous section , the 1996 saco arrangement included measures "to realign , consolidate and reduce u.s. facilities and areas , and adjust operational procedures of u.s. forces in okinawa consistent with their respective obligations under the treaty of mutual cooperation and security and other related agreements. .

the 1996 saco final report mandated the release to okinawa of thousands of acres of land that had been used by the u.s. military since world war ii , including mcas futenma .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

although the work was slated to be completed within a year , political gridlock and local resistance prevented significant progress on the agreement , a pattern that would repeat itself on a range of okinawa basing issues in subsequent years .

efforts to adjust the u.s. military presence in japan were given new impetus in 2002 by the defense policy review initiative ( dpri ) , a bilateral initiative to enhance the u.s. - japan security alliance .

through the dpri talks , the united states and japan reviewed u.s. force posture , examined opportunities for practical cooperation , and developed common strategic objectives .

the 2005 security consultative committee ( scc ) joint statement listed 19 areas for alliance transformation , such as improving interoperability , shared use of military and civilian facilities in japan , and cooperation on ballistic missile defense .

the 2005 statement endorsed the realignment of u.s. marines from okinawa to guam and the relocation of futenma air station operations to a new base on the shoreline of cape henoko .

the implementation plan for the dpri is laid out in the may 2006 "u.s. - japan roadmap for realignment implementation," a document that was endorsed in three subsequent scc joint statements .

the roadmap established the "linkages" that had been a central point of debate until 2012: ( 1 ) that the third marine expeditionary force ( iii mef ) relocation from okinawa to guam was dependent on "tangible progress toward completion" of the henoko base at camp schwab and japanese financial contribution to the development of facilities on guam ; and ( 2 ) that land return for areas south of kadena air base was dependent upon completion of the relocation of iii mef personnel and dependents from futenma to the frf and guam .

in april 2012 , washington and tokyo signed an agreement that endorsed the henoko frf but removed the linkage between construction of a new facility and relocation of the marines to guam .

since the u.s. and japanese governments first agreed to relocate mcas futenma in the 1990s , outside experts have proposed several alternative plans .

some proposals have called for a similar runway in another part of okinawa prefecture .

other concepts would entail building a large heliport , instead of the offshore runways , on an existing u.s. base .

one option that periodically has received serious attention is to integrate the functions of mcas futenma into the large kadena air base on okinawa .

there have also been proposals to construct a wholly offshore facility , either floating or supported by stilts .

according to reports , the u.s. and japanese governments considered many of these alternatives before settling on the current henoko frf plan as the best option .

in the postwar period , alliance security arrangements largely have been negotiated between political - military elites in washington and tokyo , often ignoring local concerns .

even as democratic practices deepened and the anti - base movement became more empowered , many leaders in tokyo were unable or unwilling to invest enough political capital to reduce the strains of hosting foreign troops on okinawans .

contemporary politics surrounding basing issues in japan are complex and ever - shifting and involve politicians from local village wards up to the prime minister's office .

in 2009 and 2010 , prime minister hatoyama's involvement in the futenma controversy elevated the issue to a major u.s. - japan point of contention and , some assert , may have irrevocably shifted the political landscape in okinawa by raising and then dashing the hopes of the anti - base movement .

however , his liberal democratic party ( ldp ) predecessors had made little progress in decades of trying to resolve the fundamental challenges of the u.s. military presence on okinawa .

the abe government appeared to have broken this stalemate by wielding unprecedented pressure and inducements in late 2013 to win over key okinawan politicians .

however , okinawan citizens in late 2014 voted out nakaima , who had approved the landfill permit for the frf , and turned out in large numbers to support the new governor , takeshi onaga , at an anti - base rally in early 2015 .

in the past few years , congress has exercised its oversight function on the military realignment initiatives in japan and related movement to guam .

members of the senate armed services committee in particular have voiced doubts about the viability of the marine corps realignment , questioned witnesses closely about the defense department's plans in the asia - pacific in a series of hearings , sent letters to the secretary of defense outlining their reservations , and inserted specific provisions into legislation to ensure that the executive branch heeds their concerns .

in general , members of the house armed services committee have been more supportive of the marine corps realignment and more willing to fund initial components without a complete master plan .

as tokyo and washington have struggled to overcome paralysis on the agreement , the problematic base at the center of the controversy has remained operational but in need of repair and maintenance .

in recognition of the pressing repair needs , u.s. and japanese government officials committed to "contribute mutually to necessary refurbishment projects" at mcas futenma in the joint statement issued by the bilateral security consultative committee in april 2012 .

although these projects are vital to continued operations at futenma , okinawans may interpret the repairs as a sign that the united states and japan do not intend to fulfill their goal of closing the base .

the joint consolidation plan for okinawa released by the u.s. and japanese governments in april 2013 states that futenma will be turned over to local authorities no earlier than 2022 .

the base is located within a dense urban area , surrounded by schools and other facilities that are subjected to the high noise levels that accompany an active military training site .

 ( see figure 4 . ) .

a new equipment accident or serious crime committed by a u.s. servicemember could galvanize further okinawan opposition to the u.s. military presence on the island .

the u.s. marine corps replaced the 24 ch - 46e "sea knight" helicopters stationed at the futenma base with 24 mv - 22 "osprey" tilt - rotor aircraft in 2012 and 2013 .

the deployment of the first 12 osprey aircraft to japan in mid - 2012 caused a public outcry in okinawa and mainland base - hosting communities .

japanese politicians and civil society groups opposed introduction of the mv - 22 to japan due to the aircraft's safety record .

however , the arrival of the second batch of 12 ospreys in 2013 was greeted by substantially smaller protests in okinawa .

observers warn that a crash involving an mv - 22 osprey on okinawa could galvanize the anti - base movement and create serious problems for the alliance .

the crash of another model of helicopter , an hh - 60g pave hawk , on a u.s. training area in okinawa in august 2013 renewed the sense of danger among okinawans , but it did not spark widespread demonstrations .

