the supreme court decided four search and seizure cases during its october 2012 term .

florida v. jardines involved the question of "[w]hether a trained narcotics - detection dog's sniff at the front door of a suspected [marijuana] grow house is a fourth amendment search. .

florida v. harris related to whether an alert by a trained drug - detection dog is sufficient to establish probable cause for a search of a vehicle .

bailey v. united states concerned the question of whether "the detention of an individual who has just left premises to be searched under warrant is permissible when the individual is detained out of view of the house as soon as possible. .

missouri v. mcneely addressed whether "the natural metabolization of alcohol in the bloodstream presents a per se exigency that justifies an exception to the fourth amendment's warrant requirement for nonconsensual blood testing in all drunk - driving cases. .

is a dog sniff at the front door of a suspected grow house by a trained narcotics - detection dog a fourth amendment search requiring probable cause ? .

last term in jones , five justices declared that a fourth amendment "search" occurs when "the government obtains information by physically intruding on a constitutionally protected area. .

this term , the court declared that a search occurs when the police obtain information on the basis of the performance of a drug - sniffing dog on the front porch of a private house .

although the answer might seem something of a departure from the court's past treatment of dog sniffing cases , those cases relied upon the "expectation of privacy rationale" rather than the alternative jones "property intrusion" rationale .

has the florida supreme court decided an important question in a way that conflicts with established fourth amendment precedent of the u.s. supreme court by holding that an alert by a well - trained narcotics - detection dog certified to detect illegal contraband is insufficient to establish probable cause to search a vehicle ? .

the florida supreme court's jardines decision was perhaps not surprising in light of its earlier decision in harris .

it refused to accept a trained drug - detection dog's positive reaction as per se probable cause in harris .

instead , it listed a host of criteria under which a trained dog's alert might be considered probable cause .

neither the per se standard nor the florida court's list seemed consistent with the "totality of the circumstances" standard that the united states supreme court had favored .

whether , under michigan v. summers , 452 u.s. 692 , 705 ( 1981 ) , the detention of an individual who has just left the premises to be searched under warrant is permissible when the individual is detained out of view of the house as soon as practicable .

the fourth amendment prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures .

searches and seizures are presumptively unreasonable , unless they are conducted pursuant to a warrant issued by a neutral magistrate upon a sworn showing of probable cause .

nevertheless , there are circumstances under which authorities enjoy limited authority to detain an individual without a warrant and with less than probable cause to believe the individual has committed a crime .

one such instance occurs when officers seek to execute a search warrant .

then , said the supreme court in michigan v. summer , "a warrant to search for contraband founded on probable cause implicitly carries with it the limited authority to detain the occupants of the premises while a proper search is conducted. .

some of the lower federal courts had permitted detention only within the letter of the summers rule ; others had permitted detention consistent with what they considered its spirit .

the supreme court granted certiorari in bailey to consider the question , and held that under the summers rule the occupants must be taken into custody in the immediate vicinity of the premises to be searched .

whether the natural metabolization of alcohol in the bloodstream presents a per se exigency that justifies an exception to the fourth amendment's warrant requirement for nonconsensual blood testing in all drunk - driving cases .

the fourth amendment insists that in most instances officials secure a search warrant before they search a person's house , papers , effects , or person .

there are exceptions .

the supreme court recognized one such exception in schmerber v. california , a case that involved a warrantless blood test ordered for a drunk driving suspect .

later state courts were unable to agree on whether the rate at which alcohol disappears from the blood alone constitutes exception or whether other factors must be considered .

the police stopped tyler mcneely for speeding and driving erratically .

he admitted he had been drinking .

he smelled of alcohol .

he slurred his speech , and he performed poorly on the roadside sobriety tests .

after mcneely refused to take a breathalyzer test , the officer transported mcneely to the hospital for a blood test .

no effort was made to secure a search warrant , although the officer knew that the necessary prosecutor and magistrate were both available .

the test showed that mcneely's blood alcohol level was well above the legal limit , and he was charged with driving while intoxicated .

the trial court granted mcneely's motion to suppress the results of the blood test .

the state appealed .

the missouri supreme court refused to accept a per se exception to the fourth amendment's warrant requirements .

it held that the officer had violated mcneely's fourth amendment rights when he ordered the blood test without first obtaining a warrant .

the supreme court granted certiorari to resolve the split among the state courts .

the united states supreme court agreed with the missouri supreme court in a 5-4 decision in which only justice thomas would have endorsed a per se rule .

three members of the court who dissented and concurred in part — chief justice roberts , justices breyer and alito — would have endorsed a per se rule as long as there was insufficient time to obtain a search warrant before conducting the blood test .

the majority went no further than to reject a per se rule .

justice sotomayor , the author of the opinion for the court , explained that the general rule that a search can only be executed pursuant to a warrant is particularly compelling when the search involves an intrusion upon bodily integrity .

nevertheless , the rule yields to exceptions when it encounters certain emergency circumstances .

one such exception exists when compliance with the warrant requirement would result in loss of the evidence that the warrant seeks .

the existence of this "destruction of the evidence" exception , however , can only be determined on a case - by - case basis , taking into account all the relevant facts presented in a specific case .

so it was in schmerber .

first , the "evidence could have been lost because 'the percentage of alcohol in the blood begins to diminish shortly after drinking stops , as the body functions to eliminate it from the system.' .

yet in addition in that case , because "'time had to be taken to bring the [injured] accused to the hospital and to investigate the scene of the accident , there was no time to seek out a magistrate and secure a warrant.' .

consistent with its understanding of schmerber , the court held "that in drunk - driving investigations , the natural dissipation of alcohol in the bloodstream does not constitute an exigency in every case sufficient to justify conducting a blood test without a warrant. .

four of the justices who joined in the majority — justices sotomayor , scalia , ginsburg and kagan — would have specifically rebutted , in the name of the court , arguments raised by the dissenters .

nevertheless , justice kennedy , upon whose concurrence the majority depended , would go no further than to reject a per se exception .

