this report answers several common questions regarding the london interbank offer rate ( libor ) , an index representing prevailing interest rates in london money markets .

recently , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) and the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) reached settlements with barclays , in which the british bank admitted submitting false responses to the survey used to calculate libor and the euro interbank offer rate ( euribor ) to manipulate the indexes .

american policymakers have a number of concerns , including the possibility that american banks that participate in the libor survey may also have attempted to manipulate the index , the effect that changes in libor can have on borrowers and lenders whose contracts reference libor to determine the interest rate of a loan , and the reliance of policymakers on libor as one of the indicators of the stability of the financial system .

for brevity and ease of exposition , this report focuses on libor , although the manipulation and policy issues regarding euribor are similar .

libor is an index that measures the cost of funds to large global banks operating in london financial markets or with london - based counterparties .

the british bankers' association ( bba ) , a private trade association , constructs libor , and thomson reuters publishes it worldwide .

each day , the bba surveys a panel of banks , asking the question , "at what rate could you borrow funds , were you to do so by asking for and then accepting inter - bank offers in a reasonable market size just prior to 11 am ? .

the bba throws out the highest and lowest portion of the responses , and averages the remaining middle .

the average is reported at 11:30 a.m. libor is actually a set of indexes .

there are separate libor rates reported for 15 different maturities ( length of time to repay a debt ) for each of 10 currencies .

the shortest maturity is overnight , the longest is one year .

in the united states , many private contracts reference the three - month dollar libor , which is the index resulting from asking the panel what rate they would pay to borrow dollars for three months .

the panel surveyed to construct the dollar libor is made up of the 18 banks listed in table 1 .

the u.s. banks on the dollar panel include bank of america , citibank , and jpmorgan chase , although all of the listed banks have significant u.s. activities .

for the dollar libor , the highest 4 and lowest 4 responses of the 18 banks on the panel are thrown out , and the middle 10 are averaged .

the panel of banks for the libor for each currency is chosen according to a published set of criteria .

market share in london and in transactions of various maturities for the currency are important factors .

the committee also considers a firm's reputation and expertise in transactions in a currency .

banks can apply to be participants in the libor survey , and the number of reporting banks has changed occasionally .

similar indexes are reported for other locations by other banking associations .

for example , there is a euribor for europe , and a tibor for tokyo .

a primary difference between these other indexes and libor is that they measure the cost of borrowing funds in these other locations , for various maturities , in various currencies .

the sponsoring organizations and the methodologies may vary slightly from place to place , but the public reporting and the ability of third parties to reference the indexes are similar .

the libor index is used in many ways .

many private loan contracts use libor as a benchmark ; for example , the interest rate on a mortgage , student loan , or car loan may be set to libor plus a few percentage points .

many financial derivatives , such as an interest rate swap , compare a fixed interest rate to libor ( because libor is capable of varying from day to day ) .

futures exchanges use libor for contracts traded in the market .

policymakers use libor as one element in even more complex indexes , such as the ted spread ( treasury - eurodollar ) , used to assess the level of stress in financial markets .

private parties are not legally required to use libor ( or any other index ) as a benchmark ; instead , they choose to do so voluntarily .

conceptually , a lender setting the interest rate for a future loan might try to take into account what its cost of funds will be when the loan actually has to be issued .

a lender knows that permanent surveys like libor will be published on the future date on which a loan is to be offered .

the contract could specify that on the future date , the borrower will be given the loan with an interest rate based on the index value of libor reported on that day .

because libor is meant to represent the cost of borrowing dollars by the largest banks in global financial markets , other lenders may choose libor if they believe that their own cost of funds is likely to follow a similar pattern over time .

alternatives to libor for private contracts exist , but may have shortcomings .

differences in the type of borrower or the maturity of the loan may make other benchmarks less suitable for some purposes .

for example , lenders could choose to use the yield on u.s. treasury securities as a benchmark .

however , the recent financial crisis served as a reminder that the borrowing costs of banks do not always trend in the same direction as the borrowing costs of the u.s. government .

or , banks could use the federal funds rate as a benchmark , but that rate is subject to changes for policy reasons , not just market conditions .

the rate charged on interbank repurchase agreements in new york money markets could be an alternative , although repurchase agreements may be more analogous to collateralized debt under some circumstances .

the appropriate alternative is likely to vary with the types of loans or the types of financial derivatives being benchmarked .

the value of loans , derivatives , and other financial instruments that reference libor is very large .

one estimate by staff of the federal reserve bank of cleveland found that 45% of prime adjustable rate mortgages ( arms ) and 80% of subprime arms used libor as the benchmark .

a financial adviser to municipalities stated that about 75% of municipalities have some contracts tied to the index .

because the bba throws out the highest and lowest survey responses , some people may think that a single bank on a libor reporting panel cannot affect the final index .

a single bank can affect the index , but will not always be able to move the index in the direction it wants , or may not be able to move the index at all , under some circumstances .

it is possible for a single bank on the panel to affect the dollar libor if the bank's response would have been within the middle of the responses , or if it can change which responses are the middle responses .

an illustrative example follows .

recall that the dollar libor panel is made up of 18 banks , with only the responses of the middle 10 being averaged .

suppose that 4 banks report an interest rate of 3% , the next 10 banks report an interest rate of 8% , and 4 banks report an interest rate of 10% .

the dollar libor would be calculated by throwing out all of the 3% and 10% responses because the calculation throws out the highest and lowest 4 responses .

in this example , the remaining 10 responses are all 8% , so the average would be 80 / 10 = 8% .

libor would be reported at 8% .

however , if a bank that would have reported 10% wants to lower the libor , and the bank lowers its bid from 10% to below 8% ( for the sake of this example , assume the response is changed to 2% ) , the average will change , even though the bank's response is still thrown out .

why ? .

because one of the 8% responses is now among the highest 4 responses , and one of the 3% responses is in the middle 10 .

the average is now 75 / 10=7.5% .

in this example , a single bank could move the index from 8% to 7.5% .

if the bank exaggerates its lie , perhaps by reporting 1% instead of 2% , the libor remains 7.5% in this example .

thus , it is possible for a single bank to affect libor under some circumstances , but there is a limit on the magnitude of the effect .

in some cases , the actions of a single bank will not move the index .

in the above example , if the bank that would honestly report a 10% response wanted to increase the libor index instead of lowering it , a change in the bank's own response would not achieve the desired manipulation because it would not change the value of any of the middle responses , nor would it change the responses comprising the middle .

why ? .

because reporting 12% instead of 10% still leaves the same 10 responses in the middle to be averaged .

in this example , libor remains 8% .

barclays has admitted submitting false survey responses to manipulate libor .

because libor is used in u.s. derivatives markets participated in by barclays , an attempt to manipulate libor is an attempt to manipulate u.s. derivatives markets , and thus a violation of u.s. law .

barclays has settled separately with united kingdom officials for violating uk law .

focusing on u.s. issues , the following describes barclays' admissions with the cftc and doj .

the material in this section is drawn from the statement of facts in appendix a of the settlement documents .

the settlement documents signed by barclays with the cftc and doj include employee emails that can be divided into three categories documenting manipulation: ( 1 ) changing the survey response for the benefit of barclays' derivatives trade positions , ( 2 ) changing the survey response to protect barclays' reputation , and ( 3 ) attempting to induce other banks to change their survey responses .

the first two categories , barclays acting alone , can affect libor under some circumstances , but the methodology of libor's calculation limits the magnitude of any impact of a single bank submitting a false bid .

the third category , collusion , can have an impact of greater magnitude , but the settlement documents report only barclays' attempts to reach out to other panel responders .

like any large and complex global bank , derivatives trades make up only one part of barclays' balance sheet .

libor survey responders are supposed to be from the firm's treasury office , or other general office , and kept separate from derivatives traders .

during 2005-2007 , barclays' internal emails reveal derivatives traders asking other employees to submit false survey responses to benefit their trading positions .

in one particularly telling email exchange , a survey responder says that he or she was happy to help , and the trader thanks the individual .

unlike many other divisions within barclays , the derivatives traders' preferred libor outcome changes direction from day to day ; that is , on some days the derivatives traders prefer libor to be high to benefit their position while on other days the traders prefer libor to be low .

many other lines of business have only one preferred direction ; for example , units of barclays that pay interest will consistently prefer the libor index to be low .

in the settlement , barclays admits that it submitted false survey responses ( both too high and too low ) during the 2005-2007 period .

when global financial markets came under increasing stress during 2008 , barclays' management preferred that barclays lower its responses to protect the firm's reputation .

barclay's managers said that they did not want barclays' "head to be above the parapet," lest it be shot at .

as financial turmoil increased throughout that year , large complex banks like barclays were having increasing difficulty in raising funds .

at times , barclays' responses tended to be higher than other responders , drawing the attention of uk officials .

uk financial regulators raised concerns with barclays .

if barclays' libor survey responses were significantly higher than those of other libor panel responders , then global investors might take that as a sign of weakness at barclays .

individual submissions are made public in part to promote transparency of the index .

upon hearing that uk officials raised concerns with barclays' management that the firm's responses were high , some barclays employees concluded that uk officials wanted barclays to submit lower libor responses , a conclusion that the managers who met with uk officials have said was not warranted .

unlike the 2005-2007 period during which barclays submitted false responses in both directions , barclays consistently under - reported its cost of funds in 2008 .

the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) reportedly raised concerns with barclays about its libor responses .

reportedly , the frbny also raised concerns with uk regulators and the bba about the methodology for the libor index .

in response to congressional inquiries , frbny has posted several documents that reveal its concerns with libor as it was being calculated and reported in 2008 .

included among the documents are explanatory note ; april 11 , 2008: marketsource weekly market review ; may 6 , 2008: slide deck of presentation to u.s. treasury , "recent developments in short - term funding markets" ; may 20 , 2008: marketsource report "recent concerns regarding libor's credibility" ; june 1 , 2008: timothy f. geithner e - mail to mervyn king , copying paul tucker , with attached "recommendations for enhancing the credibility of libor" ; june 3 , 2008: mervyn king e - mail to timothy f. geithner ; and june 5 , 2008: slide deck of presentation to the interagency financial markets group meeting , "market concerns regarding libor. .

