high winds , especially when combined with precipitation from seasonal storms , can cause damage to electricity utility systems , resulting in service interruptions to large numbers of electricity customers .

while most such power outages are caused by damage from trees and tree limbs falling on local electricity distribution lines and poles , major power outages tend to be caused by damage to electricity transmission lines , which carry bulk power long distances .

depending on the severity of the storm and resulting impairment , power outages can last a few hours or extend to periods of several days .

this in turn can have real economic effects , as power outages can impact businesses ( primarily through lost orders and damage to perishable goods and inventories ) , and manufacturers ( mainly through downtime and lost production , or equipment damage ) .

potential issues for congress concern the resiliency of the electric power system , and whether the economic impacts of storm - related power outages require additional measures to be undertaken by the federal government in mitigating storm - related outages .

congress has already recognized the importance of the reliable operation of the bulk power system with the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) authorization of an electric reliability organization ( ero ) .

this report will focus on the impacts of sustained power outages as might result from the result of seasonal storms , and whether there is a role for the federal government in hastening the restoration of power from weather - related outages .

electric power is generated and sent over transmission lines to substations which reduce the voltage levels for distribution to end - use customers , as shown in figure 1 .

the network of cables enabling electric power to be sent to customers generally exists in an exterior or "above ground" environment largely exposed to the elements .

as such , power outages can result from seasonal storms which often combine the furies of wind , rain , snow , or ice .

the more severe weather events usually cause the greatest damage to electric power transmission and distribution infrastructure as damage can result from trees or branches falling on electricity lines .

while data on storm - related power outages exist , they are not generally considered to be complete or well - characterized with regard to the cause of the outage event .

it has been estimated that 90% of customer outage - minutes are due to events which affect local distribution systems .

however , the remaining 10% stem from generation and transmission problems , which can cause wider - scale outages affecting larger numbers of customers .

power outages can impact electricity consumers primarily through property loss and business disruption .

this can result in lost orders , and damage to perishable goods and inventories for businesses .

power outages can critically affect manufacturing operations mainly through downtime as workers are idled , and potentially damage equipment and production processes .

the loss of electricity can also disrupt many other electric power - dependent activities sometimes taken for granted ( such as traffic control ) which can result in further economic impacts .

a study in 2001 by the electric power research institute ( epri ) estimated the costs to the economy of power disturbances .

the study found that three sectors of the economy were particularly vulnerable to power outages: the digital economy ( de ) .

this sector includes firms that rely heavily on data storage and retrieval , data processing , or research and development operations .

specific industries include telecommunications , data storage and retrieval services ( including collocation facilities or internet hotels ) , biotechnology , electronics manufacturing , and the financial industry .

continuous process manufacturing ( cpm ) .

this sector includes manufacturing facilities that continuously feed raw materials , often at high temperatures , through an industrial process .

specific industries include paper ; chemicals ; petroleum ; rubber and plastic ; stone , clay , and glass ; and primary metals .

fabrication and essential services ( fes ) .

this sector includes all other manufacturing industries , plus utilities and transportation facilities such as railroads and mass transit , water and wastewater treatment , and gas utilities and pipelines .

these three sectors accounted for almost 40% of u.s. gross domestic product in 2001 , but disruptions to especially the de and fes sectors impact other sectors of the economy through the services they provide .

epri recognized that the economic cost of power outages was largely related to the length of the outage ( while noting even short duration outages of a few minutes could have large costs ) , and estimated the average cost of a one - hour outage for manufacturing and de firms at $7,795 per firm .

while the estimate recognizes that typically most companies experienced a much smaller loss ( with a one - hour outage costing 56% of all de , cpm , and fes establishments less than $500 ) , the number was weighted by the much larger losses experienced by a few companies .

an estimated 5% of establishments in these sectors incurred costs from a one - hour outage of $20,000 or more , with costs for individual establishments ranging as high as $1.5 million .

epri estimated the annual cost of outages across all u.s. business sectors at $104 billion to $164 billion in 2001 .

with epri estimating the average number of power outages in a year over five minutes at 43% ( see figure 3 ) , a reasonable estimate for the annual economic cost yields a possible $20 billion to $31 billion ( using the hines estimate of 44% of outages as weather - related ) as a lower range .

on the higher end ( using mills's estimate of 78% of outages as weather - related ) , an estimate of the cost yields $35 billion to $55 billion for annual weather - related outage costs .

the 2004 lbl report estimated ( in its base case ) economic costs of sustained power interruptions at $26 billion , with the outages resulting from all causes including weather .

in recognition of uncertainties in the data , lbl stated that the true cost of sustained outages could be higher or lower by tens of billions of dollars .

outages are largely a result of damage to distribution systems , which are generally exposed to the elements .

storms can inflict damage to electric power delivery systems in a variety of ways .

wind and rain from a hurricane - type event tends to cause different types of power system delivery failures than snow and ice .

this section will look at various scenarios for reducing storm - related outages .

in any discussion of storm - related power outages , two prominent themes emerge — preparation and recovery .

if utilities are aware of an impending storm or weather - related event which may cause outages , they are expected to make preparations for restoration of services in as timely a manner as possible .

recovery from any such event will depend on the severity of the storm and the resulting damage .

however , recovery can be hastened , and the amount of damage to electric power infrastructure can be minimized , if good maintenance , restoration , organization , and communications strategies are followed on an ongoing basis .

electric utilities should also be aware of local weather - related events in the past .

if an area is prone to particular seasonal extremes of weather , then utilities would be expected to work with state and local regulatory authorities to look at ways to reduce vulnerabilities of the power and related infrastructure .

the cost of many aged parts of the electric power system have already been recovered in rates by electric utilities .

the time for new investments may be approaching ( if it is not already here ) considering the projected future uses of the grid .

power delivery systems are most vulnerable to storms and extreme weather events .

improving the overall condition and efficiency of the power delivery system can only serve to improve the resiliency of the system , and help hasten recovery from weather - related outages .

ultimately , however , electric utilities are responsible for this infrastructure .

they are in the business of selling electricity , and they cannot sell electricity if their power delivery systems are out of service .

the inconsistency of data from outage reporting is an issue in quantifying the impacts of storm - related and other power outages .

congress could empower the national institute of standards or doe or some other federal agency to develop standards for the consistent reporting of power outage data .

while responsibility for the reliability of the bulk electric system is under ferc , no central responsibility exists for distribution systems .

one possible option would be to bring these systems under the ero for reliability purposes .

however , this would require changes in law , with the federal power act being key to any changes .

formalizing review or even coordinating maas under a federal agency like the federal emergency management agency or the department of homeland security may be an option that congress may want to consider .

this would not necessarily mean federal approval of maas , but may help in the cooperative coordination of additional federal and state resources , especially in a wide , multi - state weather event .

the utility industry , however , may be opposed to government involvement in maas .

the aged condition of the electrical grid in many parts of the united states will likely only detract from and compound recovery efforts .

while there has been much discussion of transmission system inadequacies and inefficiencies , many distribution systems are in dire need of upgrades or repairs .

the cost of upgrading the grid to meet future uses is expected to be high , as the estimates of the asce show , and the importance of a robust grid to u.s. economic performance goes without question .

while the federal government recently made funding available for specific smart grid projects or transmission lines under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , there has not been a comprehensive effort to study the needs , set goals , and provide targeted federal funding for the modernization of the u.s. grid as part of a long - term national energy strategy .

such an effort would also require decisions about the appropriate roles of government and the private sector .

