real property disposal is the process by which federal agencies identify and then transfer , donate , or sell real property they no longer need .

agencies may also consolidate or co - locate their offices in order to reduce the amount of unneeded space they own or lease .

disposition is an important asset management function because the costs of maintaining unneeded properties can be substantial , consuming financial resources that might be applied to long - standing real property needs , such as repairing existing facilities , or other pressing policy issues , such as reducing the national debt .

in fy2010 , the government held 77,700 buildings it identified as either not utilized or underutilized and spent $1.67 billion dollars operating and maintaining them .

federal agencies have indicated that their disposal efforts are often hampered by legal and budgetary disincentives , and competing stakeholder interests .

in addition , congress may be limited in its capacity to conduct oversight of the disposal process because it currently lacks access to reliable , comprehensive real property data .

the government's inability to efficiently dispose of and utilize its property is a major reason that federal real property management has been identified by the government accountability office ( gao ) as a "high - risk" area since 2003 .

h.r .

1734 , which passed the house on february 7 , 2012 , would draw on the military base realignment and closure ( brac ) model of real property disposal by establishing an independent commission to assess agency portfolios and to recommend actions for reducing the government's inventory of unneeded and underutilized buildings and structures , as well as disposing of some properties that are not listed as excess or surplus , but which could yield savings through their disposal .

another proposal in the 112 th congress , s. 2232 , is also loosely based on the brac model , but the senate and house bills are not identical and some of their differences are identified in this report .

as noted earlier , the language in s. 2232 is also based on the brac model of real property disposal .

while sections of s. 2232 are similar or even identical to sections of h.r .

1734 , there are differences , including the size of the independent commission and the congress's role in approving or disapproving the recommendations it receives from the president .

s. 2178 was introduced on march 8 , 2012 , and reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute by the homeland security and governmental affairs committee on june 29 .

the bill takes a broad approach to real property management , one that builds on existing resources and expertise , requires new performance measures and reporting , emphasizes finding opportunities for agency consolidation , co - location , and reconfiguration , and requires a thorough examination of the federal leasing process .

h.r .

665 , which passed the house on march 20 , 2012 , also takes a broad approach to real property disposal reform .

it includes provisions that would expedite the disposal of certain high - value properties , require gsa to establish a publicly accessible real property database , reduce the scope of the mckinney - vento act , and require landholding agencies to implement policies and practices that would reduce the number of unneeded properties in their portfolios .

 table 1 , below , compares key provisions from each of the four proposals examined in this report — h.r .

1734 , s. 2232 , s. 2178 , and h.r .

665 .

an analytical discussion of the same provisions follows table 1 .

each of the bills analyzed in this report establishes procedures for selecting federal properties to sell and for the distribution of sales proceeds .

generally , each of the bills would apply net proceeds towards further real property disposals and reducing the federal deficit or debt .

it is not clear , however , that much revenue might be generated under each bill , given the lack of even the most basic data needed for analysis .

for example , it is not known how many excess , surplus , and underutilized properties are held by each agency , how much it would cost to bring each property to market , and the estimated fair market value of individual properties .

frpp data show that sales have not generated significant net proceeds — the amount of revenue remaining after the costs of bringing the property to market are deducted — in recent years .

for example , in fy2010 , the government sold 466 properties that generated in $57 million in net proceeds , and in fy2009 the government sold 2,228 properties that generated $50 million in net proceeds .

the costs of bringing properties to market — whether they are due to environmental remediation , a backlog of needed repairs , or historic preservation requirements — or the undesirable location of unneeded properties are among reasons that so little profit is generated through sales .

the proposed bills may increase sales revenue , however , by bringing properties to market that are in more desirable locations or less costly to prepare for sale .

s. 2232 and h.r .

1734 , for example , would both require the civilian property realignment commission to recommend at least five properties that are not identified as excess or surplus — and therefore not subject to disposal requirements — but which have relatively high fair market value ( $500 million total under h.r .

1734 and $500 million each under s. 2232 ) .

similarly , under s. 2178 the director of omb would have the authority to require agencies to sell properties that are not excess or surplus .

if agencies are holding properties that are valuable , and which they have not declared excess — the first step in the disposal process — then these bills may provide a mechanism by which those properties may be brought to the market and possibly generate greater net proceeds than sales have in recent years .

h.r .

665 would limit the scope of its real property disposal pilot program to properties that are declared excess or surplus , but it might also increase sales revenue and net proceeds by bringing the 15 properties most likely to sell at a high market value to be auctioned .

if agencies invest their real property funds in bringing these properties to market as soon as possible , then valuable properties which might otherwise have been conveyed or slowly moving through the screening process would be up for sale weeks , months , or even years sooner than under the current process .

frpp data also show that the reduction of operating and maintenance costs through three methods of disposal — conveyance , sale , and demolition — have yielded greater annual savings to the government than net proceeds from sales have .

in fy2010 the government reduced its annual operating costs by $274 million by disposing of unneeded properties through all methods and by $145 million in fy2009 — four times the amount of net proceeds from sales for those same years .

these figures do not include savings reported in the frpp data that are the result of transferring properties between federal agencies , since the operating and maintenance costs have only been shifted from one agency to another , not eliminated , as when properties are taken out of the federal portfolio through sale , conveyance , or demolition .

the government might generate greater value to the taxpayer , then , by disposing of some properties through the quickest possible method , rather than attempting to sell them , depending on variables such as how likely properties are to be sold , the cost of bringing them to market , and whether estimated net proceeds would exceed the operating and maintenance costs accrued while the property was on the market .

