the term "conflict minerals" is used to describe metal ores that , when mined , sold , or traded , are widely reported to play key roles in fueling armed conflict and human rights abuses in several far eastern provinces of the democratic republic of the congo ( drc , formerly zaire ) .

the main minerals at issue are columbite - tantalite ( coltan , a source of tantalum and niobium ) , cassiterite ( tin ore ) , wolframite ( tungsten ore ) , and gold — and their derivatives .

the first three minerals are dubbed the 3ts .

when gold is also considered , they are known as the 3tgs .

links between conflict , human rights abuses , and the mining of and trade in these minerals have been the subject of numerous investigations , research studies , and policy papers , as well as policy advocacy campaigns focused on a need to respond to the persistence of conflict and its large toll in lives and human rights abuses .

such efforts have prompted policy makers , industry groups , and others , both in the united states and abroad , to craft measures aimed at cutting links between the minerals trade and those involved in or abetting armed conflict in eastern drc .

continuing political instability in congo has been the focus of congressional attention since the overthrow in 1997 of the regime of mobutu sese seko , who had led drc ( known during his rule as zaire ) since 1965 .

multiple congressional hearings have investigated various aspects of the drc's conflicts , and multiple resolutions and bills have been introduced to help end them or mitigate their effects .

several have become law .

the most extensive u.s. law aimed at halting the trade in conflict minerals , specifically the 3tgs , is section 1502 of title xv of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

it is the subject of an ongoing securities and exchange commission ( sec ) rule - making process that is expected to lead to adoption of "final" section 1502 implementing rules .

this process , which has faced delays , is discussed further below .

these congressional efforts have dovetailed with executive branch activities aimed at curtailing conflict in drc , especially in the east .

for nearly two decades , state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) officials have monitored the dynamics of instability in eastern drc and the surrounding sub - region , including linkages between conflict , human rights abuses , and minerals .

they have also implemented multiple humanitarian and technical aid , policy - focused , and public - private partnership programs to break such links , in some cases as mandated by congress .

multiple international public and private initiatives have sought to accomplish similar goals .

the united nations ( u.n. ) security council ( unsc ) has , for instance , imposed drc - focused sanctions aimed , in part , at curtailing the conflict minerals trade .

it has also mandated that the u.n. peacekeeping mission in the drc help the national government to achieve that end .

donor governments have also supported initiatives by states and intergovernmental entities in central africa to design and implement transparent , accountable , and conflict - free national and regional mineral purchasing and trade certification regimes .

other donor - backed mining sector reform efforts also seek to reduce links between mining and conflict and boost legitimate trade .

industry groups are also piloting several similar certification schemes in central africa that seek to verifiably track supply chains of minerals sourced in the region to ensure that buying and trade activities do not fund armed actors or otherwise abet conflict .

these schemes are designed to complement government certification efforts in the region ( see appendix b ) and in some cases are an inherent part of these efforts .

a key component of most of these public and private sector efforts is a process of due diligence that was developed by the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) with input from a broad array of stakeholders .

the areas in eastern drc that have been negatively affected most persistently by conflict lie in the border regions adjacent to uganda , rwanda , and burundi , and include the provinces of north and south kivu ( known jointly as the kivus ) .

armed groups and illegal mineral sector actors also operate in the district of ituri , just north of the kivus , the locale of an ethnically and resource - focused conflict in the mid - 2000s .

it has been relatively quiescent in recent years .

more than a decade and a half of conflict has also resulted in a breakdown of law and order and caused socioeconomic devastation for many in eastern drc , an area which had already suffered decades of state neglect and depredation under mobutu's rule .

conflicts in eastern drc have spawned a large number of armed militias , motivated by a mix of political aims and communal or ethnic self - defense , criminal , and other goals .

multiple , often inter - related factors have underpinned these conflicts , which have consistently been characterized by numerous , extreme human rights abuses .

such factors have included inter - ethnic political and economic competition , in some instances associated with the 1994 rwandan genocide or congolese state and societal discrimination against ethnic minorities .

diverse political grievances against and competition for control over the state have also played a role .

integration of various non - state armed groups into the national military and other military reform processes ; lack of military training and discipline ; and contested command and control and corruption within the military are also contributing factors .

widespread poverty and unequal patterns of resource distribution have also helped spur and prolong conflict , as have criminal opportunism , pillage , and predation of civilian populations , often by elements of state security forces .

such catalysts of conflict have not only motivated congolese armed actors' actions ; they also spurred several foreign state military interventions in congo in the early 2000s .

for more on the dynamics of conflict in eastern dr and actors involved , see appendix a .

these drivers of conflict have been aggravated by competition and conflict over various resources , including land rights ; tropical timber and agricultural commodities , such as coffee , palm oil , and charcoal ; illicit drug cultivation and trade ; and fishing rights — but more notably over mineral reserves , mining , and trade .

ores that have been the focus of such dynamics have earned the moniker "conflict minerals" because they are found in all of the provinces of eastern drc that have experienced lengthy periods of war and insecurity , and have often provided an incentive for acts of coercion and armed clashes ; are mined under very poor , often dangerous labor conditions due to the use of manual modes of production and human rights abuses by armed groups , including state security force elements , who often directly or indirectly coercively control mining operations ; provide armed groups profit derived from direct participation in , control of , or extortion from mineral mining and commerce ; and underpin an extensive black - market cross - border trade that is proscribed under unsc sanctions pertaining to the drc and which benefits armed groups , among other actors , many illicit , such as black market traders and smugglers .

among the approaches to breaking mineral - conflict linkages that have attracted the broadest support from policy - makers , business interests , and non - governmental advocates are so - called mineral supply chain of custody controls and other proactive monitoring efforts , collectively dubbed "due diligence. .

section 1502 of p.l .

111-203 , passed as h.r .

4173 , is the culmination of several prior congressional efforts to help break links between mineral trade and conflict in eastern drc .

at its core is a requirement that sec - regulated firms that use the 3tgs in their products publicly report whether or not they obtain their supplies of these minerals from the drc , and if so , what due diligence they exercise to ensure that these purchases do not benefit armed groups .

for supporters of the measure , part of the rationale for including the provision in a financial reform law was the assertion that if a firm were to be tied to conflict minerals and associated human rights abuses , such linkages would constitute an investment risk .

proponents successfully argued for inclusion of the measure , which , from their point of view , provides a way for firms to offer investors material assurances that they are not subject to reputational or other risks — potentially including legal liabilities — arising from their sourcing or use of conflict minerals .

some critics of section 1502 , on the other hand , view it as a non - germane use of sec regulatory authority .

they argue that it falls outside the intended scope of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act , that is , to reform the u.s. financial system in order to address the causes of the post - 2007 u.s. financial crisis .

many assert it imposed inordinate , potentially large financial and regulatory burdens on a large , broad class of u.s. and international firms in order to attempt to address a discrete problem in a single region of a foreign country .

some members also question the legislative process that led to the enactment of section 1502 .

section 1502 states that the exploitation and trade of conflict minerals from the drc help to finance violent armed conflict in eastern drc , particularly sexual - and gender - based violence , thereby contributing to an emergency humanitarian situation .

as previously stated , it defines conflict minerals as "columbite - tantalite ( coltan ) , cassiterite , gold , wolframite , or their derivatives ; or [...] any other mineral or its derivatives determined by the secretary of state to be financing conflict" in the drc or an adjoining country .

other minerals are found in eastern drc ( eg , bauxite , uranium , rhenium , cobalt , manganese , tourmaline , and pyrochlor ) , and some of these have periodically been implicated in conflict - related trade .

they could , therefore , potentially be designated as conflict minerals , including under section 1502 .

to date , however , they have garnered little attention from policy - makers or global markets .

section 1502 amends the securities exchange act of 1934 by requiring the sec to issue rules requiring selected sec - regulated "persons" ( essentially business entities ) to publicly report certain information about their activities to the sec .

affected businesses are those that engage in commercial activities involving products for which "conflict minerals are necessary to the functionality or production of a product. .

such disclosures must include information on whether designated minerals used by the firm originated in the drc or an adjoining country .

when this occurs , affected firms must submit to the sec and publicly release a report containing a description of the measures that the person ( i.e. , business ) has taken "to exercise due diligence on the source and chain of custody" of any conflict minerals used , to be accompanied by a certified , independent , sec - compliant audit of the information being reported ; and descriptions of the products manufactured or contracted to be manufactured that are not drc "conflict free. .

section 1502 does not explicitly ban use of minerals linked to conflict , but firms must be transparent about their use of such minerals , in order to enable investors , businesses , and consumers to make informed choices about dealing with firms that do not meet "conflict - free" criteria .

the report must also describe the entity that audited the due diligence efforts of an affected firm ; the country of origin of the minerals used ; the facilities used to process the minerals ; and "efforts to determine the mine or location of origin with the greatest possible specificity. .

penalties for non - compliance with section 1502 are standard penalties , such as fines and other sec enforcement actions , to which firms that violate sec regulations may be subject .

how effective international and regional conflict mineral trade abatement efforts may be at curtailing or ending conflict and human rights abuses in eastern drc — even in the minerals sector alone — is open to debate on multiple grounds .

in the long run , efforts focused on ending the conflict mineral trade have the potential to play a crucial role in helping to reduce human rights violations and other crimes by reducing armed groups' access to mineral revenues .

they are unlikely to succeed on their own , however .

instead , their success will almost certainly depend on diverse other efforts to achieve security and demobilization of armed groups ; accountability for and prevention of human rights abuses ; politically and administratively feasible resolutions to diverse local grievances ; and enhanced mineral sector production and regulatory capacity - building .

for instance , it is not clear that credible , consistent , and effective due diligence efforts to prevent the conflict minerals trade can be undertaken while widespread insecurity and periodic military clashes in eastern drc persist .

it is also not certain how durable or substantial an effect on conflict reduction the removal of armed actors' access to mineral revenues through conflict - free trading schemes might have , given the availability of alternate sources of conflict financing and the multiplicity of factors that stoke conflict .

another major challenge is the technical complexity associated with due diligence and mineral certification initiatives .

without substantial , continuing external assistance to help small - scale mining sector actors in eastern drc with these efforts , and much greater local buy - in and participation , there is no guarantee that such efforts will be credible and sustainable .

the potential for such schemes may also be poor if the state military elements that have so often abetted the eastern drc trade in conflict minerals are not substantially reformed or cut off from interaction within the mineral sector .

prospects for such an outcome are decidedly mixed .

elements of the national military and other state security forces — sometimes in league with armed non - state groups — have for years been involved in various exploitative , often coercive , illicit profit - making mining and mineral trade activities .

some have also actively hampered state attempts to better regulate the trade and impose sanctions on their criminal acts , or have stymied security sector reforms ( ssr ) that threaten their ability to operate autonomously and to engage in income - earning activities , despite limited progress in addressing these problems .

thus far , emergent mineral certification and due diligence schemes have demonstrated how such systems can operate in practice in central africa , but critically , have not yet advanced beyond nascent , in some cases abortive pilot programs in conflict - affected eastern drc — the ultimate target of these efforts .

ultimately , however , their potential for sustained success is likely to depend on efforts to ensure overall security and stability , to end impunity for human rights abuses and illicit activities , and to undertake reforms and related actions , such as military and police training and broader security sector reform ; use of armed force by the state to seize and maintain control of mining sites and wider areas controlled by armed groups and , ultimately , neutralize these groups , including rogue elements of the national military ; political agreements and compromise over control of mining sites , and assured scope for civil society actors in the mineral sector to freely advocate reform policies and undertake investigations ; national and international criminal prosecution for human rights violators and imposition of targeted international sanctions , in addition to u.n. sanctions already in place , possibly specifically directed at those who engage in conflict - related mineral transactions ; institutional capacity building for trade regulation , mining , and border control and related agencies in the drc and neighboring countries ; targeted sustainable employment and working condition - focused assistance for artisanal miners and mining communities affected by externally driven due diligence initiatives and outcomes such as the de facto boycott ; reform of drc mineral tax rates and revenue sharing formulas ; increased state and third party mineral sector and trade data reporting , as well as public and private sector adherence to international extractive sector transparency initiatives , such as the extractive industries transparency initiative ( eiti ) ; and reform of mining contracts and laws , taking into consideration multiple interest groups , including the state , large - scale mining concerns , and artisanal miners .

there is widespread recognition by regional and donor governments and various international organizations that such multi - faceted approaches are essential , and diverse efforts to pursue them are underway , in addition to efforts spurred by section 1502 and the oecd guidance .

in the short to medium term , interested members of congress are likely to closely monitor section 1502 rule - making and the effectiveness of any eventual rule and other conflict mineral - focused programs as they are implemented .

both sec rule - making and prospective rule implementation are likely to continue to pose complex challenges , and may spur congress , ultimately , to revisit the approach taken in the section 1502 rule .

if the sec issues section 1502 rules at a scheduled august 22 , 2012 , meeting — which is not a given , as the sec has stated that this meeting will be held on " whether to adopt rules regarding … section 1502 [emphasis added]," rather than that it , in fact , intends to adopt final rules — reactions are likely to be complex .

given substantial opposition to the anticipated rule by some industry actors and members of congress — as described previously in this report — political and possibly legal action to amend or overturn the rules may ensue .

on the other hand , given that a substantial number of members of congress and non - governmental organizations support the law , opposition to such efforts might be expected to be stiff , and — if rules implementation is not timely and effective — may generate a separate set of political or legal actions to make it so .

quite apart from debate within the united states over section 1502 and the procedural , technical , and legal aspects its implementation , application of the law's provisions and other u.s. and international conflict mineral abatement efforts in the region are also likely to be complex , and to draw congressional attention .

while substantial financial and applied efforts are being invested in such activities , conflict in eastern drc has long posed a complex set of intractable security , governance , and human rights challenges , which trade - focused efforts alone are unlikely to overcome .

to the extent that this proves the case and conflict persists , notwithstanding enactment of section 1502 , some members of congress may see a need to pursue a more comprehensive approach to ending conflict and building peace in the drc and the surrounding sub - region .

appendix a .

background on conflict and armed actors in eastern drc armed conflict has plagued eastern drc since the mid - 1990s , notably in the border region adjacent to uganda , rwanda , and burundi — primarily the provinces of north kivu , south kivu , and eastern orientale .

this conflict has spawned a large number of armed militias , some politically oriented and some primarily criminal .

conflict in the area has varied roots and causes , but is , in large part , an artifact of two wars that began in the east .

the first followed the mid - 1994 takeover of state power in rwanda by the ethnic tutsi - led rwandan patriotic front ( rpf ) , which ended the rwandan genocide .

in the wake of the genocide , rwandan ethnic hutu militia forces and elements of the rump ousted hutu - led government fled rwanda into eastern zaire , along with large numbers of hutu refugees , and settled in border camps .

this influx fueled pre - existing local ethnic tensions , sometimes violent , and competition over land and resources , trends which were aggravated by persistent predation by various zairian state security forces .

the exiled hutu militia forces controlled and used the refugee camps as a rear base for cross - border attacks into rwanda .

these forces , sometimes together with other local ethnic militias and the zairian armed forces ( faz ) , also launched attacks on zairian tutsis , the banyamulenge .

in response , in 1996 , an rpf - backed , largely banyamulenge force broke up the camps and forced a mass repatriation of the bulk of refugees to rwanda .

recalcitrant militant hutu elements and large numbers of accompanying refugees fled deeper into zaire , pursued by the rpf - backed force , which also skirmished with faz elements .

simultaneously , leaders of the rpf - allied force joined with several obscure or defunct zairian rebel groups and other restive elements to form the alliance of democratic forces for the liberation of congo - zaire ( afdl ) in october 1996 .

led by laurent - désiré kabila and backed by several neighboring governments , the afdl marched across zaire and ousted the regime of mobutu sese seko , zaire's leader since 1965 .

after seizing the capital , kinshasa , in may 1997 , they assumed state power .

a second civil war began in august 1998 .

it was sparked by a military rebellion in the east that was ostensibly motivated by concerns over corruption and poor governance under kabila , but was underpinned by ethnic divisions within the afdl .

in subsequent months , the war burgeoned , spawning the creation of numerous new congolese armed factions and prompting extensive intervention by the militaries of neighboring states opposed to or supportive of the kabila government .

kabila was assassinated in early 2001 and succeeded by his son , joseph kabila , drc's recently re - elected president .

beginning in 1999 , a series of peace accords was signed .

they eventually led to the deployment of a u.n. peacekeeping mission and the creation of an interim congolese government , based on a 2002 peace accord .

it provided for a transition process leading to national elections in 2006 .

this peace process nominally ended the second war , but the armed groups that had emerged during the first two wars continued to be active in eastern drc .

in subsequent years these groups , some of which have enjoyed foreign backing , continued to evolve into distinct new groups and alliances .

on - going conflicts in the provinces of north and south kivu have involved armed congolese tutsi factions , in some cases drawn from mutinous elements of the national military .

other actors have included armed , largely hutu refugee groups , some closely linked or led by accused rwandan genocidaires or their associates ; and elements of the congolese military , the fardc .

other actors have included local communal , often ethnically based defense militias known collectively as the mai - mai , and other small armed groups , including some rebel elements from neighboring countries .

the situation has been complicated by the integration into the fardc of multiple former non - state rebel groups , some of whom maintain command and control capabilities that are outside the control of national military authorities .

most of the smaller militias , notably mai - mai groups , have links to the larger armed groups .

neighboring countries , notably rwanda , have also periodically militarily intervened in the region , often covertly but in some cases openly , including , on occasion in joint operations with drc government forces , as in early 2009 .

in the district of ituri , just north of the kivus , there was a period of frequent conflict from 1999 to 2003 followed by a period of low - intensity conflict until 2007 .

conflicts there involved ethnic factions ; fardc troops ; international peacekeepers ; and criminal gangs , some with linkages to ethnic political factions .

south of the kivus , in maniema , tanganyika , and haut - katanga provinces , mai - mai and fardc elements — some party to delayed disarmament processes — have periodically fought one another and attacked civilian settlements , often out of criminal motivations .

appendix b .

regional and industry supply certification and due diligence initiatives international conference on the great lakes region certification the mineral tracking and certification scheme of the international conference on the great lakes region ( icglr ) , also known as the regional certification mechanism ( rcm ) , is designed to act as a regional mineral certification coordinating mechanism .

it provides standards that national certification systems must meet or exceed and independent monitoring of those national systems .

the rcm is part of a broader icglr effort , the regional initiative against the illegal exploitation of natural resources ( rinr ) .

rinr is aimed at supporting a legal , transparent , and conflict - free intra - regional and international exports minerals trade and ensuring that the mining sector contributes to sound socioeconomic development and economic growth .

the rcm , which is at an early stage of implementation , is expected to provide a mechanism that downstream buyers ( eg , smelters , industrial producers , and manufacturers ) can rely on to ensure conflict - free mineral purchases from the region and to supplement their own due diligence .

the rcm is also designed to act as an early warning system , providing monitoring of mineral mining , trading , and financing - linked conflict risks in the region .

the system allows for ongoing private sector initiatives , such as international tin research institute's ( itri's ) tin supply chain initiative ( itsci , see below ) , to be used as implementing mechanisms , as long as they comply with all rcm standards and processes .

the united states , among other donors , is supporting the rcm .

drc mining legal reforms and minerals certification efforts inter - agency drc government working groups , with technical assistance from donors , are helping to promote drc mining sector legal reforms and developing an icglr - compliant national traceability and certified trading chain ( ctc ) system known as the certification national ( cn ) .

in addition to supporting traceability , the cn supports guarantees of "legal title , work site safety , environmental practices which include and exceed the standards of the icglr , dodd - frank , un goe [group of experts] and oecd guidance. .

top priorities have been additions to the national mining code consisting of traceability , certification , and due diligence legal requirements , manuals , and procedures .

key reforms include a june 2010 accord providing a legal basis for itsci operation under the drc's cn .

drc government decrees have also mandated the public disclosure of mineral contracts ( may 2011 ) ; mandatory 3t and gold cn certification ( june 2011 ) ; and compliance with the oecd guidance ( september 2011 ) .

another proposed reform is the creation of a legal role for artisanal miners in eastern drc .

most mine titles are held by formal sector firms that do not operate in the region due to insecurity and other factors , and artisanal extraction almost completely dominates mining in eastern drc but , in many cases , is technically illegal .

concordance between provincial laws and regulations , which can vary by region , and national ones , is another possible area of reform .

in addition , in early 2011 governmental agencies , civil society , and commercial mining sector actors from the provinces of north and south kivu and maniema signed a multi - stakeholder agreement in which they pledged to implement the drc and icglr certification systems .

under the agreement , a prerequisite to the lifting in march 2011 of the drc mining ban in the provinces , signatories also agreed to participate in mine monitoring commissions that are intended to implement these systems locally .

implementation of the cn , which had been slated to be operational by late 2011 , was delayed for a year due to the 2010-2011 mining ban , but is now underway .

a drc mines ministry working group is working on the establishment of a national mineral database .

a national third party audit system under the cn was field tested in september 2011 at nyabibwe , a cassiterite mine in south kivu , and vetting of several other mine sites followed .

efforts are underway to assess and categorize these sites as green - , yellow - , or red - flagged , in accordance with icglr and oecd due diligence guidelines .

in addition to nyabibwe , at least 8 sites in south kivu and 11 sites in north kivu have been given green designations .

the government , in collaboration with donors , has also produced several detailed maps of mining sites in the east showing which armed or other actors control them .

further mapping and related technical capacity building is ongoing , as is general cn outreach , training , and mining sector - focused public education .

another major facet of drc's cn system is the establishment of mineral trading centers ( centres de négoce , or cdn ) under a project initiated by the drc government and the united nations stabilization mission in the drc ( monusco ) in 2009 .

cdns are designed to act as trading posts where legal minerals can be reliably traded under national and regional ctc / certification systems , and are linked by fixed air or land transport routes to regional border trading hubs ( eg , bukavu or goma ) .

the initial goal is to establish five cdns in the kivus , with an eventual 16-17 in each of the kivus , and 72 nationwide .

four cdns have been completed to date .

a fifth is expected to be completed soon .

monusco , with usaid assistance , is in the process of rehabilitating roads to the centers .

there are also efforts to engage and train local comptoirs ( mineral traders ) and their associations in the kivus and maniema ( see a multi - stakeholder agreement , above ) .

many local actors in the east , however , are reportedly not undertaking cn - required supply chain and risk assessments — in part due to the de facto buyers' boycott discussed in the body of this report — posing a serious threat to prospective cn success .

in addition , limited state institutional capacity , funding , a history of state corruption , and varying levels of political will in various government agencies and jurisdictions may pose challenges to cn implementation and effectiveness , but many key local actors are undergoing cn training and appear to support the system .

furthermore , in contrast to eastern drc , certified trading is reportedly working effectively in the southern province of katanga , largely due to the greater formalization and structure of the 3ts industry in the province , as well as stable security conditions ; see text box .

industry pilot certification systems itri tin supply chain initiative itsci ( itri tin supply chain initiative ) , initially developed for the tin industry , and more recently for tantalum and tungsten , is the sole traceability system currently being used by most upstream actors in the drc and rwanda .

the u.s. technical assistance non - profit pact , a key usaid drc minerals project implementer , helps local organizations in the drc and rwanda to run the scheme in collaboration with government officials and local stakeholder groups .

only large - scale mineral traders and other mineral chain actors may undergo a risk assessment and become itsci members , although the scheme incorporates data from smaller - scale actors in the mineral chain .

itsci is designed to help upstream businesses — notably including small and medium - size enterprises , co - operatives , and artisanal miners — to comply with and implement the oecd guidance , the icglr rcm , and national mineral certification system requirements .

it is designed to comply with the conflict - free smelter ( cfs ) program ( see below ) .

the two programs are expected to provide a joint mechanism enabling section 1502 compliance , although there are some incompatibilities ( primarily technical and definitional ) between the systems .

itsci has been in development since 2008 .

since 2011 , itsci has been implemented in rwanda and the southern drc province of katanga , but is currently not in operation elsewhere in the drc .

itsci was piloted at kalimbi mining area in south kivu in 2010 , but the 2010-2011 mining ban prompted suspension of the project .

a pilot project in the kivus , initially at one mine , is planned , but depends on several outcomes .

these include the availability of funding , assurance of operational security , and the confirmation that prospective dodd - frank compliant buyers will re - enter the market .

rwanda's itsci program runs under the aegis of its broader national mineral ctc system .

itsci may be extended to burundi and uganda and eventually to the entire great lakes region .

itsci , funded through industry levies , employs an oecd guidance / icglr rcm - compliant mineral tagging and source monitoring chain of custody and database tracking system .

in addition to shipment tracking , it emphasizes tax and border fee payment verification .

this requirement can reportedly slow and otherwise hinder trading , as collections officials are often absent from their posts , and the reduction in earnings , for some , may be high enough to prompt abandonment of itsci participation .

two other key components are independent third party audits of itsci members , small - scale upstream actors in the mineral supply chain , and itsci data ; and independent third party conflict risk assessments of vetted mines and transport routes , and conflict risks in the larger regional environment .

in both drc and rwanda , government entities are responsible for affixing itsci tags to mineral bags .

the role of state agencies has reportedly induced a few instances of illicit itsci tag sales by corrupt officials .

there have also been reports that the itsci tags have been stolen , and that some independent traders accept stolen rwandan ore and ore from the drc that enters rwanda through various means , including through the use of falsified itsci tags , without paperwork , or through smuggling .

this ore may illicitly either transit rwanda or be integrated into its trade stream through various means , leading the group of experts to conclude that "fraudulent tagging and the transit of untagged minerals through the country are threatening the credibility of rwanda's certification system," although they also report that rwandan border officials regularly seize illicit imports , as do drc authorities , albeit to a lesser extent .

the standard itsci model employs a tagged consignment logbook recording system that is reportedly somewhat cumbersome and expensive to implement .

it is manually intensive at the field level — although a paper - based system is arguably a technically sustainable , user - friendly format for use in underdeveloped eastern drc — and these data must then be transferred into a computer database overseas .

its cost is reportedly high enough to act as a disincentive for participation by some smaller commercial actors .

in late 2011 , the itsci cost in katanga and rwanda was $500 per tonne of minerals .

the price is fixed , regardless of commodity price changes , which could reportedly hurt artisanal miners' already thin profit margin .

by contrast , the ctc system in rwanda reportedly costs $200 per tonne of minerals .

several firms working under the itsci system or the rwandan national icglr - compliant ctc system have developed a computer - based system that uses itsci tags ( which have a barcode ) or radio - frequency identification ( rfid ) chip tags .

these are placed on consignments and scanned on site , and the resulting data can immediately be uploaded to a server .

the model is reportedly less costly and as technically robust as other traceability systems , but in some cases lacks market recognition .

conflict - free smelter ( cfs ) program the electronic industry citizenship coalition ( eicc ) and global e - sustainability initiative ( gesi ) conflict - free smelter ( cfs ) assessment program , initiated in 2009 , supports conflict - free mineral sourcing through evaluation of the origin and status of smelter mineral input under an independent , cfs - vetted third party system .

it allows a smelter to verify to buyers that it produces "conflict - free" metals .

the main cfs elements are a review of an applicant firm's policies and practices on conflict minerals .

the second is an assessment of smelter input materials to verify that they are conflict - free via vetting of mineral source locations ; and , if the input material is not raw ore , vetting of compliance with cfs "recycled" materials standards .

cfs , a voluntary program , currently covers tantalum and gold , but is slated to also cover tin and tungsten .

eicc / gesi assert that the cfs protocol is oecd guidance - compliant .

it is not publicly available , however ; it is accessible only to select actors ( certain ngos , governments , and the oecd ) .

it will again be reviewed and updated once section 1502 rules are issued .

its sponsors seek to create a single , cross - industry , vetted conflict - free supply process .

there are currently 17 cfs compliant smelters , owned by 11 firms .

a cfs - vetted smelter can remain compliant for a year at a time before having to be vetted anew .

the cfs incorporates a tiered country categorization system , but makes a major distinction between smelters that source from the drc or adjoining countries and those that do not .

the latter are immediately eligible to participate in a cfs assessment .

to become cfs - eligible , the former must provide verified cfs - compliant / conflict - free custody / traceability documentation of the entire upstream ( mine to smelter ) supply chain .

to a large extent , the cfs program is dependent on upstream due diligence schemes .

in practice , it is aligned and works almost exclusively with itsci , with which it is largely congruent , despite some technical incompatibilities between the two systems .

the cfs is complemented by a standard reporting and data analysis platform , the conflict minerals reporting template and dashboard , which allows smelters and suppliers and buyers with whom they or their clients do business to prepare and share consolidated data on their mineral supply chains .

gold industry due diligence initiatives in june 2011 , the world gold council released a draft chain of custody and conflict - free gold standards designed to ensure that gold purchases do not enable , fuel , or finance armed conflict .

compared to 3t - related industries , the gold industry appears to be at an earlier stage of developing conflict mineral - related due diligence .

there are no clear indications that any applied , field - based pilot or other due diligence gold programs are yet being implemented .

in march 2012 , the responsible jewellery council ( rjc ) also launched a voluntary chain - of - custody ( coc ) certification for gold and other precious metals aimed at helping firms support responsible sourcing and conflict - free due diligence in supply chains .

the coc lays out an independent , third party audit - based certification process and is aimed at enabling certified compliance with the oecd guidance and section 1502 .

another reported gold industry due diligence effort is a london bullion market association ( lbma ) system "requiring third - party audit of all accredited refiners of gold bullion who are on the london good delivery list. .

related initiatives there are a variety of other standards of practice focused on human rights , social development , good governance , natural resource transparency , corporate operations , fair trade , labor rights , environment , corporate activities in unstable or conflict - prone zones , and other issues that firms can adapt to help ensure due diligence on the sourcing of minerals .

these are sponsored by various industry and non - governmental coalitions .

the collective goals of such initiatives are reflected in the work of the global reporting initiative ( gri ) , an organization that produces a comprehensive "sustainability reporting" framework for application globally .

its core goals include the mainstreaming of disclosure on environmental , social , and governance performance .

