the people's republic of china ( prc ) has the world's largest number of internet users , estimated at 500 million people , including an estimated 300 million people with accounts on twitter - like microblogging sites .

despite government efforts to limit the flow of information , chinese internet users are able to access unprecedented amounts of information , and the web has served as a lifeline for political dissidents , social activists , and civil society actors .

"netizens" have helped to curb some abuses of government authority and compelled some officials to conduct affairs more openly .

the web also has enabled the public to engage in civil discourse on a national level .

some government departments have begun to solicit online public input on policy issues .

however , the internet has proven to be less of a catalyst for democratic change in china than many foreign observers had initially expected or hoped .

along with its extensive internal security apparatus , china also has an aggressive and multi - faceted internet censorship system .

in 2011 , freedom house ranked china as one of the five countries with the lowest levels of internet and "new media" freedom .

according to some estimates , roughly 70 chinese citizens are serving prison sentences for writing about politically sensitive topics online .

the development of the internet and its use in china have raised u.s. congressional concerns , including those related to human rights , trade and investment , and cybersecurity .

congressional interest in the internet in china is linked to human rights in a number of ways .

these include the use of the internet as a u.s. policy tool for promoting freedom of expression and other rights in china ; the use of the internet by political dissidents in the prc and the political repression that such use often provokes ; and the role of u.s. internet companies in both spreading freedom in china and cooperating with prc censorship and social control efforts .

in addition to the effectiveness of censorship , some studies show that the vast majority of internet users in china do not engage the medium for political purposes .

although a small community of dissidents and activists use the web to broach political topics , they reportedly make up a small minority — less than 10% of all users according to some estimates .

between 1% and 8% of web users in china use proxy servers and virtual private networks to get around government - erected internet firewalls to access censored content — both political and non - political .

the widespread satisfaction reportedly felt by many chinese internet users has reduced public pressure for greater freedom .

although netizens have frequently protested against government actions aimed at further controlling web content and use , the internet in china offers a wide and attractive range of services , making restrictions almost unnoticeable to many users .

furthermore , some experts argue that the internet in china has created an illusion of democracy by allowing people to vent their opinions online and by providing venues for debate on some political and policy issues .

moreover , many chinese accept the government's justification that it regulates the internet in order to control illegal , harmful , or dangerous online content , services , and activities , such as pornography , gambling , slander , cyberattacks , and social networking by criminal organizations .

u.s. efforts to promote internet freedom have broadened .

since the early 2000s , policy makers have focused on supporting censorship circumvention techniques and their use in china , protecting the privacy of chinese internet users , and discouraging or preventing u.s. information and communications technology companies from aiding beijing's censorship efforts and public surveillance system .

according to some analysts , counter - censorship technology has proven to have a vital , but limited , impact on the promotion of freedom and democracy in the prc .

they have advocated a broader approach or the development of a more comprehensive and robust mix of tools and education for "cyber dissidents" and online activists in china and elsewhere , including the following: software and training to help dissidents and civil society actors communicate securely through evading surveillance , detecting spyware , and guarding against cyberattacks ; archiving and disseminating information that censors have removed from the internet ; developing means of maintaining internet access when the government has shut it down entirely ; and providing training in online communication , organization , and advocacy .

the prc government employs a variety of methods to control online content and expression , including website or ip address blocking and keyword filtering by routers at the country's eight internet "gateways," telecommunications company data centers , and internet portals ; regulating and monitoring internet service providers , internet cafes , and university bulletin board systems ; registering websites and blogs ; and occasional arrests of high - profile "cyber dissidents" or crackdowns on internet service providers .

some analysts argue that even though the prc government cannot control all internet content and use , its selective targeting creates an undercurrent of fear and promotes self - censorship .

blocked websites , social networking sites , and file sharing sites include radio free asia , voice of america ( chinese language ) , international human rights websites , many taiwanese news sites , facebook , twitter , and youtube .

online english language news sites , including the voice of america , the new york times , and the washington post , are generally accessible or only occasionally or selectively censored .

commonly barred internet searches and microblog postings include those with direct and indirect or disguised references to tibet ; the tiananmen suppression of 1989 ; falun gong ; prc leaders and dissidents who have been involved in recent , politically sensitive events ; democracy ; highly charged foreign affairs issues ; and sexual material .

the government reportedly also has hired thousands of students to express pro - government views on websites , bulletin boards , and chat rooms .

since internet use became widespread in china in the mid - 2000s , the government and netizens have engaged in a game of cat and mouse , with new communications platforms challenging the government's efforts to control the web , followed by crackdowns or new regulations , and then a repeat of the cycle .

bulletin and message boards , personal websites , blogs , microblogs , and other communication outlets have allowed for an unprecedented amount of information and public comment on social and other issues .

although the state has the capability to block the dissemination of news or shut down the internet , as it did in xinjiang for several months following the social unrest that erupted there in july 2009 , it often cannot do so before such events are publicized , if only fleetingly , online .

for chinese internet users in search of blocked information from outside the prc's internet gateways , or "great firewall," circumventing government controls ( also known as fanqiang or "scaling the wall" ) is made possible by downloading special software .

these methods mainly include proxy servers , which are free but somewhat cumbersome , and virtual private networks ( vpns ) , which are available at a small cost ( roughly $40.00 ) but also enable secure communication .

proxy servers and vpns enable some motivated internet users to avoid censorship , but impose just enough inconvenience to keep foreign information out of the reach of most chinese users .

the use of these tools is tolerated by the government as long as it remains politically manageable , according to some observers .

however , the government occasionally has attempted to curtail their use , as in 2011 , when users of vpns began to experience interference with their access to foreign websites .

while remaining vigilant against internet activities that it perceives may give rise to organized or potentially destabilizing political activities , the prc government has been careful not to unnecessarily provoke the ire of the general online population .

nor does it want to alienate china's international business community , which relies upon internet services as well as vpns .

in one dramatic example , the government backed down when confronted by an outpouring of domestic and foreign opposition to an initiative designed to filter content .

in 2009 , the ministry of information and information technology issued a directive requiring the installation of special software ( "green dam youth escort" software ) , ostensibly created to block harmful content potentially affecting children , on all chinese computers sold after july 1 , 2009 , including those imported from abroad .

many chinese internet users and international human rights activists , foreign governments , chambers of commerce , and computer manufacturers openly opposed the policy , arguing that the software would undermine computer operability , that it could be used to expand censorship to include political content , and that it may incorporate pirated software and weaken internet security .

on june 30 , 2009 , the prc government announced that mandatory installation of the software would be delayed for an indefinite period and that any future policy would involve public input .

one clear exception to this method of selective targeting , however , is tibet , where internet censorship is often indiscriminate and repression of free speech and communication harsher than other parts of china .

in the past decade , various online communications platforms have repeated a pattern of boom and decline .

in such cycles , chinese internet users enthusiastically adopted new technologies to express their opinions on current issues .

they then faced growing government restrictions , but also new opportunities as circumvention tools developed or new services became available .

the first medium that offered this possibility on a mass scale was bulletin boards attached to websites , followed by personal websites , and then blogs .

the most recent sensation in china is twitter - like microblogging .

as u.s. internet companies entered the chinese market in the early 2000s , some of them became directly or indirectly involved in prc government censorship and surveillance efforts , which concerned some members of congress .

in 2004 , yahoo ! .

was blamed for providing e - mail account holder information to state security authorities , which resulted in the arrests of four chinese internet users .

in the most high - profile case , the internet service provider was accused of having provided information about the identity of a chinese journalist and yahoo ! .

e - mail account holder , shi tao .

shi reportedly had forwarded information about state policy regarding the 15 th anniversary of the june 4 , 1989 , demonstrations in tiananmen via his yahoo ! .

e - mail account to an overseas democracy group .

in march 2005 , a prc court sentenced shi to 10 years in prison for "leaking state secrets. .

in 2006 , microsoft shut down the msn spaces site of chinese journalist zhao jing ( a.k.a .

michael anti ) at the request of the prc government , after zhao had expressed support on his blog for a boycott of beijing news following the firing of one of its editors .

human rights activists also criticized microsoft for blocking words such as "democracy" from msn spaces .

other u.s. and western companies are alleged to have provided technology to the prc government for censorship and surveillance efforts .

for example , in the early 2000s , cisco systems , juniper networks , nortel of canada , and alcatel of france ( now alcatel - lucent ) reportedly were involved in upgrading china's internet infrastructure , filtering , and surveillance systems .

according to some reports , cisco systems sold several thousand routers to china , which some analysts argue helped to facilitate the prc government's censorship of internet content and monitoring of internet users .

according to other reports , cisco also sold technology to china's police force that can be used in the collection and use of data regarding personal background and imaging information , web browsing history , and e - mail .

in 2011 , human rights groups filed two lawsuits in u.s. district courts against cisco systems on behalf of prc citizens , claiming that the u.s. company helped prc authorities to censor the internet and track and apprehend dissidents and members of the outlawed falun gong group .

in the same year , cisco , working with a chinese company , reportedly agreed to provide networking equipment to be used in chongqing municipality's city - wide video surveillance system .

in response to criticism , some u.s. ict companies have argued that they must abide by the laws of the countries in which they operate , and that they are not actively cooperating or collaborating with the prc government or tailoring their products to suit prc censorship requirements .

cisco's general counsel has made the following arguments: cisco does not customize its equipment for china ; filtering technologies that are intrinsic to the company's products cannot feasibly be eliminated ; cisco has a written code of conduct that aims to prevent the modification of its products in foreign countries in such as way as to undermine human rights ; and cisco complies with all u.s. government regulations or export controls that restrict the sale of high - tech products and crime detection equipment .

some u.s. companies add that despite prc censorship policies , they nonetheless are enlarging the volume of information available in china and other internet - restricting countries , and can better press for freedom of expression and protection of privacy while located in these countries .

they also claim that chinese and other asian and european competitors would fill the void in providing internet services and technology in their absence .

some chinese experts have suggested that overall , foreign companies have promoted freedom through the internet in china , although they also have made troubling compromises with the government .

in response to criticism , particularly of their operations in china , a group of u.s. information and communications technology companies , along with civil society organizations , investors , and academic entities , formed the global network initiative ( gni ) in 2008 .

the gni aims to promote best practices related to the conduct of u.s. companies in countries with poor internet freedom records .

the gni adopts a self - regulatory approach to promote due diligence and awareness regarding human rights .

a set of principles and supporting mechanisms provides guidance to the ict industry and its stakeholders on how to protect and advance freedom of expression and the right to privacy when faced with pressures from governments to take actions that infringe upon these rights .

companies undergo third - party assessments of their compliance with gni principles .

although some human rights groups have criticized the gni's guidelines for being weak or too broad , the gni's supporters argue that the initiative sets realistic goals and creates real incentives for companies to uphold free expression and privacy .

 ( for the gni's membership , core documents , and implementation process , see the appendix . ) .

u.s. government efforts to promote and protect internet freedom operate as a part of overall u.s. cyberspace policy and programs .

released in may 2011 , the president's international strategy for cyberspace outlines strategic and policy priorities for the global digital infrastructure and networked technology .

the strategy sets out a number of goals that include enabling continued innovation for increasing economic activity ; increasing individuals' ability to communicate with one another ; safeguarding freedom of expression , association , and other freedoms ; and enhancing both individual privacy and national and international security .

it stresses using diplomacy to build unified action for creating standards in regulating and operating global digital networks , employing national defense actors to oppose and protect against malicious actors in cyberspace , and focusing development resources on increasing and improving developing countries' digital system capacity and access to such systems by their populations .

the strategy sets out seven policy priorities focusing on opening markets , enhancing security , enforcing relevant law , ensuring military response capabilities , promoting internet governance , developing capacity and security , and promoting internet freedom .

some observers have questioned the ability of the u.s. government to effectively promote internet freedom and meet the other policy goals of the strategy and u.s. foreign policy and national security goals generally .

the united states also has been criticized for employing many of the most sophisticated surveillance and other security - related technologies on the internet , both domestically and internationally , and many repressive regimes have used restrictive technologies developed by u.s. companies .

in addition , google has recently reported that several democratic countries including the united states have engaged in their own censorship efforts , significantly increasing their requests for websites or online information to be removed from google search results .

members of congress have raised concerns , formed caucuses , funded programs , held hearings , and sponsored legislation regarding internet freedom and related issues , with a focus on china .

congress appropriated $50 million for global internet freedom efforts between fy2008 and fy2010 , $20 million in fy2011 , and $25 million in fy2012 .

program areas include censorship circumvention technology , internet and mobile communications security training , media and advocacy skills , and public policy .

the primary target countries of such efforts , particularly circumvention and secure communications programs , have been china and iran .

u.s. congressional committees and commissions have held hearings on the internet and china , including the roles of u.s. internet companies in china's censorship regime , cybersecurity , free trade in internet services , and intellectual property rights ( see below ) .

the department of state and the congressional - executive commission on china include internet freedom issues in their annual reports on human rights conditions in the prc .

as china enters a leadership transition in 2012-2013 , congress may consider how to uphold internet freedom and regulate u.s. companies in an environment of growing tensions between state and society — of both greater freedom and heightened repression .

general policy areas include funding , programming , and coordination .

congress may make decisions regarding how much money to provide to the state department for global internet freedom efforts , how to apportion appropriations for different types of program and target countries , and how to determine benchmarks for future support .

congress may attempt to find common ground between the global online freedom act and the global network initiative , both of which attempt to promote human rights standards for ict companies related to free expression and user privacy , company due diligence , and transparency .

congress may also consider ways to foster linkages between u.s. government , private sector , and international online freedom efforts .

gni membership the gni is composed of: corporations : google , yahoo ! , and microsoft .

facebook was granted "observer status" on may 3 , 2012 .

observer status is an opportunity for companies who are actively considering joining gni to examine the initiative's programs as well as its principles on free expression and privacy .

observer status lasts for one non - renewable 12-month term .

five seats remain open for future member companies .

civil society organizations : human rights watch , center for democracy and technology , committee to protect journalists , and human rights first .

investors : calvert group and domini social investments .

academics and academic organizations : colin maclay ( berkman center for internet and society , harvard university ) and rebecca mackinnon , new america foundation ( personal capacity ) .

governments are not members of the gni , but they are encouraged to support the goals of the gni .

gni core documents there are three core documents that describe the initiative's objectives and the key commitments of the participants: principles on freedom of expression and privacy implementation guidelines governance , accountability & learning framework principles on freedom of expression and privacy the principles state the members' overarching commitment to collaborate in the advancement of user rights to freedom of expression and privacy .

the principles provide high - level guidance to the ict industry on how to respect , protect , and advance user rights to freedom of expression and privacy , including when faced with government demands for censorship and disclosure of users' personal information .

participating companies are committed to conducting "human rights risk assessments" that guide policy decisions .

the principles are intended to be applied globally and are based on internationally recognized laws and standards for human rights .

implementation guidelines the implementation guidelines provide more detailed guidance to ict companies on how to put the principles into practice , and also provide the framework for collaboration among companies , ngos , investors , and academics .

when faced with demands to remove or limit access to content or restrict communications , participating companies are to: operate in a transparent manner when required to remove content or restrict access ; disclose to users the applicable laws and policies requiring such action and the company's policies for responding to such demands ; and provide timely notice to users when access to content has been blocked or communications limited due to government restrictions .

with respect to privacy , participating companies commit to assess the human rights risks associated with the collection , storage , and retention of personal information and to develop mitigation strategies .

the guidelines are regularly reviewed and revised to take into account actual experience , evolving circumstances , and stakeholder feedback .

governance , accountability & learning framework the governance , accountability & learning framework sets out a multi - stakeholder governance structure , goals for collaboration , and a system of ensuring company compliance .

a system of independent third - party assessment of company compliance with the principles and implementation guidelines is being phased in over three stages: in phase one ( which ended in december 2010 ) each participating company was to establish internal policies and procedures to implement the principles , and the board was to approve independence and competence criteria for the selection of independent assessors .

in phase two ( 2011 ) independent assessors were to conduct process assessments of each participating company to review and evaluate their internal systems for implementing the principles .

in phase three ( january 2012 onwards ) the board is to begin accrediting independent assessors to review the internal systems of companies and company responses to specific government demands implicating freedom of expression or privacy .

each participating company is to submit an annual report to the organization .

the assessors are to prepare reports explaining each company's responses to government demands and evaluating the effectiveness of the company's responses .

each company is to be given the opportunity to respond to the assessor's draft and final report .

the board of the organization is to assess whether the company is in compliance with the principles and its determination is to be made public .

the board of the organization is to publish an annual report assessing each participating company's compliance with the principles .

current activities the gni's goals for 2012 include increasing membership across all constituencies , with a focus on new members in developing countries and emerging markets ; deepening its relationships with companies across the ict sector ; and carrying out the first phase iii assessments of the founding companies to see how implementation of the principles is working in practice .

the development of phase iii of the assessment process has been cited as a key priority in 2012 .

the gni has also commissioned a study to inform the development of a public engagement process that would enable the initiative to seek feedback from a broad set of stakeholders in a transparent and structured manner .

the first gni multi - stakeholder learning forum was held in june 2012 in washington , dc , inviting participants from around the world .

the forum included: public dialogue on gni's principles and shared learning from implementation ; the launch of gni's research report on balancing free expression , privacy , national security , and law enforcement ; and confidential dialogue among gni members relating to human rights issues in icts .

