facing significant pressure to reduce the federal budget deficit , some in the 112 th congress viewed international affairs spending , particularly for foreign aid programs , as expenditures of limited benefit to u.s. taxpayers and eligible for cuts .

others favored a more robust foreign affairs budget for various reasons .

in particular , some members of congress in both political parties , as well as the previous and current secretaries of defense , viewed a solid foreign affairs budget as essential to assisting the defense department in promoting u.s. national security and foreign policy interests , perhaps even saving long - term spending by preventing the much costlier use of troops overseas .

to address budget costs , congress considered the fy2013 department of state , foreign operations , and related agencies appropriations in the context of the budget control act of 2011 .

 ( see text box below. ) .

congress delayed passing most appropriations bills , including state - foreign operations , until after the start of the new fiscal year and the fall elections .

it passed a continuing resolution ( cr ) that provided government funding until march 27 , 2013 .

with that resolution soon to expire , the house passed legislation ( h.r .

933 ) on march 6 , 2013 , that would fund federal programs for the remainder of fy2013 .

the senate approved an expanded version of the bill on march 20 , 2013 , and the house adopted the senate version the next day .

the legislation was signed into law on march 26 , 2013 ( p.l .

113-6 ) .

the state - foreign operations appropriation , typically representing about 1.5% of the total federal budget in recent years , supports most programs and activities within the international affairs budget account , known as function 150 , including foreign economic and security assistance , contributions to international organizations and multilateral financial institutions , state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) operations , public diplomacy , and international broadcasting programs .

the bill does not align perfectly with the international affairs budget , however .

food aid , which is appropriated through the agriculture appropriations bill , and the international trade commission and foreign claims settlement commission , both funded through the commerce - science - justice appropriation , are international affairs ( function 150 ) programs not funded through the state - foreign operations appropriations bill .

furthermore , a number of international commissions that are not part of function 150 , such as the international boundary and water commission , are funded through the state - foreign operations bill .

a chart illustrating the organizational structure of the state - foreign operations appropriations bill is provided in appendix a .

abbreviations of terms used throughout this report are in appendix b .

the report focuses on the accounts funded through the state - foreign operations appropriations bill ( see appendix c for data ) , and it also provides appropriations figures for the entire international affairs ( function 150 ) budget in appendix d .

in order of the most recent events , congressional activity related to the state - foreign operations appropriations includes the following as summarized in table 1 below: on march 26 , 2013 , president obama signed the fy2013 defense and military construction / va , full year continuing resolution , p.l .

113-6 ( see text box above ) , which funds most state - foreign operations accounts for the remainder of fy2013 at the fy2012-enacted level , not including sequestration .

appendix c has been updated to show enacted fy2013 funding by account , but does not reflect estimated budget sequestration reductions .

on september 28 , 2012 , president obama signed the continuing appropriations resolution , 2013 , h.j.res .

117 into law ( p.l .

112-175 ) , funding the government until march 27 , 2013 .

on september 22 , 2012 , the senate passed h.j.res .

117 .

on september 13 , 2012 , the house passed h.j.res .

117 , a continuing resolution that would fund the federal government through march 27 , 2013 .

h.j.res .

117 would provide 0.612% more than fy2012 levels for state and foreign operations non - oco funded activities .

oco - designated activities would be funded at the fy2012-enacted level .

according to the congressional budget office , the annualized state - foreign operations funding rate under the cr was estimated to be $53.52 billion .

on may 24 , 2012 , the senate appropriations committee approved by a vote of 29-1 its fy2013 state - foreign operations appropriations bill ( s. 3241 / s.rept .

112-172 ) .

the bill provided a total of $52.3 billion , including $2.3 billion in overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funds .

this was 5% below the $54.9 billion requested and 2% below the fy2012 estimated level .

for the state department and related agencies , the senate sets fy2013 funding at $16.3 billion , including $1.6 billion for oco .

it funded foreign operations at $36.0 billion , including $709.8 million in oco funds .

on may 17 , 2012 , the house appropriations committee approved by voice vote its fy2013 state - foreign operations appropriations bill ( h.r .

5857 / h.rept .

112-494 ) totaling $40.3 billion for regular funding and $8.2 billion for oco .

in total , the bill's $48.5 billion was 12% less than requested and 9% below the fy2012 estimated levels .

within the total , the bill provided $15.8 billion for the department of state and related agencies accounts , including $2.9 billion in oco funding and $32.9 billion for foreign operations accounts , including $5.4 billion in oco funding on april 25 , using the caps in the march 29 , 2012 , house - passed budget resolution ( h.con.res .

112 ) for guidance , the house appropriations committee approved its initial subcommittee allocations .

the house allocation for the state - foreign operations subcommittee was $48.38 billion , including $8.2 billion in oco funds , or almost 12% below the administration's request and nearly 9% below the senate allocation .

on april 19 , using the fy2013 budget authority caps in the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) as guidance , the senate appropriations committee adopted its initial fy2013 subcommittee allocations .

the senate allocated $53.02 billion for the state - foreign operations subcommittee , or 3% less than the administration's request .

this included $3.2 billion in oco funds .

on february 13 , 2012 , the obama administration submitted its fy2013 budget request to congress , seeking an increase of 2.6% above the estimated fy2012 level for the department of state - foreign operations and related agencies .

on february 13 , 2012 , the obama administration submitted its fy2013 budget proposal .

the administration's priorities on foreign affairs funding for fy2013 did not differ significantly from the congressional priorities indicated by the enacted fy2012 funding levels .

the fy2013 request totaled $54.9 billion for the state - foreign operations appropriations , including a core budget proposal of $46.6 billion plus $8.2 billion for extraordinary and temporary war - related overseas contingency operations ( oco ) in frontline states .

the total request represented an increase of 2.6% over the estimated fy2012 funding level for state - foreign operations , including a 4.5% increase in state department and related agencies accounts and a 0.1% increase in foreign operations accounts .

within the budget , the administration requested authority and $770 million in funds for a new bilateral economic aid account — the middle east and north africa incentive fund ( mena if ) — to provide flexible and transparent support for arab spring countries in transition toward democracy .

within the security aid category , the administration sought $800 million for the pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund ( pccf ) , even though most past pccf funding has not been disbursed and many lawmakers have voiced concerns about u.s. - pakistan relations , in general , and aid to pakistan , specifically .

figure 1 provides a breakout of the fy2013 request by funding category .

the fy2013 request reflected a slight increase of state department administration of foreign affairs funding as a share of the total request , from 25% in fy2012 to 26% requested for fy2013 , a slight decrease from 40% in fy2012 to 39% requested for fy2013 for bilateral economic aid , and a small increase from 19% in fy2012 to 19.5% in the fy2013 request for security assistance funding .

these three categories make up more than 85% of the total state - foreign operations funding requested .

for a full listing of funds requested for state , foreign operations and related agency accounts , by account , see appendix c .

 ( for a description of all the accounts , see crs report r40482 , state , foreign operations appropriations: a guide to component accounts , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

u.s. national security , trade promotion , and humanitarian interests are rationales for most international affairs activities .

during the cold war , foreign aid and diplomatic programs had a primarily anti - communist focus , while concurrently pursuing other u.s. policy interests , such as promoting economic development , advancing u.s. trade , expanding access to basic education and health care , promoting human rights , and protecting the environment .

after the early 1990s , with the cold war ended , distinct policy objectives — including stopping nuclear weapons proliferation , curbing the production and trafficking of illegal drugs , expanding peace efforts in the middle east , achieving regional stability , protecting religious freedom , and countering trafficking in persons — replaced the cold war - influenced foreign policy objectives .

a defining change in focus came following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks in the united states .

since then , many u.s. foreign aid and diplomatic programs have emphasized national security objectives , frequently cast in terms of contributing to efforts to counter terrorism .

in 2002 , president bush released a national security strategy that for the first time established global development as the third pillar of u.s. national security , along with defense and diplomacy .

development was again underscored in the administration's 2006 and 2010 national security strategy .

also in 2002 , foreign assistance budget justifications began to highlight the war on terrorism as the top foreign aid priority , emphasizing u.s. assistance to 28 "front - line" states — countries that cooperated with the united states in the war on terrorism or faced terrorist threats themselves .

large reconstruction programs in afghanistan and iraq began to dominate the foreign aid budget and exemplified the emphasis on using foreign aid as a tool of national security .

state department efforts focused extensively on diplomatic security and finding more effective ways of presenting american views and culture through public diplomacy , particularly in muslim communities .

at the same time , the bush administration vastly increased aid to combat hiv / aids globally , with the creation of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , and explored a new approach to development assistance with creation of the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , which supports the development strategies of countries that have demonstrated good governance .

the obama administration has carried forward many bush foreign aid initiatives , including the mcc , massive global health funding ( though the obama administration's global health initiative is broader in scope than pepfar ) , and robust assistance to the frontline states of iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan .

funding for these , rather than being in supplemental appropriations requests , however , has been requested within overseas contingency operations ( oco ) in regular appropriations bills .

the obama administration completed the first ever quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) in the fall of 2010 .

within that context , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) was named the leading government agency for development assistance .

the qddr also identified several reforms for the department of state that have been implemented , including establishment of the bureau of energy and elevating the office of the coordinator for stabilization and reconstruction to the bureau of conflict and stabilization operations .

in its fy2012 budget proposals , the department of state proposed a significant change in how funding for the "front line states" of iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan is viewed in budgetary terms .

it requested that the use of oco funds , through which war - related defense appropriations had flowed for years , be extended to include "extraordinary , but temporary , costs of the department of state and usaid in the front line states of iraq , afghanistan and pakistan. .

congress not only adopted the oco designation in the fy2012 state - foreign operations appropriations legislation , but expanded it to include funding for additional accounts and countries .

the oco designation gained increased significance in august 2011 with enactment of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) , as previously discussed , specifying that funds designated as oco do not count toward the budget caps established by the act .

oco designation makes it possible to keep war - related funding from crowding out core international affairs activities within the budget allocation .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) recently determined , however , that oco funds are not exempt from the bca automatic across - the - board reductions that are to occur january 2 , 2013 .

the oco approach is reminiscent of the use of supplemental international affairs appropriations for much of the past decade .

significant emergency supplemental funds for foreign operations were appropriated in fy2002-fy2010 for activities in iraq , afghanistan , and elsewhere , and were not counted toward subcommittee budget allocations .

 ( see figure 2 below. ) .

the obama administration criticized this practice , asserting that after several years such activities should no longer be considered emergencies , and pledged to request funds for these activities through the regular budget process starting in fy2010 .

this resulted in a sharp increase in base funding in fy2010 , yet supplemental international affairs funds were still requested and enacted for that year , largely in response to the earthquake in haiti , but also for activities in afghanistan , iraq , and pakistan .

the fy2011 funding cycle was the only one in the last decade in which all international affairs funding was appropriated as part of the base budget , before the oco approach was adopted for fy2012 .

unlike supplementals that often have been submitted to congress separate from regular funding requests , oco allows all the funding to be considered simultaneously in the regular appropriations process .

for fy2013 , the administration again used this approach , requesting that $8.24 billion , or about 15% of the international affairs request , be designated as oco .

this amount was 5% less than was requested for oco in fy2012 , and about 26% less than the $11.2 billion that congress enacted for that year .

the house legislation designated $8.3 billion as oco , similar to the administration request , but designated proportionately more of the funds within foreign operations accounts and less within state operations accounts .

the senate bill designated $2.3 billion as oco , or 72% less than requested , largely because it provided no funding for the iraq police development program , as mentioned above , and would fund disaster assistance and migration and refugee assistance accounts entirely through the base budget .

over the past decade , state department - foreign operations funding generally trended upward until 2011 , with the exception of a spike in fy2004 that reflected large reconstruction funds for iraq and afghanistan .

this changed in fy2011 when congress significantly reduced foreign affairs spending to help meet deficit reduction goals .

the fy2012 estimate and fy2013 request in current dollars leveled off largely due to congressional efforts to reduce deficit spending , and after adjusting for inflation , both in constant dollars were below the fy2009 overall funding level .

table 2 and figure 3 below show state - foreign operations appropriations for the past decade in both current and constant dollars .

table 3 and figure 4 show appropriations for the state department and related agencies over the past decade in both current and constant dollars .

note that while there was a spike in foreign aid in 2004 , there was only a slight increase in state department funding that year as diplomacy funding lagged .

in recent years , however , the state department and related agencies funding trends upward at a steeper rate than the overall foreign affairs spending , reflecting an interest by both the george w. bush and obama administrations to increase human resource capacity at the department of state .

table 4 and figure 5 show appropriations for the foreign operations ( foreign aid ) portion of the foreign affairs budget over the past decade in both current and constant dollars .

because foreign operations typically makes up about two - thirds of the state - foreign operations appropriations , it shows a similar trend as the overall state - foreign operations budget .

unlike the state department trend line , which continues upward in fy2012 and fy2013 , foreign aid funding levels off in those years .

prior to 9 / 11 and the wars in afghanistan and iraq , israel and egypt typically received the largest amounts of u.s. foreign aid every year since the camp david peace accords in 1978 .

the reconstruction efforts in iraq and afghanistan moved those countries into the top five , though assistance to iraq has declined significantly in recent years with the completion of many reconstruction activities .

meanwhile , a combination of security assistance and economic aid designed to limit the appeal of extremist organizations has moved pakistan up the list in recent years .

funding for iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan includes temporary oco appropriations .

the top five recipient countries in the fy2013 request were the same as the top five aid recipients of the allocated fy2012 funds .

israel topped the list at $3,100 million in foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and afghanistan ranked second , with $2,505 million requested , of which $1,237.9 million was designated as oco funds .

nearly three - quarters of aid requested for afghanistan was within esf .

pakistan ranked third at $2,228 million , including $800 million for pccf and $928 million within esf .

iraq moved up from sixth in fy2010 to fourth in fy2012 and in the fy2013 request .

of the $2,045 million for iraq , $1,750 million was oco money .

 ( see table 5 above. ) .

as shown in figure 6 , under the fy2013 budget request , aid to africa would have declined by 10% from the current level to $6.4 billion ; u.s. aid to the near east would have increased by 12% to $9.0 billion , largely due to support for the arab spring ; and aid to south central asia would have increased by 6% to $5.3 billion .

aid to africa primarily supports hiv / aids and other health - related programs while 88% of the aid to south central asia was requested , largely for war - related costs , in afghanistan and pakistan .

the near east region request continued to be dominated by assistance to israel ( $3.1 billion ) , iraq ( $2.0 billion ) , egypt ( $1.6 billion ) , and jordan ( $0.7 billion ) .

the western hemisphere's projected relative decline in fy2013 was attributable to a reduction in funding of esf and incle for colombia .

europe and eurasia's 14% decline was largely due to progress made by many countries in the region and other more pressing global priorities .

aid to east asia and pacific remained relatively low and consistent with past years' levels .

over the years , congress has expressed interest in various discrete aid sectors , such as education , building trade capacity , maternal and child health , and biodiversity , that are funded across multiple accounts and / or agencies .

administrations have begun presenting their respective budget requests with a section showing what portion of the request would address some of these "key interest areas. .

the administration did not provide allocation data , limiting comparisons to year - to - year requested funds rather than comparing requested funds to previous enacted levels .

comparing past and present requested levels do provide an indication of the administration's interests and priorities , but not those of congressional appropriators .

table 6 compares the fy2012 and fy2013 budget requests for key interest areas identified by the administration .

out of 23 sectors listed , the administration's fy2013 request was less than the fy2012 request for all except five .

perhaps surprisingly , two of the administration's major initiatives — food security and global climate change―showed declines in the fy2013 request .

other sectors with reduced funding requests included sustainable landscapes ( helping manage forests and ecosystems to reduce greenhouse effects ) , neglected tropical diseases , nutrition , maternal and child health , higher education , clean energy , and basic education .

the administration emphasized increased funding for two focus areas that were new in fy2012: gender funding ( up by 330% over last year's request ) and science , technology , and innovation ( up 85% over last year's request ) .

appendix a .

structure of state - foreign operations appropriations appendix b. abbreviations appendix c. state department , foreign operations and related agencies appropriations appendix d. international affairs ( 150 ) budget accoun .

