in 1984 , the crime victims fund ( cvf , or the fund ) was established by the victims of crime act ( voca , p.l .

98-473 ) to provide funding for state victim compensation and assistance programs .

since 1984 , voca has been amended several times to support additional victim - related activities .

these amendments established within the cvf discretionary grants for private organizations ; the federal victim notification system ; funding for victim assistance staff in the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and executive office of u.s .

attorneys ( eousa ) ; funding for the children's justice act program ; and assistance and compensation for victims of terrorism .

in 1988 , the office for victims of crime ( ovc ) was formally established within the department of justice ( doj ) to administer the cvf .

as authorized by voca , the ovc awards cvf money through formula and discretionary grants to states , local units of government , individuals , and other entities .

the ovc also distributes cvf money to specially designated programs , such as the children's justice act program and the federal victim notification system ( see figure 1 ) .

the ovc's mission is to enhance the nation's capacity to assist crime victims and to improve attitudes , policies , and practices that promote justice and help victims .

according to the ovc , this mission is accomplished by ( 1 ) administering the cvf , ( 2 ) supporting direct services for victims , ( 3 ) providing training programs for service providers , ( 4 ) sponsoring the development of best practices for service providers , and ( 5 ) producing reports on best practices .

the ovc funds victim - support programs in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories .

notably , congress has amended voca several times to provide support for victims of terrorism .

these amendments established cvf - funded programs for ( 1 ) assistance to victims of terrorism who are injured or killed as a result of a terrorist act outside the united states , ( 2 ) compensation and assistance to victims of terrorism within the united states , and ( 3 ) an antiterrorism emergency reserve fund to support victims of terrorism .

this report provides background and funding information for voca programs and the cvf .

it describes the process through which cvf funds are allocated and explains how the cvf impacts the annual budget for doj .

it then provides an analysis of selected issues that congress may consider regarding the cvf and the federal budget .

as previously stated , the ovc awards cvf money through formula and discretionary grants to states , local units of government , individuals , and other entities .

the ovc also awards cvf money to specially designated programs .

grants are allocated according to statute ( see figure 1 ) established by the voca .

congress may confront several issues when considering the balance of the cvf , the annual obligation cap on the cvf , and possible amendments to voca .

these issues include using the cvf for purposes other than those explicitly authorized by voca , making adjustments to the cvf cap such as eliminating the cap , and amending voca to accommodate new programs or to adjust the allocation formula .

congress may also consider the purposes for which certain pools of victim services monies can be used .

because the cvf balance remains significantly larger than the amount distributed to victims each year , there are several issues congress may consider , and in some cases already has considered , regarding the balance of the fund .

one is whether to use receipts from the cvf to fund grant programs that are not authorized by voca .

in the past , congress has passed legislation that made cvf money available to support programs authorized outside of voca .

for example , the national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) included a provision mandating that the attorney general transfer from the emergency reserve of the cvf "such funds as may be required" to cover the costs of special masters appointed by u.s. district courts in civil cases brought against state sponsors of terrorism .

until fy2016 , cvf money had not been used to fund grant programs outside of those authorized by voca ; however , in the fy2016 and fy2017 appropriations acts , cvf funds were transferred to the office on violence against women ( ovw ) to be used for specified grant programs authorized under the violence against women act .

the administration's fy2018 budget request proposes to use the cvf to fund multiple doj accounts not authorized by voca , including those that address domestic violence , sex offenders , trafficking victims , and child abuse .

while it could be argued that funds for non - voca grant programs go to support crime victims , it raises a question about whether these actions might pave the way for the cvf to be used to support grant programs that might not be victim - focused .

on the other hand , the cvf has a balance of more than $9 billion , which indicates that receipts to the fund , for certain years , exceeded the congressionally specified cap ; however , as mentioned , congress substantially increased the cap in fy2015 and increased it further in fy2016 ( see table 1 ) .

in addition , deposits into the fund decreased by approximately 44% from fy2015 to fy2016 .

in a time of fiscal constraint , the cvf might provide an avenue to fund some doj grant programs while reducing doj's discretionary appropriation ; however , as shown by the drop in cvf deposits in fy2016 , there is no guarantee that receipts going into the cvf will be consistent from one year to the next .

therefore , if congress were to further increase the cap and continue to use funding from the cvf for non - voca programs , it may not be possible to ensure that there will be a consistent level of funding to support these programs in future budget cycles .

congress may also decide to rescind funds from the balance of the cvf , as it did in november 2015 through the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) .

this law required the rescission and permanent cancellation of $1.5 billion from the balance of the cvf .

this unprecedented rescission and cancellation did not carry any specification as to any redirection for the funds , but rather was treated as a general offset .

this action did not impact , at least not directly , the annual obligation cap on the cvf .

congress could decide to eliminate the cap on the crime victims fund altogether .

if congress should decide to eliminate the cap and allow all collected funds to be distributed in a given fiscal year , it could possibly have significant consequences for the doj budget .

as mentioned , the capped amount and remaining balance in the cvf are considered part of the doj budget total .

these amounts impact the doj appropriation , are used to offset spending limits for doj programs , and are included in the overall budget score for doj .

if congress were to eliminate the cap , it would have to make up the amount of the cvf through offsets .

moreover , congress may consider whether voca programs would be able to use all money in the fund if the obligation cap were eliminated .

while voca may be amended in many possible ways , this report presents two options that congress may choose to consider .

congress may decide to reassess the allocation formula of the cvf ( see figure 1 ) or consider the addition of new programs to be supported through the cvf .

voca assistance administrators have voiced concern that fluctuations in annual obligations can directly impact fund availability for victim assistance formula grants and , to a lesser extent , discretionary grants .

the addition of new programs , increases in funding to other programs funded by the cvf , and new management and administration costs cause a reduction in funding available for victim assistance formula grants and discretionary grants .

congress may choose to review the allocation formula to determine if changes should be made to reduce the impact of fluctuations in obligated funds on these grants .

since 1984 , voca has been amended several times to support additional victim - related activities and accommodate the needs of specific groups of victims , such as child abuse victims and victims of terrorist acts .

congress may choose to continue amending voca to further accommodate the needs of additional special populations , such as victims of elder abuse and rural victims .

while support for victims of elder abuse is an allowable use of the fund , as the "baby boom" generation ages , it is possible that elder abuse will grow as a social concern .

similarly , victims in rural areas are supported through voca programs , but they face unique barriers to assistance such as lack of qualified service professionals and higher costs and availability of transportation to obtain services .

other populations with unique risks and needs may present themselves , and congress may choose to use voca as one potential vehicle to address those risks and needs .

currently , the voca formula does not incorporate american indian tribal governments for its two largest programs ; the victim assistance and victim compensation formula grant programs .

while tribal governments are eligible to receive assistance and compensation funds from their respective state victim programs ( eg , in the form of sub - grants ) , some have argued that there should be a dedicated amount from the crime victims fund directed to american indian tribes each year .

in the 114 th congress , the senate committee on indian affairs marked up the securing urgent resources vital to indian victim empowerment act ( survive act ; s. 1704 ) , which would have amended voca to create a special allotment ( 5% of the annual obligation capped amount ) for tribes .

these funds would have been used to create a new grant program for tribal crime victims services and compensation to be administered by the u.s. department of the interior .

the administration's fy2018 budget request proposes to set aside 5% of the fy2018 obligation cap for grants and assistance to american indian tribes "to improve services and justice for victims of crime. .

federal spending can be divided into the budget categories of discretionary spending , mandatory spending , and net interest .

in certain circumstances , reductions in mandatory spending can generate offsets that allow higher levels of discretionary spending than would otherwise be permitted under congressional budget rules or under statutory caps on discretionary spending .

changes in mandatory spending ( chimps ) are provisions in appropriations acts that reduce or constrain mandatory spending , and they can provide offsets to discretionary spending .

the obligation limitation on the cvf has been the chimp item that has generated the largest offset of discretionary spending in recent years .

in the 115 th congress , the fairness for crime victims act of 2017 ( h.r .

275 ) has been introduced , and if enacted would adjust the way chimps affect the cvf and how it is used as an offset of discretionary spending .

also , the bill is intended to ensure that the cvf annual obligation cap is never less than the average amount of deposits into the cvf of the previous three fiscal years .

as mentioned , the fy2017 obligation cap was calculated based on a three - year average of collections into the cvf .

