the u.s. department of veterans affairs ( va ) , previously named the veterans administration , has been providing veterans educational assistance ( gi bill ® ) benefits since 1944 .

the benefits have been intended , at various times , to compensate for compulsory service , encourage voluntary service , prevent unemployment , provide equitable benefits to all who served , and promote military retention .

in general , the benefits provide grant aid to eligible individuals enrolled in approved educational and training programs .

the newest gi bill was enacted on june 30 , 2008 , as the post - 9 / 11 veterans' educational assistance act of 2008 ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) , title v of the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-252 ) .

although the va still provides benefits under several older gi bills , participation and spending for the post - 9 / 11 gi bill has represented approximately 80% or more of total gi bill participation and spending in each year since fy2013 .

in fy2018 , the program is estimated to benefit almost 800,000 individuals and expend over $12 billion .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill was enacted in response to findings that "service on active duty in the armed forces [had] been especially arduous for the members of the armed forces since september 11 , 2001," and that there was a need for an educational assistance program that provided "enhanced educational assistance benefits … worthy of such service. .

the benefits were designed to meet four main objectives: 1. provide reservists benefits equivalent to members of the regular armed forces for equivalent , though often not continuous , active duty service ; 2. ensure comprehensive educational benefits ; 3. meet military recruiting goals ; and 4. improve military retention through transferability of benefits .

it was recognized that veterans and servicemembers would be eligible for u.s. department of education ( ed ) student financial aid benefits such as pell grants and stafford loans ; u.s. department of defense ( dod ) educational assistance ; and various state , local , and other federal benefits in addition to the basic post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits .

many members of congress hoped that a benefit that exceeded amounts available under the other active gi bills would ameliorate the military recruiting challenges and higher unemployment rate among veterans compared with non - veterans of the same age group that existed in 2008 .

there was some discussion about whether increasing the monthly benefit might result in lower retention in the armed forces .

some dod research suggested that education is not a very important factor in the decision to stay in or leave the military , while other evidence suggested that very high education benefits would encourage discharge .

dod considered the ability to transfer benefits to dependents critical to retention .

the administration was interested in transferability as well , and president george w. bush advocated for transferability in a state of the union address .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill is codified under title 38 u.s.c. , chapter 33 .

the stated purpose is to reward members of the armed forces for service on active duty since september 11 , 2001 ; maintain a history of offering educational assistance to veterans ; respond to the needs of the armed forces when not at peace ; demonstrate the high esteem with which military service is held ; recognize the difficult challenges involved in readjusting to civilian life after serving ; and enhance the educational assistance benefits to those who serve on active duty after september 10 , 2001 .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill provides aid payments to or on behalf of participants pursuing approved programs of education for tuition and fees , housing , books and supplies , and other education - related expenditures .

the program became effective august 1 , 2009 .

the program is permanently authorized and supported through mandatory funds .

following enactment , concerns were raised about several aspects of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , and calls were made for the program to be amended .

several laws have been enacted to amend programmatic aspects of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ) , enacted on june 24 , 2009 , created the marine gunnery sergeant john david fry scholarship .

the post - 9 / 11 veterans' educational assistance improvements act of 2010 ( improvements act ; p.l .

111-377 ) , enacted on january 4 , 2011 , made several amendments to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and other veterans' educational assistance programs .

the restoring gi bill fairness act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-26 ) , enacted on august 3 , 2011 , temporarily reverses one amendment of the improvements act for some individuals attending private institutions of higher learning ( ihls ) in seven states .

the honoring america's veterans and caring for camp lejeune families act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-154 ) , enacted on august 6 , 2012 , requires annual reports to congress on the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and the survivors' and dependents' educational assistance program ( dea ; 38 u.s.c. , chapter 35 ) .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) , enacted on january 2 , 2013 , expands eligibility to certain members of the coast guard reserve .

the veterans' access to care through choice , accountability , and transparency act of 2014 ( veterans' access to care act ; p.l .

113-146 ) , enacted on august 7 , 2014 , expands eligibility and reduced tuition and fee charges for some participants .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( p.l .

114-92 ) , enacted on november 25 , 2015 , prohibits concurrent receipt of unemployment insurance and post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits .

the jeff miller and richard blumenthal veterans health care and benefits improvement act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-315 ) , enacted on december 16 , 2016 , extends benefit availability for some individuals and streamlined claim processing .

the harry w. colmery veterans educational assistance act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-48 ) , also known as the forever gi bill , enacted on august 16 , 2017 , eliminates the time limitation on use of benefits , expanded eligibility , and modified benefit amounts .

the amendments will be noted in this report , as applicable .

this report provides a detailed description of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill .

the first section describes participant eligibility criteria .

the second section indicates a participant's entitlement to benefits and the period during which the benefits must be used .

the third section describes the eligible programs of education .

the subsequent section explains the eligible benefit payments .

the final sections illustrate key links to other programs administered by the u.s. department of veterans affairs and current data on obligations and participation .

the following subsections describe the general eligibility criteria for servicemembers and veterans , the eligibility mechanisms for their dependents , and two unique aspects of eligibility .

the first describes the need for individuals to make an irrevocable election to receive post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits .

the second describes limited authority for individuals formerly eligible for reserves educational assistance program ( reap ; 10 u.s.c. , chapter 1607 ) to achieve eligibility under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill provides eligible persons an entitlement to educational assistance .

this entitlement is measured in time — months and days .

for qualifying individuals , the entitlement period is 36 months ( or its equivalent in part - time educational assistance ) .

generally , receipt of educational assistance payments for one day of full - time pursuit reduces the entitlement period by one day or a proportional percentage of a day for less - than - full - time pursuit .

however , certain educational assistance payments reduce the entitlement period depending on the amount of the payment , as highlighted in the section on benefit payments .

the entitlement of a transferee may be less than or equal to 36 months .

the qualifying individual's 36 months of entitlement may be variously distributed to himself , a child , a spouse , or some combination of himself , a child , and a spouse .

further , the qualifying individual can modify the number of months of transferred entitlement or revoke the designation at any time .

as dependents use the transferred benefit , the remaining entitlement periods of both the dependents and qualifying individual are reduced .

in some instances , the entitlement period may be extended or modified .

any entitlement that was charged for an incomplete course or program for which the individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time as a result of an educational institution closing is restored .

the same applies to an entitlement initially charged for a course or program if a necessary course is disapproved by a subsequently established or modified policy , regulation , or law .

in addition , an entitlement is not charged for the interim ( through the end of the academic term but no more than 120 days ) housing allowance paid following either a closure or disapproval .

the entitlement period is not reduced for individuals who must discontinue a course ( s ) and fail to receive credit or training time as a result of certain service obligations .

for reservists , a call to active duty under section 688 , 12301 ( a ) , 12301 ( d ) , 12301 ( g ) , 12302 , or 12304 of title 10 u.s.c .

qualifies .

for active duty servicemembers , assignment to a new duty location or an increased amount of work qualifies .

in general , once the entitlement period is exhausted , veterans and servicemembers may continue receiving educational assistance through the end of the academic term if more than halfway through , or a 12-week period if not on an academic term schedule .

some individuals are subject to a delimiting date after which no post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits may be earned or paid .

for individuals whose last discharge or release from active duty was before january 1 , 2013 , no benefits may be paid 15 years or more after discharge or release from active duty .

spouses using benefits transferred from qualifying individuals who were last discharged or released from active duty service before january 1 , 2013 , must use the benefits within 15 years of the qualifying individuals' last discharge or release .

children using transferred benefits must use the benefit before reaching 26 years of age .

for fry scholarship recipients , the benefit is available for children who first became eligible before january 1 , 2013 , until age 33 , and for spouses who first became eligible before january 1 , 2013 , during the 15-year period following the spouse first becoming eligible .

all other individuals are not subject to a delimiting date .

for individuals whose last discharge or release from active duty was on or after january 1 , 2013 , there is no delimiting date .

spouses using benefits transferred from qualifying individuals who were last discharged or released from active duty service on or after january 1 , 2013 , may use the benefits until the entitlement is exhausted .

for fry scholarship recipients who first became eligible on or after january 1 , 2013 , the benefit is available until the entitlement is exhausted .

there are limitations on when family members may begin using their benefits .

a spouse can begin using transferred benefits after the servicemember completes at least six years of service .

spouses who subsequently divorce post - 9 / 11 gi bill - eligible individuals are still eligible to use the transferred benefits unless the qualifying individuals revoke the transfer .

children using transferred benefits have to achieve a high school diploma , achieve the equivalent of a high school diploma , or reach 18 years of age before using a transferred benefit .

in addition , the qualifying individual has to complete at least 10 years of service before a designated child can use the transferred benefit .

fry scholarship recipients may begin using the benefits once eligible , except that children must be at least 18 years of age .

like most veterans' educational assistance benefits , post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits can be used to support students pursuing approved programs of education at a variety of training establishments and educational institutions , including institutions of higher learning ( ihls ) .

the eligible programs may include the following: the eligible programs of education must be approved by a state approving agency ( saa ) or the va , or must be deemed approved by statutory provisions .

saas are federally authorized state entities that approve programs of education for the gi bills .

under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , several types of benefit payments are available , including payments for tuition and fees , the yellow ribbon program , housing , books and supplies , tutorial assistance , test fees , and relocation and travel assistance .

the following describes the various payments and the criteria for determining the amount of each payment for which participants may be eligible .

for individuals using transferred benefits , children receive payments as if not on active duty , whereas spouses receive payments according to the current status of the qualifying individuals .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill is an appropriated entitlement program , meaning the entitlement spending is funded in annual appropriations acts .

while the funding is provided in the annual appropriations acts , the level of spending for appropriated entitlements is not controlled through the annual appropriations process .

instead , the level of spending for appropriated entitlements is based on the benefit and eligibility criteria established in law , and the amount provided in appropriations acts is based on meeting this projected level .

obligations for the post - 9 / 11 gi bill have increased from $5.5 billion in fy2010 , the first full year of implementation , to an estimated $12.2 billion in fy2019 ( table 3 ) .

participation has more than doubled from over 350,000 in fy2010 to an estimate of almost 800,000 in fy2019 .

on average in fy2010 , participants received almost $14,500 each in benefits , and participants in fy2019 are estimated to receive almost $15,900 each .

participation data by program of education are not currently available .

