u.s. energy policy since the arab oil embargo in the 1970s has been aimed at a long - term goal with three major dimensions: to assure a secure supply of energy , to keep energy costs low enough to meet the needs of a growing economy , and to protect the environment while producing and consuming that energy .

a continuing theme during this period has been that dependence on imported energy , particularly oil for the transportation sector , impedes that aim in all three dimensions .

but the importance given to import dependence varies .

for some , import dependence is the primary concern ; for others , particularly those focused on environmental issues , it is a symptom of a general crisis that arises from indiscriminate consumption of fossil fuels .

a particularly controversial aspect of the debate is the issue of global climate change , because burning fossil fuels produces large amounts of carbon dioxide , a greenhouse gas .

like the goals of energy policy , the means of achieving them have three dimensions: reducing consumption by increased energy efficiency ; increasing domestic production of conventional energy sources , particularly oil and natural gas ; and developing new sources of energy , particularly renewable energy and renewable fuels , that can replace oil and other fossil fuels .

pursuing the goals of energy policy has been complicated by the diversity of energy consumption and supply in the united states .

on the consumption side , there are three major sectors: residential / commercial , industrial , and transportation .

on the supply side , the primary sources have traditionally been fossil energy: petroleum , natural gas ( and "natural gas liquids" such as propane and butane ) , and coal .

electricity , which is both an energy source and a consumer of energy , has replaced some fossil fuels: about 75% of the energy consumed by the residential / commercial sector is electricity , and industrial energy consumption is about 35% electricity .

but in the transportation sector , petroleum has remained dominant .

only in the past few years has corn - derived ethanol become a significant transportation fuel , replacing around 10% of gasoline consumption .

a diverse spectrum of generating sources is used to produce electricity .

coal for many years supplied half the electricity generated nationally .

in recent years its share has declined ; it was about 33% in 2015 .

generation by natural gas has risen in importance , supplying nearly an equal percentage in the same year .

to those who regard global climate change as an urgent issue , this trend is important because generating electricity from coal emits roughly twice the carbon dioxide per kilowatt - hour than generating from natural gas .

nuclear fission supplies about 20% , hydropower less than 10% .

petroleum , an important generating fuel in the 1970s and early 1980s , now contributes less than 1% of electricity generation .

a surge of construction of wind - powered generating capacity has brought its share of total generation to almost 5% .

an issue that cuts across all these factors is the role of government .

how much does and should government policy affect energy markets ? .

a fundamental dichotomy that lies beneath many individual policy debates , not only in energy issues , is between those who see government intervention as a positive force , and those who view it at best as a necessary evil to be restricted as much as possible .

energy policy historically has often been legislated in large , complex bills that deal with a wide variety of issues , with debate spanning several sessions .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ; p.l .

109-58 ) was the most recent comprehensive general legislation , with provisions and authorizations in almost all areas of energy policy .

epact 2005 also set up in doe the program of energy project loan guarantees which became a source of controversy and debate following the bankruptcy of the solyndra solar system manufacturing facility in 2011 .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) set new target fuel economy standards for cars and light trucks of 35 miles per gallon by 2020 , and expanded the renewable fuels standard ( rfs ) to require 9.0 billion gallons of biofuels in transportation in 2008 , rising to 36 billion gallons by 2022 .

eisa also included new efficiency standards for appliances and for light bulbs , the latter being particularly controversial in the 112 th congress .

in the 111 th congress the american recovery and reinvestment act ( the "stimulus" act , arra , p.l .

111-5 ) had major energy policy provisions , including expansion of the loan guarantee program and large increases in funding for renewable energy programs .

the department of energy's office of energy efficiency and renewable energy , in addition to the $2 billion appropriated in the fy2009 regular appropriations bill , received $17 billion in arra , of which $11.5 billion was for grants to states for energy , efficiency , and weatherization programs .

the office of electricity delivery and energy reliability , which had historically been funded at about $150 million per year , received $4.5 billion in arra , directed at establishing "smart grid" technology for the electric power industry .

in the second session of the 114 th congress , both the house and senate are considering broad energy legislation , as well as specific topics of key interest .

on april 20 , 2016 , the senate passed s. 2012 , the energy policy and modernization act .

on december 3 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

8 , the north american energy security and infrastructure act of 2015 .

on may 25 , 2016 , the house passed an amended version of s. 2012 which contains the text of h.r .

8 , as well as the text of several other energy and natural resources - related bills .

the conference committee met for the first time on september 8 .

both bills would address a variety of energy topics , including energy efficiency in federal buildings , data centers , manufacturing , and schools ; water conservation / efficiency ; electric grid cybersecurity ; and review of the strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) .

the house bill also includes topics such as electric grid physical security and study of electricity markets ; the senate bill also includes provisions on helium and critical minerals , electric grid energy storage , and loan programs .

further , both bills contain major natural resources provisions , including a title on forestry management in the house and permanent reauthorization of the land and water conservation fund in the senate .

in june 2013 , president obama released a climate action plan and directed epa to propose standards for carbon dioxide emissions from existing power plants by june 2014 and to finalize the standards a year later .

epa proposed the standards on june 2 , 2014 , and finalized them on august 3 , 2015 .

the rule , known as the clean power plan ( cpp ) , sets individual state targets for average emissions from existing power plants .

the cpp set a deadline of september 6 , 2016 , for states to submit implementation plans to epa detailing how they will meet these targets .

however , the cpp is the subject of ongoing litigation in which a number of states and other entities have challenged the rule , while other states and entities have intervened in support of the rule .

on february 9 , 2016 , the supreme court stayed the clean power plan for the duration of the litigation .

on september 27 , 2016 , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) heard oral arguments on the case .

in the 114 th congress several pieces of legislation have been introduced regarding the cpp .

in the first session , both the senate and house passed s.j.res .

24 , to disapprove the rule under the congressional review act ( november 17 and december 1 , 2015 , respectively ) .

the president vetoed the resolution on december 18 , 2015 .

in addition , on june 24 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

2042 , the ratepayer protection act of 2015 , which would delay implementation of the cpp and allow states to opt out of the rule .

in the senate , s. 1324 , the affordable reliable electricity now act , contains similar provisions .

some major energy topics were addressed at the end of first session of the 114 th congress as part of the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

among other provisions , the act repealed the 40-year limitation on exports of u.s. - produced crude oil under the energy policy and conservation act .

before the repeal , the united states exported roughly 500,000 barrels of crude oil per day to canada .

through the end of june 2016 , approximately 29 million barrels total have been exported to new destinations in the caribbean , europe , and asia .

the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act also extended several energy tax incentives , including the production tax credits ( ptc ) for wind and solar electricity , electric vehicle tax credits , and incentives for advanced biofuel production .

early in the first session of the 114 th congress , the house and senate passed the keystone xl pipeline approval act ( s. 1 ) , which was vetoed by president obama on february 24 , 2015 .

the bill would have immediately approved this controversial pipeline project .

on november 6 , 2016 , the department of state determined that the pipeline would "not serve the national interest of the united states," and rejected transcanada's permit application .

under provisions of epact 2005 , epa does not have regulatory jurisdiction over certain aspects of hydraulic fracturing .

the fracturing responsibility and awareness of chemicals act ( frac act , h.r .

1482 and s. 785 ) would give epa such jurisdiction under the safe drinking water act .

the safe hydration is an american right in energy development act of 2015 ( h.r .

1515 ) would amend the sdwa to create a new prohibition on hydraulic fracturing unless the party conducting the operations agrees to comply with new testing and data reporting requirements .

the fracturing regulations are effective in state hands act ( s. 828 ) would give states sole jurisdiction to regulate hydraulic fracturing within their borders , including on federal land .

on august 28 , 2012 , the obama administration issued new joint passenger vehicle corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) and greenhouse gas ( ghg ) standards for vehicle model years ( my ) 2017-2025 .

however , while epa has authority to set ghg standards over an unlimited time frame under the clean air act , the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) is constrained by the energy policy and conservation act to setting standards in five - year increments .

thus , nhtsa has established standards for my2017-my2021 , and only proposed standards beyond that .

as part of the 2012 rulemaking , the agencies committed to a "comprehensive mid - term evaluation" in 2017 to assess the progress of the program , revisit cost - benefit analyses , and propose new cafe standards .

at the same time that epa and nhtsa are preparing for the mid - term evaluation , automakers are seeking regulatory or legislative changes to limit their potential penalties under the cafe program .

because of differences between the two statutes , while some automakers are in compliance with the ghg standards , they may still potentially face penalties under the cafe standards .

