fannie mae and freddie mac are stockholder - owned , government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , which purchase existing mortgages , guarantee investors that the mortgages will be paid on time , pool the mortgages into mortgage - backed securities ( mbss ) , and either keep the mbss as an investment or sell the mbss to investors .

congressional charters give the gses a special relationship with the federal government , and it is widely believed that the federal government implicitly guarantees their $1.2 trillion in bonds and $3.7 trillion in mbss .

the charters give these gses special public policy goals aimed at providing liquidity in the mortgage market and promoting homeownership for underserved groups and locations .

in 2008 , the gses' financial condition had weakened and there were concerns over their ability to meet obligations .

on september 7 , 2008 , the federal government took control of these gses from their stockholders and management in a process known as conservatorship .

the goal of conservatorship is to restore the gses' financial strength and to return control to their stockholders and management .

congressional interest in fannie mae and freddie mac has increased in recent years , primarily because the federal government's continuing conservatorship of these gses has raised doubts about their future and concerns about the potential cost of supporting them .

congressional interest has been reflected by the introduction of bills to reform or replace the gses and by oversight hearings .

this report presents , in analytical question and answer form , the major issues surrounding fannie mae's and freddie mac's financial conditions , and various public policy options under discussion .

a glossary of terms is included at the end of this report .

prior to the development of the secondary mortgage market , mortgage markets were local , and there were significant differences across the nation in mortgage rates and relatively large fluctuations in lending activity .

primary lenders had to balance their lending practices with their deposits received , which led to severe credit shortages during economic downturns , when savings accounts were depleted by withdrawals .

this shortage was exacerbated due to the concentration of major money centers in areas like chicago and new york , far from many who needed home loans .

there was no way to move funds from these areas where mortgage money was available to other areas , such as california , where it was in relatively short supply .

in effect , this amounted to a geographic barrier that prevented the law of supply and demand from operating on a national level in the home loan market .

the secondary mortgage market combined these many regional mortgage markets into a single national market that draws financing from around the world .

to encourage improvement in housing standards and conditions and to provide a system of mutual mortgage insurance , congress passed , and president franklin d. roosevelt signed into law , the national housing act in 1934 .

title iii of the national housing act established national mortgage associations , giving rise to the creation of fannie mae .

in its original form , fannie mae was a federal government agency that was chartered to support government - backed mortgages and carry out some government subsidy functions .

in 1954 , congress re - chartered fannie mae as a mixed government and private - sector entity , with a clearly delineated separation between its market - oriented ( i.e. , secondary mortgage trading ) and governmental ( i.e. , special assistance and managing and liquidating government - held mortgages ) functions .

in 1968 , congress split the firm into two distinct organizations , with the secondary market arm retaining the fannie mae name and the government functions arm taking the name ginnie mae , short for the government national mortgage association .

the partitioning legislation re - chartered fannie mae as a gse to become completely privately owned with no federal funding .

fannie mae completed this transition in 1970 .

in 1970 , congress enacted the emergency home finance act , which authorized fannie mae to buy conventional mortgages .

fannie mae bought most of the mortgages from mortgage bankers .

savings and loans , the other major source of mortgage money , were restricted to holding mortgages and were generally unable to work with fannie mae .

to facilitate secondary market trading of conventional mortgages for savings and loan associations , the act created freddie mac as a wholly owned subsidiary of the federal home loan bank system ( fhlbs ) .

in 1989 , congress re - chartered freddie mac so that its shares could trade on the new york stock exchange , in the same manner as fannie mae's .

the 1989 act also did away with the separate missions of fannie mae and freddie mac , with the result that today the two enterprises have similar characteristics .

fannie mae and freddie mac purchase mortgages that lenders have already made to homeowners .

these mortgages must meet fannie mae's and freddie mac's standards and not exceed the conforming loan limit .

these mortgages are guaranteed by the purchasing gse , pooled into mbss , and either sold to investors or kept by the gse as an investment .

