the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa ) and became operational january 24 , 2003 , barely 16 months after the terrorist attacks on the pentagon and world trade center on september 11 , 2001 .

rather than being as a completely new entity , the department was established by assembling existing parts of 22 different federal agencies and departments into a new framework .

the timing and means of establishing dhs , coupled with the perceived urgency of its mission in its early years , hastened the growth and development of the department's operational capabilities .

at the same time , these factors hindered potential efforts to more fully integrate the functions of the department's different components .

a former navy facility at the corner of nebraska and massachusetts avenues in northwest washington , dc ( known as "the nac," short for "the nebraska avenue complex" ) was designated as the interim dhs headquarters shortly after the confirmation of tom ridge as the first secretary of the department .

the headquarters functions of the department's components were not physically consolidated at the time , but instead were left scattered across the national capital region in accordance with their past history , rather than their new role in the dhs .

as a result , dhs today stands as the third - largest department of the federal government , but runs its operations from more than 50 different locations in the national capital region .

in 2004 , the coast guard ( one of the larger components of the newly minted dhs ) began to explore how to meet its needs for new headquarters facilities .

the coast guard headquarters was housed in several leased locations that were too small for the coast guard's needs and prone to flooding .

the general services administration ( gsa ) , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and dhs determined that a federally owned site would be more cost - effective than securing a replacement lease .

in the meantime , the interim location of the dhs headquarters was proving to be inadequate .

one of the initial assumptions at the time of the establishment of dhs was that the department would only need a headquarters staff of roughly 800 persons .

once the department was established and roles , responsibilities , and management needs became clear , dhs determined that the nac would not meet mission execution requirements over the long term .

in december , 2004 , gsa became the landlord of record for the west campus of st. elizabeths hospital in southeast washington , dc , which had recently been declared excess by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the campus was also a national historic landmark , due its architecture and its service since the mid - 19 th century .

the passage of time and the lack of maintenance and upgrades to the campus over the years had taken a toll .

restoring the buildings to basic operating capacity was estimated by senate government reform committee investigators as approaching $500 million in 2003 .

senator collins noted in a hearing on federal investments in real property: the deterioration of the west campus of st. elizabeths is a particularly tragic example of how the federal government's mismanagement of its real property can result in massive waste of taxpayer dollars .

this hearing will examine how this once elegant , thriving federal property has deteriorated to the point that it could cost nearly $500 million to rehabilitate its buildings... .

the poor oversight of st. elizabeths by both hhs and the d.c. government is inexcusable .

what was a valuable asset in the mid - 1980's today is a massive liability .

nevertheless , the 182-acre site at the time had 61 buildings with 1.1 million square feet of space and represented , according to gsa , "the last parcel of federally owned land in the district , with a capacity to house large agencies with high - level security requirements. .

the decision was made to keep the west campus of st. elizabeths as a part of the federal real estate portfolio .

president george w. bush's fy2006 budget request had announced the administration's plan to consolidate the coast guard's headquarters on the west campus of st. elizabeths — an initiative that received initial planning funding in gsa's budget that year .

the administration's fy2007 budget request sought the initial tranche of construction funding for the new coast guard headquarters through the dhs appropriations bill , but both house and senate appropriators , when briefed on the idea of a larger consolidation project for dhs headquarters at the site , directed dhs to not proceed on either project until a new headquarters master plan was completed .

in october 2006 , dhs secretary michael chertoff put forward a master plan for "unifying … core headquarters facilities with those of our operating components," which essentially broadened the coast guard project to include the overall dhs headquarters consolidation as well , moving 14,000 of the 22,000 people that were projected to staff headquarters functions for the department and its components to st. elizabeths .

earlier that year , the white house issued a report entitled "the federal response to katrina: lessons learned. .

while this report did not call for a consolidated dhs headquarters per se , it did state a need to develop a joint departmental operations center with robust command and control functions to promote more efficient incident response .

this need would be used to help advocate for the consolidated headquarters project in future years .

since that year , administrations of both parties have requested funding for this initiative to support a coordinated construction plan .

however , this project has not received consistent funding — over 70% of the funding it has received so far came in fy2009 when a surge of supplemental funding combined with the regular appropriations for gsa and dhs provided almost $1.1 billion for the project .

most of these funds were used to construct the new 1.2 million square foot coast guard headquarters at st. elizabeths , which the coast guard occupied in 2013 .

given this lack of consistent funding , administration officials indicated in 2012 that the coordinated construction schedule was no longer feasible .

the cost estimates for the project , provided in june 2013 , present a phased approach of funding individual "useable segments" of roughly 300,000 gross square feet each year .

if funding is provided for one segment each year , dhs and gsa indicate the project will cost $4.5 billion to complete , with the final segment completing in fy2026 .

even so , gsa estimates $697 million in savings over thirty years solely comparing construction costs to lease costs .

the revised baseline for the project does note that if additional funding is provided in earlier years that "segments could be collapsed , shortening the timeline and reducing the estimated project cost. .

however , even with the revised schedule with potentially more annually affordable structuring of work , each of the first four years of the new plan would require an annual investment of over $330 million by dhs and gsa combined .

fy2014 represented the first fiscal year in which funding was requested following this new baseline , and the $190 million provided to gsa and dhs for project construction was more than $164 million short of the request level .

in september , 2014 , the government accountability office ( gao ) reported that dhs and gsa "did not follow relevant gsa guidance and gao's leading practices when developing the cost and schedule estimates for the st. elizabeths project , and the estimates are unreliable. .

critics pointed to the report as evidence of mismanagement of the project .

gsa and dhs testified that improved compliance with these guidelines would be a part of their latest revision of the project plan , which was under development at the time the report was released and which was promised as a part of the fy2016 budget request for dhs .

it can be argued that the creation of dhs was a reaction to a national crisis .

after years of reaction , departmental reorganization , and increasing distance from the events that led to the creation of the department , there are issues that remain from that more tumultuous time that have yet to be addressed .

the consolidation of dhs headquarters functions is one of those unresolved issues .

at the time the bush administration unveiled its idea for the department , stan collender , writing for national journal , pointed out that the administration's plan did not answer the question of how transition costs would be paid for and where the new headquarters would be: [t]he assumption is that there will be moving costs involved as at least the administrative functions of the various homeland security agencies are brought together under one roof .

better coordination is , after all , one of the key reasons for this new department ; it would make little sense to leave its disparate parts in different locations .

collender went on to ask questions about building a new building , using an existing federal space , or leasing a private one , and finally noted the irony of the creation of the department and its inevitable transition costs eating into the operational funding for the various components .

these questions of real property management and budget constraints remain an active part of the debate today .

congress and the department are operating in a different environment than when the consolidation plan was originally drawn up , both in terms of the security threats the nation perceives and the budgetary situation .

even the expectations of what workspace is required for an agency to function has evolved over this period of time with the growing acceptance of telework and flexible office arrangements .

the administration's pending revised plan for st. elizabeths may or may not fit these new realities better than the previous plans .

it is worth noting that making a decision to proceed or not with dhs headquarters consolidation on the west campus st. elizabeths will not make certain costs vanish .

whatever course congress chooses to follow , costs will be rebalanced between a number of types of expenses: construction and move costs for a consolidated headquarters ; continued rents for leases across the national capital region for maintaining existing headquarters facilities ; or the possible ( and more difficult to quantify ) security , management , communications , logistics , and command and control impacts presented by both the status quo or any proposed change .

gsa would also still be responsible for the not insignificant cost of restoring and maintaining the st. elizabeths campus .

the need for the continuing missions of the dhs components , the existence of dhs as an entity , and the realities of putting st. elizabeths back to productive use drive these costs — even an optimally efficient mix of these investments will still result in significant costs to the federal government .

given the size of the department , the importance of its missions , and the scale of these costs , how the dhs headquarters functions are housed and managed will be an issue of congressional interest for years to come .

analysis of fiscal years with denied requests or partial funding , fy2007-fy2013 appropriations for the dhs headquarters consolidation effort are carried in two bills: the construction needs for the basic buildings and infrastructure are typically funded in the financial services and general government appropriations bill , through the general services administration ( gsa ) , while the mission - specific needs are typically funded through the homeland security appropriations bill .

table a - 1 at the end of the appendix provides a summary of funding requested and ultimately appropriated for the consolidation of coast guard and dhs headquarters at st. elizabeths .

fy2007 in the course of developing the fy2007 appropriations bills , the house appropriations subcommittee for homeland security stated that the initial proposal for coast guard headquarters evolved into a consolidated headquarters project without answers being provided to the committee on the reasoning behind the site choice , the full range of costs involved and what components would move .

the committee rejected funding for the coast guard headquarters project in the report accompanying the bill .

roughly a month later , the senate homeland security appropriations report took a substantively similar position , which was echoed in the final conference report .

both house and senate appropriators were concerned that dhs was wasting money on investing in the nebraska avenue complex , which they would then abandon for a newer , larger , more expensive headquarters at st. elizabeths .

when the house appropriations committee reported out the transportation , treasury , and housing and urban development appropriations bill , which at the time included gsa , the committee report for the bill also rejected the coast guard project , but on the basis of their belief that the project would have little positive impact on the local community .

the senate companion report was silent on the project , and the year ending continuing resolution ( p.l .

110-5 ) expressly denied funding for a coast guard headquarters at st. elizabeths .

fy2008 for fy2008 , the house appropriations committee recommended partial funding for the project , while still expressing concerns about overinvesting in the nebraska avenue complex and the breadth of the st. elizabeths project .

the senate also provided partial funding for the project , but in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , $6 million was provided for continuing improvements at the nebraska avenue complex , rather than the $101 million provided in the house bill for the nac and st. elizabeths or the $88 million provided in the senate for st. elizabeths alone .

in fy2008 , the gsa appropriations were moved to the financial services and general government appropriations act , where they remain today .

the house financial services appropriations subcommittee expressed concern about the size of the coast guard project , and about possible overinvestment in the nac given the impending move , but did not explicitly restrict funding for the projects , despite undesignated cuts to the accounts that would support the projects .

the senate funded the requested projects in full , but in the final version of p.l .

110-161 , only $28 million in funding for the nac remained .

fy2011 for fy2011 , the administration requested $380 million through the gsa for construction , infrastructure , historic preservation efforts , and initial work on the new highway interchange .

it also sought almost $288 million through the dhs budget for headquarters consolidation , as well as consolidation of its leases housing more mission support functions outside st. elizabeths .

the combined appropriation for the requested budget for the project was unmet , falling over half a billion dollars short of the total request , despite testimony before the house appropriations committee's homeland security subcommittee about the urgency of the need and the potential long - term budget savings .

fy2011 appropriations for federal government operations were provided through a year - long continuing resolution ( cr ) , which included $77 million for the headquarters consolidation project through dhs .

the gsa had requested $381 million for st. elizabeths , ultimately provided $30 million to the project from the $82 million it received for construction projects nationwide under the cr .

fy2012 for fy2012 , the administration requested $215 million for headquarters consolidation through the dhs budget , including $160 million for new construction at st. elizabeths , and $55 million for lease consolidation .

they also requested $217 million in the general services administration budget for the project through the federal buildings fund , including funding for planned highway alterations to provide better motor vehicle access to the campus .

the house did not fund the project in the house - passed dhs appropriations bill .

in report language , the committee stated: [b]oth costs and schedule of the current project are matters of concern for the committee .

in hearings the committee held on the st. elizabeths project in 2010 , it became clear that adequate cost controls were essential for this project.… yet costs have grown in a year from $3,400,000,000 to $3,600,000,000 chiefly due to increases in the general services administration share of the project .

the committee notes that dependence on gsa funding requires coordination of funding and management , and that the proposed dhs request , even if resources were available , would likely not coincide with necessary gsa funding .

furthermore , delays are already being factored into the department's planning , as it has projected it will postpone work on the fema section of the facility .

in minority views included in the report , the ranking members of the house subcommittee and full committee had a different perspective: of particular concern is the decision to provide no funding for the new dhs headquarters or for the consolidation of leased property , a penny - wise and pound - foolish decision .

already , based on the delay in finalizing the 2011 bill and the reduced resources provided in that bill for dhs headquarters construction activities , the cost of the headquarters project has grown by $200 million , from a total cost of $3.4 billion to $3.6 billion .

the decision to deny an additional $159,643,000 in 2012 to finalize construction of the first phase of the new headquarters project and begin construction on the second phase will result in higher costs in the out years and will delay , by at least one year , when the coast guard can move into its new headquarters facility ( phase one ) , which is already under construction .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $56 million in title v of their version of the dhs appropriations bill to complete the coast guard headquarters facility , $159 million ( 74% ) below the president's requested funding level .

the senate appropriations committee also expressed concern that limited funding would result in no other dhs headquarters components using the st. elizabeths campus , and included in their bill a requirement that dhs provide within 60 days of enactment an expenditure plan and an initial analysis of the mix of offices to be housed at the headquarters complex .

the house appropriations committee's financial services subcommittee rejected the administration's entire $840 million request for construction and acquisition under gsa's federal buildings fund .

in zeroing out the request for construction , the report noted "adding to the federal inventory of buildings is not welcomed at a time when the management and use of the current inventory is less than optimal. .

the chairmen of the house subcommittee and full committee expressed concern about the deep cuts in gsa's budget , noting that it reversed a position taken by the current chamber majority in the fy2008 bill .

however , the report does not mention the dhs project specifically .

the senate appropriations committee's financial services subcommittee provided $65 million for the entire construction and acquisition activity at gsa , rather than the $840 million requested .

no mention is made in the bill or report of the dhs headquarters project .

in the final consolidated appropriations bill for fy2012 , the overall combined request of $377 million for gsa and dhs contributions to st. elizabeths resulted in only $93 million in appropriations , with $56 million provided to dhs to complete only the construction of the coast guard portion of the headquarters .

the remaining $37 million for the st. elizabeths project came from the $50 million gsa received for construction projects nationwide .

dhs has indicated that the gsa funding was inadequate to complete work as planned for the coast guard to occupy its new headquarters , so several elements of phase i have been delayed and the funding for those elements redirected to ensure the needed work could be done .

fy2013 the administration's fy2013 budget request for the department of homeland security included $89 million for construction related to st. elizabeths , and $24.5 million for the coast guard to cover operational transition costs for the move to the new facility .

the gsa budget included no funding request for the project .

however , it is noteworthy that the dhs budget justification indicated the request is "to construct i - 295 / malcolm x avenue interchange improvements and west campus access road extension from gate 4 of the u.s. coast guard headquarters building to malcolm x avenue. .

funding for this type of infrastructure , which in this case supports access to multiple federal facilities aside from the st. elizabeths campus , has traditionally been requested and provided in the gsa budget .

the house appropriations committee recommended no funding for the highway interchange or any part of the st. elizabeths project through the management accounts , noting in its report the irregularity of funding a highway interchange through the homeland security bill .

the bill would have provided the administration's requested funding for the coast guard .

in addition , $10 million would have been provided through the coast guard's construction budget to provide additional support for the project .

in the report accompanying h.r .

5855 , the committee noted the following: the committee recommends no new construction funding in the bill for new departmental headquarters consolidation expansion .

this is $89,000,000 below the request .

funding is included , as requested , as part of the coast guard appropriation to cover the costs associated with completing the move of the coast guard headquarters to st. elizabeths .

associated with this , as described below , is additional funding under coast guard construction to ensure completion of the current project , improve site access , and support analysis for follow on work and any necessary planning adjustments for schedule , scope , and cost .

… the committee understands that the department … is actively exploring options to creatively modify or consolidate current leases , in the expectation that a permanent headquarters construction site will be significantly delayed or amended .

the committee encourages the department to continue this effort and to inform the committee of its progress in consolidation no later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this act , including a revised schedule and cost estimates .

further , as noted above , the committee includes $10,000,000 under the coast guard acquisition , construction , and improvements account to complete phase 1 of construction , ensure coast guard will be able to move in 2013 and that there will be no obstacles to access and transportation into the site , and to support orderly planning and analysis for the overall project .

in the minority views accompanying the report , the ranking members of the subcommittee and full committee noted the following: the bill also fails to provide the $89 million for site access , including necessary road and interchange improvements , for dhs personnel to access the new dhs headquarters .

the new dhs headquarters project has been shortchanged over the past few years , causing repeated schedule delays and increasing the costs from $3.4 billion to just over $4 billion if all three phases are constructed .

in the interim , the coast guard may be the only tenant at this new facility for the next 3-5 years , as the bill funds only this relocation in 2013 .

the bill does not include any funding for phase 2 , which was to begin construction for dhs central headquarters and fema .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $89 million for the highway interchange , although it was funded as a part of the under secretary for management's office through a general provision rather than as a stand - alone appropriation in departmental operations as requested .

the committee also fully funded the coast guard's operational transition costs for the move .

no funding was provided for the project through the coast guard construction budget .

an amendment was offered in full committee markup on may 22 , 2012 , to use the $89 million for the highway interchange as an offset for an unrelated amendment .

the amendment failed on a 15-15 vote , and the funding remained in the reported version of the legislation .

in the report accompanying s. 3216 , the committee noted the following: pursuant to section 549 , a total of $89,000,000 is provided for ''office of the under secretary for management'' for costs associated with headquarters consolidation and mission support consolidation .

the under secretary shall submit an expenditure plan no later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this act detailing how these funds will be allocated , including a revised schedule and cost estimates for headquarters consolidation .

quarterly briefings are required on headquarters and mission support consolidation activities , including any deviation from the expenditure plan .

according to the department , an updated plan is being developed in coordination with the general services administration to complete the headquarters consolidation project in smaller , independent segments that are more fiscally manageable in the current budget environment .

the department expects this updated plan to be completed by the end of summer 2012 and it is to be submitted to the committee upon its completion .

the committee expects the plan to identify the discrete construction segments , the associated resource requirements for each segment , and the proposed timeline for requesting funding to complete each segment .

p.l .

113-6 provided $29 million in a general provision for "necessary expenses to plan , acquire , design , construct , renovate , remediate , equip , furnish , improve infrastructure , and occupy buildings and facilities for the department headquarters project and associated mission support consolidation. .

according to the dhs operating plan , this amount was not reduced through sequestration .

fy2014 appropriations the administration's fy2014 budget included requests for funding for the st. elizabeths project through both gsa and dhs .

the gsa request was for $262 million — $202 million for the next phase of the st. elizabeths project and $60 million for infrastructure activities left undone from the previous phase .

the dhs request included $93 million for the next phase of construction and $13 million for support costs for campus security .

p.l .

113-76 included $155 million through the gsa for the project and $35 million through dhs for development of the project .

$13 million for support costs was provided through the coast guard operating expenses appropriation .

the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2014 homeland security appropriation act called for an expenditure plan that included a revised schedule and cost estimate on the project and quarterly briefings "to highlight any deviation from the expenditure plan. .

combined , the two appropriations represented the largest appropriations provided for the project since fy2009 .

according dhs , the fy2014 appropriation was sufficient to begin work on the renovation of the central building on the st. elizabeths campus , where the offices of the executive leadership of the department would be located — however , the funding was not adequate to keep up with the construction schedule outlined in 2013 .

fy2015 appropriations the administration's fy2015 budget request also included funding for the st. elizabeths project through both gsa and dhs .

the gsa request was for $251 million — over half of which would go to constructing a new interchange to facilitate access to federal government facilities in the area from interstate 295 .

the dhs request included $58 million for the next phase of construction and $15 million for campus operational support costs .

the house - passed financial services and general government appropriations bill for fy2015 included no funding for st. elizabeths through the gsa .

the senate appropriations committee draft of the bill included $251 million for the same .

the house - reported homeland security appropriations bill for fy2015 included no funding for headquarters consolidation at st. elizabeths: its senate - reported counterpart included $49 million through a general provision for operational support of the st. elizabeths campus headquarters consolidation and completion of construction on one of the larger historic buildings on the site .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2015 included $144 million for the gsa — the amount requested for the new highway interchange — while dhs was funded by a short - term continuing resolution through february 27 , 2015 , which carried no specific direction regarding funding for headquarters consolidation .

