the clean water act ( cwa ) contains a number of complex and interrelated elements of overall water quality management .

foremost is the requirement in section 303 that states establish ambient water quality standards for water bodies , consisting of the designated use or uses of a water body ( eg , recreational , public water supply , or industrial water supply ) and the water quality criteria which are necessary to protect the use or uses .

standards are then used to determine which waters must be cleaned up , how much effluent may be discharged , and what is needed for protection .

through permitting , states or the environmental protection agency ( epa ) impose wastewater discharge limits on individual industrial and municipal facilities to ensure that water quality standards are attained .

however , congress recognized in the act that , in many cases , pollution controls implemented by industry and cities would be insufficient to attain and maintain water quality standards , due to pollutant contributions from other unregulated sources .

under cwa section 303 ( d ) , states must identify waters for which discharge limits specified in permits are not stringent enough to achieve established water quality standards , after implementation of technology - based controls by industrial and municipal dischargers .

for each waterbody or segment , states are required to set a total maximum daily load ( tmdl ) of pollutants at a level that ensures that applicable water quality standards can be attained and maintained .

a tmdl is essentially a pollution budget , a quantitative estimate of what it takes to achieve state water quality goals , setting the maximum amount of pollution a waterbody can receive without violating water quality standards , including a margin of safety to account for seasonal variations and uncertainty between pollutant loads and the quality of receiving waters .

as such , tmdls provide a scientific calculation of how much pollutant loads need to be reduced to meet those standards .

a tmdl is both a planning process for attaining water quality standards and a quantitative assessment of problems , pollution sources , and pollutant reductions needed to restore and protect a river , stream , or lake .

tmdls may address all pollution sources and allocate needed pollutant reductions among categories of sources that contribute to the water quality impairment , including point sources , such as municipal sewage treatment or industrial plant discharges ( wasteload allocation or wla ) ; and nonpoint sources ( load allocation or la ) , such as runoff from roads , farm fields , and forests , atmospheric deposition , naturally occurring sources , and background sources of the pollutant .

the goal of the tmdl is to eliminate an impairment , not meet a pollutant limit for its own sake .

the tmdl itself does not establish new regulatory controls on sources of pollution , and it does not set discharge limits .

nor is it self - implementing .

however , when tmdls are established , municipal and industrial wastewater treatment plants may be required to install new or improved pollution control technology .

for waters impaired by point source discharges , tmdls are enforced through revisions to existing cwa permits , which include the pollutant limits and a schedule for compliance .

for waters impaired by nonpoint source runoff , because there are no federal controls over these sources ( there is no cwa permit requirement as there is for point sources ) , the primary implementation tools are state - run nonpoint source management programs , coupled with state , local , and federal land management programs and authorities , and financial assistance and incentive programs .

states can but are not required to regulate nonpoint sources to achieve goals set out in a tmdl .

for example , farmers or ranchers may be asked by states to use alternative methods in their operations to prevent fertilizers and pesticides from reaching streams , and they may receive funds to help them install on - farm pollution management systems or practices .

epa has specific responsibilities under section 303 ( d ) .

first , epa is required to review and approve a state's list of impaired waters and tmdls .

second , if a state fails to identify impaired waters and develop a tmdl where one is needed , the cwa requires epa to develop an impaired waters list for the state and make its own tmdl determination .

epa is not authorized to implement a tmdl , but the agency provides technical assistance and funding , which help states develop and implement tmdls .

epa acknowledges that a vigorous tmdl program is needed because significant water quality problems persist in the nation's waters , nearly 40 years after enactment of the cwa .

an estimated 40% of the nation's waters assessed by states do not meet water quality standards .

under the cwa , states are responsible for developing tmdls for waters that they identify as impaired and for implementing pollution control actions to reduce pollution to an amount that meets water quality standards .

tmdls are one element of state water quality management programs .

other activities include standard setting , monitoring , permitting , and enforcement , and all must be integrated with the tmdl program .

most states have lacked the resources to do tmdl analyses , which involve complex assessment in order to ascribe and quantify environmental effects from particular discharge sources .

baseline water quality monitoring data for the analyses ( to identify impaired waters and pollution sources ) have been limited .

epa has both been reluctant to intervene in the states and also lacked resources to do so itself .

thus , there was little initial implementation of the provision enacted in 1972 .

only in 1992 did epa issue regulations requiring states , every two years , to list waters that do not attain water quality standards and establish tmdls to restore water quality .

responding to the failure of states and epa to meet these requirements , however , environmental groups filed lawsuits in more than three dozen states to compel compliance with the law's requirements .

environmentalists see implementation of section 303 ( d ) as important both to achieving the overall goals and objectives of the act and to pressuring epa and states to address nonpoint and other sources that are responsible for many water quality impairments nationwide but have not been well controlled .

of the suits tried or settled , nearly two dozen resulted in court orders requiring expeditious tmdl development by states or epa .

the tmdl litigation falls into three general categories: ( 1 ) challenges intended to compel epa to step in to fulfill tmdl requirements where a state has failed partially or completely to do so ; ( 2 ) challenges to epa's listing of impaired waters , tmdl approval decisions , or epa's promulgation of tmdls ; and ( 3 ) challenges to the substance or content of tmdls .

because of the lawsuits and existing requirements of the law , in 1997 , epa issued interpretive guidance which for the first time called on states to develop long - term schedules for implementing tmdls .

there is neither a cwa nor a regulatory deadline for states to develop tmdls .

under the 1997 guidance , epa recommends that states establish tmdls in order to meet water quality standards within 8 to 13 years of listing the water as impaired .

development of tmdls has increased ( since 1996 , states and epa have established more than 51,000 ) , but many more remain to be completed .

the most recent state 303 ( d ) lists , most of them submitted in 2010 and 2012 , identified over 41,000 waterbodies as not meeting water quality standards and in need of a tmdl , affecting more than 300,000 miles of rivers and shorelines and 5 million acres of lakes and resulting from nearly 72,000 causes of impairment .

nationwide , more than 50% of all impairments are caused by nutrients and sediment , metals including mercury , and pathogens ( eg , fecal coliform , e. coli , enterococcus bacteria , and other ) .

pathogens are the largest single cause of impairments .

development of tmdls does not equate automatically with restoration that attains water quality standards .

implementation is complex and highly dependent on state and local stakeholders .

it takes time , as does demonstrating results .

epa has adopted a goal of having 3,360 waters ( 8.2% of all impaired waters identified in 2002 ) in attainment with applicable water quality standards by 2015 .

after 40 years of implementing the cwa , epa and states acknowledge that a substantial portion of the nation's waters still are impaired or threatened by pollution .

the most recent national inventory of water quality reported that nearly 40% of surveyed water bodies remain too polluted for fishing , swimming , and other designated uses .

yet those numbers only represent rivers , streams , and lakes actually surveyed by state monitoring programs — typically about one - third of all waters .

the tmdl assessments developed by states yield more precise water quality information and identify large numbers of waters requiring additional measures before water quality standards are attained .

the tmdl program is in a period of transition .

many states are emerging from earlier consent decree mandates and are increasingly addressing new challenges — for example , more complex and resource - intensive tmdls , larger scale impairments , and nonpoint sources .

whether the program as it now exists is well suited to address problems such as ocean acidification or climate change is debatable .

in 2011 , epa and state program managers launched discussions of developing new goals for the program .

two years later , these discussions produced a "vision plan" for reforming the process , which includes allowing states the option to consider prioritizing healthy waters , using alternative approaches that incorporate adaptive management , and integrating tmdls with other cwa and safe drinking water act programs .

other than recent oversight hearings on the chesapeake bay tmdl , congress has not shown active interest in the tmdl program for more than a decade .

some stakeholders , especially states , believe that several issues present congress with an opportunity to examine the tmdl provisions of the cwa .

issues could include integrating tmdls into a larger clean water program that considers all steps — from designation of uses to implementation — in order to meet water quality standards , recognizing and striking a balance between water quality restoration and pollution prevention , changing focus from point sources to nonpoint sources , and addressing resource and funding needs .

