security - related implications are of concern in the lead - up to a presidential election .

these concerns are present when it is known there will be a change of administration or in cases where the sitting president is running for reelection against an opponent vying for the office .

a prospective presidential transition period — ranging from candidate's campaign - related activities through placement of new administration personnel — is a unique time in american politics and holds the promise of opportunity as well as a real or perceived vulnerability to the nation's security interests .

on a given day the outgoing administration has the ability to change the policies of a nation and possibly affect the international security environment , yet the following day the president and the national security leadership team may be replaced by a new set of leaders who could have very different strategy and policy goals .

this political dynamic , coupled with the inherent uncertainty accompanying a presidential transfer of power , may provide an opportunity for those who wish to harm u.s. security interests .

unlike other man - made incidents that may occur with little warning , the presidential election period offers a broadly defined time frame in which an enemy of the united states may decide to undertake an incident of national security significance to manipulate the electoral process or change the nation's foreign and domestic policies .

presidential transitions during times of global uncertainty , u.s. involvement in military operations , and risks to national security - related activities are not unique to the 2012-2013 presidential election period ( see appendix a ) .

history shows that some state enemies purposefully select periods of government transition to undertake significant acts of violence with a desire to disrupt a peaceful transfer of power ( see appendix b ) .

while the mere occasion of presidential transition does not ensure an incident of national security significance will occur , security experts argue that this window of potential opportunity is not lost on the enemies of the united states .

for example , according to a 2008 presidential transition - related report provided to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) by the homeland security advisory committee ( hsac ) , "briefings , research , and recent history have provided an appreciation of the potential vulnerabilities during transition periods .

not only are we [united states] aware that vulnerabilities exist , but our enemies are as well. .

while no claims of attempting to influence the united states presidential election have been offered as a factor in the september 11 , 2012 , terrorist attacks on the u.s. consulate in benghazi , libya , incidences such as this could have policy implications during the transition period .

the executive branch is not alone in attempting to ensure the country passes power from one administration to the next in a safe and thoughtful manner .

however , the outgoing and incoming administrations are viewed as primarily responsible for addressing risks to the nation and taking actions to prevent and respond to any incident that may affect the electoral process .

whether the enemies of the united states choose to undertake action that may harm national security interests during this prospective period of transition or the new president experiences a relative peaceful period shortly after entering office , many national security issues will be awaiting a new administration .

how a newly elected president recognizes and responds to these challenges will "depend heavily upon the planning and learning that takes place during the transition from one administration to another. .

during recent presidential transitions , the current and incoming administrations and congress have traditionally undertaken numerous activities to facilitate a smooth transfer of executive branch power .

some of the actions taken during a presidential transition period include consulting with government and private sector experts who have presidential transition expertise , providing information to the president - elect after the election and prior to the inauguration , offering operational briefings on ongoing national security matters to prospective presidential nominees and their staff , preparing briefings books and policy memos detailing the issues of most concern to the current administration , and expediting security clearances for president - elect transition team members .

other activities that the current and incoming administrations and congress may wish to consider undertaking during the presidential transition period include pursuing public outreach efforts to discuss possible risks to the nation , involving the national security representatives of presidential candidates in all transition - related discussions , establishing joint advisory councils responsible for addressing all transition - related risks , requiring the director of national intelligence ( dni ) to undertake efforts to support the nation's awareness of risks , reflecting the national security priorities of the newly elected administration in the upcoming budget , passing fiscal year appropriations without undue delay , quickly assigning newly elected and existing members of congress to committees focused on national security , holding hearings comprised of national security experts to gather ideas on prospective u.s. national security policies and goals , and holding hearings soon after the inauguration of the new president to determine the administration's national security - related priorities .

from a national security perspective , the presidential election period runs from the formal announcement of candidates for the office of the presidency to long past the inauguration , members of the current administration and potential incoming administration may wish to initiate substantive transition activities as soon as possible .

specifically , some scholars state that "enhanced cooperation and communication between the two administrations is demanded by national security and foreign policy concerns. .

it is further observed that , "as the world becomes more dangerous and the risks to harm more immediate , the need for effective and seamless transitions becomes correspondingly greater. .

thus , with respect to national security issues in particular , the need for outgoing and incoming presidents to work together is no longer an option , but an unavoidable demand of the contemporary world .

the presidential election and transition period are characterized by unique national security challenges .

in particular , if the election results in a change of administration , a new president will likely face many national security - related challenges upon taking office .

risks during the transition period may be minimized with proactive executive branch and congressional actions .

whether the enemies of the united states choose to undertake action counter to the nation's security interests or the new president experiences a relatively peaceful period during the transition , a new administration's recognition and response to these security - related challenges will depend heavily on the preparation and education activities that have occurred prior to the inauguration .

while it may be impossible to stop an incident of national security significance during the presidential election process , there are steps that can be taken during all phases of the transition to lessen the risks to the nation .

such actions may be helpful in preparing the nation for possible risks during the presidential election period and mitigating the effects of acts taken by those that wish to cause confusion during the transfer of presidential power .

the transition - related actions or inactions of the outgoing and incoming administration may have a long - lasting affect on a new president's ability to effectively safeguard u.s. interests and may also affect the legacy of the outgoing president .

appendix a .

recent military operations occurring during u.s. presidential transition periods appendix b .

representative examples of incidents of national security interest occurring during periods of governmental transition this appendix provides a representative listing of incidents of terrorism that have occurred during times of transitions of heads of state .

the criteria for inclusion in this chart was based on the aggressor's real or perceived intent to change the course of an election or affect future policy of the country during a time of transfer of presidential authority .

it should be noted that , barring relatively few examples , there is little evidence that incidents of national security significance were planned for a specific date prior to an election .

while varying levels of planning occur prior to an incident , as with most criminal acts , the leader directs , or the individuals act , when opportunity for the best possible outcome is presented .

with respect to times of presidential transition , the optimal time for an attack , for a variety of reasons , may not present the best opportunity for the aggressors to attempt an incident .

as such , the potential time frame for risk is present during any phase of the transition , with the effects of an incident differing based on the location of the event , the proximity to the election date , and the reaction and actions of the u.s. national security enterprise .

many security experts believe that some of the incidences noted below had a significant impact on the outcome of the country's national election or subsequent policies .

national security observers are fearful that terrorists groups may see some of the incidences as successes and feel emboldened to attempt to affect future national transfers of power by launching attack just before the election .

these groups may see the timing of such an action as a viable strategic opportunity to further the goals of their cause .

however , it should be noted , other security experts suggest that incidences of national significance taken prior to a national election could produce a reaction that is counter to the long - term goals of the terrorist group .

appendix c. congressional legislation addressing various aspects of national security considerations during presidential transitions , in chronological order ( 1963-2008 ) .

