in recent years a subject of continuing interest to congress has been the length of time taken for lower court nominations to receive senate confirmation .

most recently , during the 111 th and 112 th congresses , senate debate on this subject has concerned whether president obama's nominees to u.s. circuit or district court judgeships , relative to the judicial nominees of other recent presidents , have waited longer to receive up - or - down votes by the senate .

part of this debate , in turn , has focused on the waiting times from nomination to confirmation of president obama's uncontroversial judicial nominees who have enjoyed bipartisan support in the senate .

senators , often along party lines , have expressed differing views concerning how long these nominees have waited for senate confirmation , or on how their waiting times compared with the times that uncontroversial judicial nominees of other recent presidents waited to be confirmed .

on the one hand , the chairman of the senate judiciary committee , senator patrick j. leahy of vermont , has criticized the wait time for president obama's uncontroversial judicial nominees as generally being much too long .

in march 2010 , senator leahy stated that the senate had "wasted weeks and months having to seek time agreements in order to consider nominations that were reported by the senate judiciary committee unanimously and who are then confirmed overwhelmingly by the senate once they are finally allowed to be considered. .

this year , senator leahy raised the issue again , arguing that the treatment of president obama's nominees "amounted to months of unnecessary delays" for "judicial nominations who should be noncontentious. .

he argued that the senate minority had engaged in "across - the - board stalling of judicial nominees," which he said had "led to the backlog in confirmations and the months of delays in the consideration of consensus nominees. .

by contrast , senator chuck grassley — the ranking member of the senate judiciary committee — has argued that president obama's judicial nominees have not been treated differently by the senate relative to the nominees of president obama's predecessors .

the senate , senator grassley maintained recently , continues to confirm "consensus district judge nominees" in a manner consistent with past senate practice .

senator grassley has also argued that the pace of the senate's consideration of president obama's judicial nominees , uncontroversial or otherwise , has itself been affected by the pace at which the president has submitted nominations to the senate , stating that "republicans have been more than fair to this president and his judicial nominees , considering the fact that we have so many vacancies that have not had a nominee submitted to the senate for our consideration. .

this report seeks to inform the current debate by analyzing the time taken by the senate during recent presidencies to confirm uncontroversial circuit and district court nominees .

it is comprised of four sections: a first section explains the methodology used to identify what , for purposes of this report , are regarded as "uncontroversial" lower court nominees .

the section also shows , from the reagan presidency to the obama presidency , the percentage of circuit and district court nominees approved by the senate and who , according to the methodology used in the report , qualify as uncontroversial .

a second section calculates the average and median lengths of time from nomination to confirmation for president obama's uncontroversial circuit and district court nominees approved by the senate .

these times are compared with the corresponding average and median waiting times to confirmation for the uncontroversial judicial nominees of presidents reagan , george h.w .

bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush .

the average and median waiting times from nomination to confirmation , the section finds , generally increased from one presidency to the next for uncontroversial circuit and district court nominees .

a third section analyzes , again for uncontroversial confirmed circuit and district court nominees of presidents reagan to obama , the percentage of nominees who waited specified amounts of time from nomination to senate confirmation .

shown by presidency are the percentages of uncontroversial judicial nominees who waited , from first nomination to confirmation , ( 1 ) fewer than 100 days , ( 2 ) from 100 too 199 days , and ( 3 ) 200 or more days .

this section finds , among other things , that fewer than 1 in 10 of the uncontroversial confirmed lower court nominees of the two earliest presidents included in the analysis ( reagan and g.h.w .

bush ) waited 200 or more days to be confirmed .

by contrast , more than half of president obama's uncontroversial confirmed judicial nominees ( for both circuit and district court judgeships ) waited 200 or more days to receive senate approval .

a fourth section identifies various institutional and political factors that possibly influenced the increase across the five most recent presidencies in the length of time uncontroversial circuit and district court nominees waited from nomination to confirmation .

a concluding section identifies several potential implications of longer waiting times from nomination to confirmation for uncontroversial judicial nominees .

for purposes of this report , determining whether circuit or district court nominees were "uncontroversial" was based on the level of support they had from senators of both parties when their nominations were reported by the senate judiciary committee and when their nominations were approved by the full senate .

specifically , the nominees were identified as uncontroversial if ( 1 ) their nominations were reported out of the judiciary committee favorably either by voice vote or by a unanimous roll call vote , and ( 2 ) their nominations were approved by the full senate by voice vote , or if a roll call vote was held , approved with 5 or fewer nay votes .

all of a president's confirmed uncontroversial nominees are included in the analysis , regardless of whether such nominees were confirmed during his first or , when applicable , second term .

the length of time from first nomination to confirmation is measured as the number of days elapsed from when a president first nominates an individual to a u.s. circuit or district court judgeship to when the senate approves his or her nomination .

for some individual nominees , the number of days elapsed from his or her first nomination to confirmation spans two or more nominations to the same judgeship ( eg , an individual's nomination is reported out of the senate judiciary committee only to be returned to the president ; subsequently , the individual is renominated by the president to the same judgeship , his or her nomination is reported again by the senate judiciary committee , and then confirmed by the senate ) .

figure 2 tracks , by presidency ( from reagan to obama ) , the mean and median number of days from first nomination to confirmation for all circuit and district court nominees approved by the senate , during the period january 20 , 1981 , to september 14 , 2012 , whose nominations were reported favorably out of the senate judiciary committee by voice vote or a unanimous roll call vote and who were confirmed by the senate by voice vote or , if a roll call vote was held , received 5 or fewer nay votes .

as the mean and median trend lines in figure 2 suggest , the percentage of uncontroversial judicial nominees waiting at least 200 days from nomination to confirmation has increased in recent years .

tables 1 and 2 , presented below , are more precise in revealing this trend .

specifically , they show the percentage of uncontroversial u.s. circuit court nominees from presidents reagan to obama who waited , from first nomination to confirmation , ( 1 ) fewer than 100 days , ( 2 ) from 100 to 199 days , and ( 3 ) 200 or more days .

the tables reveal , among other things , an increase , from presidency to presidency in the 1981 to 2012 period , a steady increase in the percentage of uncontroversial circuit and district court nominees who have waited 200 or more days to be confirmed .

it reveals , at the same time , a steady decrease ( by presidency ) in the percentage of uncontroversial judicial nominees waiting less than 100 days to be confirmed .

across the five most recent presidencies there has been a general increase in the waiting times from nomination to confirmation for uncontroversial u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

there are various institutional and political factors that have possibly contributed to this increase — including ideological differences between a president and senators of the opposite party or between the senate's two parties ; procedures used by the judiciary committee to process a president's judicial nominees ; floor procedures used to dispense with judicial nominations ; and the role taken by non - committee senators in the vetting of judicial nominees .

there are several possible consequences to the increase in waiting times from nomination to confirmation for uncontroversial judicial nominees .

first , if judicial vacancies are not being filled as quickly as in the past , this may lead to an increase in the number of vacancies qualifying as "judicial emergencies. .

additionally , judicial vacancies that persist for longer periods of time may lead to greater caseloads and workload burdens for sitting federal judges , a greater number of retiring judges taking "senior status" when they step down from full - time service , and delays in trial proceedings which might have adverse affects on litigants .

second , well - qualified individuals who , if nominated , would enjoy bipartisan support may nonetheless turn down the opportunity to be nominated to a vacant judgeship if longer wait times from nomination to confirmation are viewed as potentially disruptive to one's career or associated with greater uncertainty in ultimately being confirmed .

third , longer wait times for uncontroversial nominees might increase partisan tensions between the two parties , leading to conflict that might make it less likely for the parties to agree on a "best practices" approach to processing a president's uncontroversial judicial nominees .

finally , not all possible consequences to longer wait times from nomination to confirmation might be viewed as detrimental or negative .

according to some perspectives , relatively longer wait times associated with greater scrutiny by the senate might be appropriate for nominees to positions with lifetime tenure .

additionally , longer wait times might be desirable because they provide interest groups and citizens a greater opportunity to participate in the confirmation process by contacting senators to express their views on judicial nominees ( whether such nominees are uncontroversial or not ) .

