u.s. code , title 10 , section 5063 , united states marine corps: composition and functions , dated october 1 , 1986 , states the following: the marine corps will be organized , trained and equipped to provide an amphibious and land operations capability to seize advanced naval bases and to conduct naval land campaigns .

in this regard , the marines are required by law to have the necessary equipment to conduct amphibious operations and land operations .

the acv and mpc were considered integral systems by the department of defense ( dod ) and marine corps to meet this legal requirement , as well as providing critical capabilities to execute the nation's military strategy .

on january 6 , 2011 , after spending approximately $3 billion in developmental funding , the marine corps — with "encouragement" from dod — cancelled the expeditionary fighting vehicle ( efv ) program .

the efv was intended to replace the 40-year - old amphibious assault vehicle ( aav ) , which currently transports marines from ships to shore under hostile conditions .

the marine corps cancelled the efv due to excessive cost growth and poor performance in operational testing .

recognizing the need to replace the aav , the pentagon pledged to move quickly to develop a "more affordable and sustainable" vehicle to take the place of the efv .

the amphibious combat vehicle ( acv ) is intended to replace the aav , incorporating some efv capabilities but in a more practical and cost - efficient manner .

in concert with the acv , the marines were developing the marine personnel carrier ( mpc ) to serve as a survivable and mobile platform to transport marines when ashore .

at present , the marines do not have a wheeled armored fighting vehicle that can operate as a dedicated infantry carrier with marine maneuver forces inland .

the mpc was not intended to be amphibious like an aav , efv , or the acv but instead would be required to have a swim capability for inland waterways such as rivers , lakes , and other water obstacles such as shore - to - shore operations in the littorals .

because of a perceived amphibious "redundancy," some have questioned the need for both the acv and mpc .

in june 2013 , citing budgetary pressures , the marines reportedly put the mpc program "on ice" and suggested that it might not be resurrected for about 10 years .

although some have questioned why the marines cannot simply "adopt" a u.s. army personnel carrier , marine requirements for a personnel carrier reflect the need for this vehicle to be compatible with amphibious assault craft , as well as to have an enhanced amphibious capability , which is not necessarily an army requirement .

with the marines involved in decades - long land conflicts in iraq and afghanistan and proliferating anti - access technologies such as guided missiles , some analysts questioned whether the marines would ever again be called on to conduct a large - scale amphibious assault operation .

in response to these questions and the perceived need to examine the post - iraq and afghanistan marine corps , the department of the navy and dod studied the requirement to conduct large - scale amphibious operations and in early 2012 released a strategic vision for how amphibious operations will be conducted in the future .

the primary assertion of this study is that the marine corps' and navy's amphibious capabilities serve a central role in the defense of the global interests of a maritime nation .

the need to maintain an amphibious assault capability is viewed by marine corps leadership as establishing the requirement for the acv and mpc ( as discussed in greater detail below ) .

congress is responsible for authorizing and appropriating funds for all weapon systems programs , including the acv .

in its oversight role , congress could be concerned about how the acv enables the marines to conduct not only amphibious operations but also operations ashore .

another possible congressional concern is to what extent a robust amphibious assault capability is a necessary component of u.s. national security .

cost is another issue of interest to congress .

defense officials have noted the marine corps is "not currently organized , trained and equipped to face a peer adversary in the year 2025" and enemies with advanced air and shore defense will make amphibious operations even riskier .

to counter this , the navy is developing the expeditionary advance base operations ( eabo ) operational concept to address these concerns .

eabo is described as follows: expeditionary advance base operations is a naval operational concept that anticipates the requirements of the next paradigm of us joint expeditionary operations .

the concept is adversary based , cost informed and advantage focused .

eabo calls for an alternative , difficult to target forward basing infrastructure that will enable us naval and joint forces to create a more resilient forward based posture to persist , partner and operate within range of adversary long range precision fires .

the alternative forward posture enabled by expeditionary advance bases ( eabs ) is designed to mitigate the growing threat posed by the abundant quantity , expanded range and enhanced precision of potential adversary weaponry — particularly ballistic and cruise missiles designed to attack critical joint fixed forward infrastructure and large platforms .

eabs provide a dispersed and largely mobile forward basing infrastructure that enables a persistent alternative force capability set that is similarly designed to be difficult to target and inherently resilient .

the resilient , reduced signature infrastructure of eabs , combined with naval forces designed and structured to persist and operate within the arc of adversary anti - access / aerial denial ( a2ad ) capabilities enables naval commanders to conduct expeditionary advance base operations to support joint force maritime component commander ( jfmcc ) , and fleet commanders in the fight for sea control , by exploiting the opportunities afforded by key maritime terrain , particularly in close and confined seas .

eabo advances , sustains and maintains the naval and joint sensor , shooter and sustainment capabilities of dispersed forces to leverage the decisive massed capabilities of the larger joint force with enhanced situational awareness , augmented fires and logistical support .

the eabo concept enables us naval forces to exercise 21 st century naval operational art , meet new enemy a2ad threats with new capabilities and operate and thrive in and around close and confined seas .

in terms of marine corps amphibious assault operations , the adoption of eabo could reportedly result in "an entirely different approach to amphibious assaults as well as new weapon systems. .

noting that "missiles can now hit ships and landing craft while they are hundreds of miles from shore , making it far too dangerous for marines to storm a beach with current capabilities," marine officials are reportedly exploring ways to create temporary "bubbles" where marines can get ashore .

in response to these challenges , current and planned weapons systems might need to be modified to accommodate eabo operational concepts .

on april 10 , 2019 , during testimony to the subcommittee on seapower of the senate armed services committee , navy and marine corps leadership noted during the fall of 2018 , acv 1.1 prototypes demonstrated satisfactory water mobility performance in high surf conditions , and in doing so met the full water mobility transition requirement for acv 1.2 capability .

subsequently , the milestone decision authority assistant secretary of the navy for research , development and acquisition ( asn ( rd&a ) ) approved the consolidation of increments one and two into a single program to enable continuous production of acvs to completely replace the aav .

the next key acquisition event is the full rate production decision scheduled for the third quarter of fy 2020 following initial operational test & evaluation .

acv remains on schedule to achieve initial operational capability in the fourth quarter of fy 2020 .

with the consolidation of acv variants into a single variant , there will likely be a number of programmatic changes and potential ramifications for the acv and acv 2.0 programs .

reportedly , the marines plan to develop an acv 2.0 , capable of carrying 10 to 13 marines plus crew , capable of high water speeds and deployment from ships far from the coast .

acv 2.0 is planned to be capable of operating on land alongside tanks and light armored vehicles .

according to the marines acv 2.0 serves as a conceptual placeholder for a future decision point ( ~ 2025 , or sooner ) at which time knowledge gained in the fielding and employment of the first phase of acv ( 1.1 and 1.2 ) , the state of the naval connector strategy , and science & technology work towards a high water speed capable self - deploying vehicle will support an informed decision .

the fy2020 presidential budget request includes rdt&e and procurement funding requests in the base budget , as well as fy2020 requested quantities .

the marines did not request acv overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funding in fy2020 .

according to dod , the fy2020 acv budget request will fund the acv 1.1 full rate production ( frp ) lot 3 of 56 vehicles , plus procurement of related items such as production support , systems engineering , program management , engineering change orders ( ecos ) , government furnished equipment ( gfe ) , and integrated logistics support .

research and development efforts include the procurement of acv 1.2 mrv test articles , associated gfe , and initiation of a vehicle protective system trade study and integration efforts .

while from an overall programmatic perspective , the consolidation of the acv 1.1 and acv 1.2 variants could be viewed as a favourable programmatic outcome , there are likely ramifications that might be of interest to policymakers .

potential issues include the following: will the consolidation of acv 1.1 and acv 1.2 result in an overall cost savings ? .

will this consolidation permit the acquisition of additional acvs because of potential cost savings ? .

with the consolidation and the stated intent to replace aavs , what is the revised timeline for the replacement of aavs and will this result in cost savings from not having to upgrade and maintain aavs longer than previously intended ? .

how will the consolidation of acv 1.1 and acv 1.2 affect the acv 2.0 program ? .

if the navy and marine corps decide to adopt expeditionary advance base operations ( eabo ) as an operational concept , it could possibly have implications for the acv program , including the following: at the weapon systems level , would eabo require any changes to the vehicles themselves , such as enhanced survivability , lethality , or command , control , communications , computer , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) features ? .

if changes are required to facilitate eabo , how would this affect the program's overall acquisition timeline and cost ? .

if eabo does not require any technical changes in the acv program , would the adoption of eabo modify the marines' current procurement quantities of acvs ? .

if eabo requires different procurement quantities for the different acv versions ( more or fewer ) , how might this affect program timelines and program costs ? .

