section 706 of the communications act of 1934 , as amended by 47 u.s.c .

ยง606 , authorizes the president , among other things , to address national security and emergency preparedness ( ns / ep ) telecommunications issues and assign federal department , agency , and entity ns / ep telecommunications responsibilities .

on july 6 , 2012 , president barack obama issued an executive order 13618 to assign those ns / ep communications functions effective immediately .

generally , eo 13618 states that the federal government must have the ability to communicate at all times and under all circumstances .

specifically , the order outlines the federal government's need and responsibility to communicate during national security and emergency situations and crises and provides direction for such communications .

the federal government uses numerous ns / ep communications systems and programs to effectively communicate during incidents and emergencies .

some of these systems and programs include the government emergency telecommunications service ( gets ) , wireless priority service ( wps ) , and classified messaging related to the continuity of government condition ( cogcon ) .

these systems and programs use both classified and nonclassified communications systems to assist the national leadership , and affected entities such as state and local governments , non - governmental organizations , the private sector , and the public , in communicating during emergencies and crises .

these communications systems are both federally and privately owned and operated .

the 2010 national security strategy , the primary federal government guidance on national security , reiterates the notion that reliable and secure telecommunication is necessary to effectively manage emergencies , and that the united states must prevent disruptions to critical communications .

following the enactment of the communications act of 1934 , numerous presidents have issued executive orders addressing ns / ep communications .

for example , in 1962 president john f. kennedy issued eo 10995 that assigned federal telecommunications management functions ; in march 1978 , president jimmy carter issued eo 12046 that transferred certain federal telecommunication functions ; on september 13 , 1982 , president ronald reagan issued eo 12382 that established the national security telecommunications advisory committee ; and president william clinton issued eo 12919 on june 3 , 1994 , that addressed national security telecommunications related to national defense industry resources preparedness .

eo 13618 , however , changes federal ns / ep communications functions by dissolving the national communications system ( ncs ) , establishing an executive committee to oversee federal ns / ep communications functions , establishing a programs office within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to assist the executive committee , and assigning specific responsibilities to federal government entities .

this report addresses eo 13618 salient provisions and provides a summary of eo 13618 .

three sections of eo 13618 affect the federal government's ns / ep communications functions: section 3 "ns / ep communications executive committee," section 4 "executive committee joint program office," and section 5 "specific department and agency responsibilities. .

these three sections direct federal department and agency actions .

it appears as if dhs is assigned increased ns / ep communications functions .

specifically , eo 13618 affects dhs by dissolving ncs ; creating a new committee , the ns / ep communications executive committee and assigning dhs the responsibility of co - chairing that committee with dod ; establishing and supporting the executive committee joint program office ; and leading non - military federal department and agency ns / ep communications activities .

these changes are described in the next section .

generally , eo 13618 states that the federal government must have the ability to communicate at all times and under all circumstances .

it assigns executive office responsibilities through presidential policy directive 1 ( ppd 1 ) .

it establishes the ns / ep communications executive committee and the executive committee joint program office .

eo 13618 assigns specific and general federal department and agency responsibilities .

finally , it identifies previous executive orders that are amended and revoked .

eo 13618 is a continuation of presidential authority assigned in the communications act of 1934 , and modifies or revokes other executive orders related to federal ns / ep communications .

as identified earlier in this report , eo 13618 changes federal national security and emergency preparedness communications functions by dissolving the national communications system , establishing an executive committee to oversee federal national security and emergency preparedness communications functions , establishing a programs office within the department of homeland security to assist the executive committee , and assigning specific responsibilities to federal government entities .

again , this executive order does not modify or end any ns / ep communications systems or programs , instead it assigns the management and administration of these systems and programs to specific federal departments , agencies , and entities .

