the united states has long sought to influence the peoples of foreign countries through public diplomacy .

u.s. government public diplomacy is defined in different ways , but broadly it is a term used to describe efforts to conduct u.s. foreign policy and promote u.s. national interests through direct outreach and communication with the population of a foreign country .

public diplomacy activities , conducted by the department of state and u.s. diplomatic personnel abroad , include providing information to foreign publics through broadcast and internet media and at libraries and other outreach facilities in foreign countries ; conducting cultural diplomacy , such as art exhibits and music performances ; and administering international educational and professional exchange programs .

each u.s. embassy maintains a public affairs section to manage informational and cultural public diplomacy programs in a host country .

the section is tasked with explaining u.s. government policy and actions to that country's officials , media , and people .

at large embassies , the section's overall responsibilities are shared by a cultural affairs officer ( cao ) and an information officer ( io ) , while at other embassies , the duties are handled by the public affairs officer ( pao ) .

the cao or pao manages cultural programs designed to educate foreign publics about the united states and to counter negative conceptions about americans , american attitudes and beliefs , and life in the united states .

these programs include sending foreign individuals to the united states for various periods of time for professional and educational exchange .

the public affairs section also sponsors trips by american cultural ambassadors and brings american speakers to the host country to engage the people on important issues .

the pao will also often conduct informal outreach by attending receptions and concerts in the host country , and by hosting receptions for foreign individuals in his or her home .

in addition to state department and u.s. foreign mission public diplomacy efforts , the u.s. government sponsors international broadcasting overseen by the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) , since 1999 an independent executive branch agency led a bipartisan board .

bbg broadcasters include the voice of america ( voa ) , radio free europe / radio liberty ( rfe / rl ) , tv and radio martí broadcasts overseen by the office of cuba broadcasting ( ocb ) , radio free asia ( rfa ) , and the middle east broadcasting networks ( mbn ) , which broadcast alhurra television and radio sawa .

together these broadcasters provide news and information about the united states as well as global , regional , and country - specific news to foreign audiences in every part of the world .

in 1948 , congress passed authorizing legislation that placed public diplomacy responsibilities within the ambit of the secretary of state , marking a shift from military to civilian control over efforts to influence foreign publics following world war ii .

this legislation , entitled the united states information and educational exchange act of 1948 ( "smith - mundt act" ; p.l .

80-402 ) , provided the secretary of state with the authority to conduct international information activities abroad , including broadcasting through the voice of america , as well as certain types of information and cultural exchange .

in 1953 , some public diplomacy authority was transferred to the newly created u.s. information agency ( usia ) .

later , the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) was created and tasked with overseeing u.s. international broadcasting .

in 1999 , usia was dissolved and its public diplomacy authorities were transferred back to the department of state .

today , the state department leads u.s. public diplomacy efforts , while the independent bbg runs u.s. international broadcasting .

the smith - mundt act remains the primary authority for the state department to conduct international information programs .

the smith - mundt act , as amended in 1972 , as well as a 1985 provision , popularly known as the zorinsky amendment , prohibits domestic dissemination of international information materials and products .

these provisions have been interpreted as attempting to curtail the intentional or unintentional propagandizing of the american populace through exposing it to public diplomacy materials whose purpose is to influence foreign public opinion .

over time , observers have argued that these restrictions render u.s. public diplomacy less efficient and effective as modern global communications technology makes the domestic dissemination ban unenforceable and anachronistic , and overestimates the propagandistic effect of international information materials .

on several occasions , members of congress have proposed amending the smith - mundt act and the zorinsky amendment to remove or otherwise alter the domestic dissemination ban in these provisions .

in the 112 th congress , the smith - mundt modernization act of 2012 ( "modernization act" ; h.r .

5736 ) contains the latest set of amendments to section 501 of the smith - mundt act and the zorinsky amendment , restating the provisions to exclude any ban on domestic dissemination and making international information materials prepared for foreign publics available to a domestic audience .

the provisions of the act were incorporated into the national defense authorization act , fiscal year 2013 ( h.r .

4310 ) , which has passed the house of representatives .

the modernization act's inclusion in the ndaa has fostered debate and analysis over what effect , if any , a removal of the domestic dissemination ban in these provisions would have on state department communications both domestic and foreign , and broadcasts from voice of america and other bbg - supervised broadcasters .

this section provides background on the smith - mundt act , certain specific sections of that act , and the zorinsky amendment .

h.r .

5736 and section 1097 of h.r .

4310 would make identical amendments to section 501 of the smith - mundt act and the zorinsky amendment via complete restatement , as well as make clarification amendments to the provisions concerning the utilization of private media discussed above .

see appendix a for a side - by - side analysis of the current and proposed provisions .

the proposed amendments to section 501 and the zorinsky amendment implicate a number of issues and concerns .

these include consideration of the legislative effect such amendments might have on related existing law and the interpretation of such provisions , as well as the policy considerations over allowing domestic availability of international information programs .

whether or not the proposed restatements of section 501 and the zorinsky amendment become law , congress may decide that further action should be taken to better understand and regulate the dissemination of international information materials created by the state department and the bbg , as well as the international communications , intended or inadvertent , of other executive branch agencies , including the department of defense .

topics for congressional attention could include the following: how will the proposed amendments affect current international information activities , and are there strategies for adapting such activities after these amendments become effective ? .

what are the concerns that the state department and the bbg have regarding possible abuse of authority in the domestic sphere , if any ? .

what benefits are foreseen from these proposed changes ? .

what constraints might be lifted , or efficiencies realized ? .

what effect would lifting the domestic dissemination ban on certain state department and bbg communications have on interagency coordination of communications both to foreign and domestic audiences ? .

is there a need for additional legislation to better define what types of communications are designed to influence u.s. public opinion and are therefore prohibited , require effective identification of all communications as to their u.s. government source , and / or require publication or public availability of internal data to confirm statements in such communications materials ? .

appendix a. side - by - side amendment analysis appendix b. smith - mundt act sections 502 and 1005 sections 502 and 1005 ( 22 u.s.c .

§§1462 and 1437 , respectively ) are set out in this appendix as they would appear if the proposed amendments are enacted .

changes to the provisions below are shown using bold text denoting new language .

policies governing information activities sec .

502 .

in authorizing international information activities under this act , it is the sense of the congress ( 1 ) that the secretary and the broadcasting board of governors shall reduce such government information activities whenever corresponding private information dissemination is found to be adequate ; ( 2 ) that nothing in this act shall be construed to give the department or the broadcasting board of governors a monopoly in the production or sponsorship on the air of short - wave broadcasting programs , or a monopoly in any other medium of information .

utilization of private agencies sec .

1005 .

in carrying out the provisions of this act it shall be the duty of the secretary and the broadcasting board of governors to utilize , to the maximum extent practicable , the services and facilities of private agencies , including existing american press , publishing , radio , motion picture , and other agencies , through contractual arrangements or otherwise .

it is the intent of congress that the secretary and the broadcasting board of governors shall encourage participation in carrying out the purposes of this act by the maximum number of different private agencies in each field consistent with the present or potential market for their services in each country .

appendix c. section 501 and the zorinsky amendment section 501 of the smith - mundt act ( 22 u.s.c .

§1461 ) changes to the provision below are shown using strikethrough text denoting deletions , and bold text denoting new language .

section 501 as enacted in 1948 sec .

501 .

the secretary is authorized , when he finds it appropriate , to provide for the preparation , and dissemination abroad , of information about the united states , its people , and its policies , through press , publications , radio , motion pictures , and other information media , and through information centers and instructors abroad .

any such press release or radio script , on request , shall be available in the english language at the department of state , at all reasonable times following its release as information abroad , for examination by representatives of united states press associations , newspapers , magazines , radio systems , and stations , and , on request , shall be made available to members of congress .

1972 amendment of section 501 as amended by section 204 of the foreign relations authorization act of 1972 ( p.l .

92-352 ; 86 stat .

494 ) : sec .

501 .

the secretary is authorized , when he finds it appropriate , to provide for the preparation , and dissemination abroad , of information about the united states , its people , and its policies , through press , publications , radio , motion pictures , and other information media , and through information centers and instructors abroad .

any such press release or radio script information ( other than "problems of communism" which may continue to be sold by the government printing office ) shall not be disseminated within the united states , its territories , or possessions , but , on request , shall be available in the english language at the department of state , at all reasonable times following its release as information abroad , for examination only by representatives of united states press associations , newspapers , magazines , radio systems , and stations , and by research students and scholars , and , on request , shall be made available for examination only to members of congress .

1990 amendment of section 501 as amended by section 202 of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1990 and 1991 ( p.l .

101-146 ; 104 stat .

49 ) : sec .

501 .

 ( a ) the secretary is authorized , when he finds it appropriate , to provide for the preparation , and dissemination abroad , of information about the united states , its people , and its policies , through press , publications , radio , motion pictures , and other information media , and through information centers and instructors abroad .

any subject to subsection ( b ) , any information ( other than "problems of communism" and the "english teaching forum" which may continue to be sold by the government printing office ) shall not be disseminated within the united states , its territories , or possessions , but , on request , shall be available in the english language at the department of state , at all reasonable times following its release as information abroad , for examination only by representatives of united states press associations , newspapers , magazines , radio systems , and stations , and by research students and scholars , and , on request , shall be made available for examination only to members of congress .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) the director of the united states information agency shall make available to the archivist of the united states , for domestic distribution , motion pictures , films , videotapes , and other material prepared for dissemination abroad 12 years after the initial dissemination of the material abroad or , in the case of such material not disseminated abroad , 12 years after the preparation of the material .

 ( 2 ) the director of the united states information agency shall be reimbursed for any attendant expenses .

any reimbursement to the director pursuant to this subsection shall be credited to the applicable appropriation of the united states information agency .

 ( 3 ) the archivist shall be the official custodian of the material and shall issue necessary regulations to ensure that persons seeking its release in the united states have secured and paid for necessary united states rights and licenses and that all costs associated with the provision of the material by the archivist shall be paid by the persons seeking its release .

the archivist may charge fees to recover such costs , in accordance with section 2116 ( c ) of title 44 , united states code .

such fees shall be paid into , administered , and expended as part of the national archives trust fund .

zorinsky amendment ( 22 u.s.c .

§1461-1a ) sec .

208 .

ban on domestic activities by the usia .

except as provided in section 501 of the united states information and educational exchange act of 1948 ( 22 u.s.c .

1461 ) and this section , no funds authorized to be appropriated to the united states information agency shall be used to influence public opinion in the united states , and no program material prepared by the united states information agency shall be distributed within the united states .

this section shall not apply to programs carried out pursuant to the mutual educational and cultural exchange act of 1961 ( 22 u.s.c .

2451 et seq. ) .

the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the united states information agency from responding to inquiries from members of the public about its operations , policies , or programs .

