s ince the 1980s , there have been five major disputes ( so - called lumber wars ) between the united states and canada , interspersed by three different trade agreements .

the latest dispute , lumber v , started after the expiration of the 2006 softwood lumber agreement ( sla ) in october 2015 .

the u.s. lumber industry petitioned for trade protections shortly thereafter .

this report provides background information on the dispute , summarizes the key issues leading to the tensions between the united states and canada over softwood lumber , and examines current developments in lumber v .

softwood lumber , for purposes of this report , is lumber produced from conifer trees .

the definition of the term had been an issue leading up to the signing of the 2006 agreement and is discussed more thoroughly in the appendix .

the sla definition is based on four tariff items under the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( htsus ) and includes essentially all traditional softwood lumber items intended for residential construction .

because softwood lumber is primarily used for residential construction , repair , and remodeling , the demand for softwood lumber is a secondary demand , derived substantially from the demand for new or remodeled houses and other buildings .

both the u.s. and canadian softwood lumber industries are largely driven by the u.s. housing market in general and the new construction or remodeling market specifically .

in the early to mid - 2000s , the u.s. and canadian softwood lumber industries enjoyed a period of prosperity as the residential real estate market boomed .

however , the softwood lumber industry began to struggle when the real estate market began to crash in 2007 .

for example , from 2005 to 2009 the number of new home construction starts declined by 74% .

over that same period , the use of softwood lumber in the united states decreased by 41% .

further , the number of sawmills ( used to process lumber ) decreased by 17% , sawmill capacity decreased by 11% , and sawmill production decreased by nearly 30% .

since 2010 , the u.s. housing and softwood lumber markets have made a modest recovery .

new home construction starts have increased annually .

u.s. consumption of softwood lumber has increased annually since 2009 , although it remains well below the rates of the early 2000s and at levels not seen since the early 1990s .

as a secondary demand , softwood lumber is largely price - inelastic .

this means that modest changes in construction demand cause relatively large changes in lumber prices , but the price of lumber does not affect the supply or demand of lumber , or , debatably , the price of construction .

for example , wood products are generally a minor component of construction costs .

while some claim that wood products represent up to 15% of construction costs , using the 2014 average framing lumber composite price of $383 per thousand board feet ( mbf ) , framing lumber in an average ( 2,690-square foot ) new home would cost $7,512 — 3% of the 2014 median price of a new home .

in contrast , the price of lumber dropped significantly as a result of the housing market crash .

in 2009 , the price of lumber fell below $200 mbf for several months , for the first time since the 1980s ( see figure 1 ) .

since the expiration of the 2006 sla , lumber prices have risen steadily , and they were above $400 mbf for both march and april 2017 .

when adjusted for inflation , however , the price of lumber remains relatively low , comparable to the prices of the early 2000s but below prices seen in the 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s in real terms .

as mentioned above , the 2006 sla expired on october 12 , 2015 , although a one - year cooling - off period prevented trade litigation from being introduced until after october 12 , 2016 .

on march 10 , 2016 , president obama and prime minister trudeau announced the start of discussions to "explore all options" regarding the dispute , charging their trade representatives with reporting back within 100 days .

the result of this exercise was a set of negotiating goals , which included , among other elements: "an appropriate structure , designed to maintain canadian exports at or below an agreed u.s. market share to be negotiated , with the stability , consistency and flexibility necessary to achieve the confidence of both industries ; provisions for regional or company exclusions , if justified ; and provisions promoting regional policies that eliminate the underlying causes of trade frictions , including a regional exits process that is meaningful , effective and timely , recognizing that should an exit be granted , it would be reversible if the circumstances justifying the exit change. .

these goals would effectively limit softwood lumber exports to specified market share , but they left for negotiating the method to achieve this end: through a quota system , an export tax , or a combination of both .

the goals also reflect the canadian desire for flexibility by region and the ability to exit out of market share system based on adoption of market pricing .

in subsequent talks , the following concepts were discussed: market restraint mechanism: canada proposed an export tax on its lumber to achieve a certain market share in the united states .

canada also sought provincial flexibility — quota , export tax , or a combination — to achieve the market access goal .

u.s. producers have criticized an export tax as not guaranteeing a certain market share ; they claim such a tax would only penalize canadian producers for exporting above target .

as such , u.s. producers are in favor of a quota - only system .

market access: the canadian proposal reportedly is based on a 32% market share .

the u.s. producers reportedly sought a 28% share gradually lowered to 22% during the term of an agreement .

regional flexibility: canada also sought continued exclusions for largely private - held timber from the maritime provinces .

they also favored a province's ability to exit the market access restraints if it adopts market based systems , as quebec claims it has done .

the previous sla contained such a provision , which canada criticized as ineffectual .

these discussions did not make headway during the last months of the obama administration .

in the trump administration , secretary of commerce wilbur ross and canadian foreign minister chrystia freeland undertook negotiations to solve the dispute in the summer and fall of 2017 , and secretary ross announced the postponement of the final ad / cvd determinations to facilitate an extension of the talks .

however , commerce announced on november 2 , 2017 , that the two parties were unable to reach an agreement and announced the final determinations ( see below ) .

while the softwood lumber litigation plays out , congress may seek to influence any settlement of the softwood lumber dispute through potential renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

during the campaign and in office , president trump has vowed to renegotiate or withdraw from nafta .

however , under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , the president must give advanced notice to congress for any renegotiation and must consult with congress before and during the negotiations .

this process affords congress the opportunity to influence and direct the course of negotiations .

in this fashion , congress may seek to examine several issues relating to a potential future agreement .

for example , members may seek to shape an agreement within the context of nafta itself .

congress may seek the removal of export log restrictions as part of any nafta package .

some members of congress favor the removal of the nafta chapter 19 dispute settlement arbitration panels , which canada has used to challenge the decisions of u.s. trade remedy enforcement agencies , including in the softwood lumber cases .

congress also may consider the extent to which u.s. home builders and home buyers are affected by the possibility of renewed antidumping and countervailing duties being placed on softwood lumber .

the end of the 2006 sla and the commencement of trade remedy litigation is a recurring pattern in the decades - long softwood lumber dispute .

the determination of injury from subsidy and dumping likely will be followed , as it has in the past , by canadian appeals to the world trade organization and nafta dispute settlement .

then , the parameters of a new export restraint agreement may be explored .

u.s. lumber producers assert that they have been injured by canadian subsidies that have given canadian lumber producers an unfair advantage in selling lumber in the u.s. market .

these two conditions — subsidies and injury — are prerequisites for a countervailing duty under u.s. trade law .

one alleged subsidy is canadian provincial stumpage fees ( fees for the right to harvest trees ) , which may be less than the value of the timber in a competitive market .

in the 10 canadian provinces , 90% of the timberland is owned by the provinces .

the majority of provincial timber is allocated to lumber producers under long - term area - tenure agreements , which specify harvest levels , management requirements , and stumpage fees .

the stumpage fees generally are set administratively and adjusted periodically to reflect changes in lumber markets .

this situation contrasts with that in the united states , where most timberlands are privately owned and timber from federal and state lands typically is offered for sale at competitive auctions .

administered fees are not likely to match market values but could be higher or lower , depending on the purpose and methods by which they are established ; critics have claimed that the canadian administrative fees are set low to assure profitable production , regardless of market conditions .

several studies have shown significantly lower canadian stumpage fees , but other studies have found comparable cross - border prices .

these contradictory results may be explained by the adjustments made to account for differences in timber measurement systems ( one cubic meter of canadian logs yields 125 – 275 board feet of u.s. lumber , depending on the logs' diameters ) ; in tree species , sizes , and grades ; and in requirements imposed on the timber purchaser ( eg , reforestation and road construction ) , among other factors .

analyses of the differences are difficult and generally problematic .

injury to the u.s. lumber industry remains a complex issue .

the canadian share of the u.s. softwood lumber market grew substantially over the past 60 years , from less than 7% in 1952 to more than 35% in 1996 .

during that period , u.s. lumber production for domestic consumption grew slowly ( from nearly 30 billion board feet [bbf] in the early 1950s to 35 bbf in 1999 ) , while imports of canadian lumber rose substantially ( from less than 3 bbf in the early 1950s to more than 18 bbf in 1999 ) .

under the 1996 agreement , imports remained at a relatively stable rate , fluctuating around 33% - 34% .

under the 2006 sla , canadian imports declined to around 28% .

this decline is likely attributable — at least in part — to the sla and a drastically decreased demand for softwood lumber due to the crisis in the u.s. housing market .

other factors might also be important in the dispute over lumber imports from canada .

some believe the persistence of the dispute is due , at least in part , to the conflict between a u.s. trade policy focused on the removal of trade barriers and the process for obtaining industry protection under u.s. trade law .

others contend that the dispute is fueled by interest - group politics , and that the u.s. lumber industry is better organized and more influential than u.s. lumber consumers , who mostly feel the cost impacts of the trade protection measures .

in addition , environmental laws and policies may differ , and the impact of those laws and policies for lumber production costs complicates any cross - border analyses .

finally , the dispute may be alleviated in part due to increasing cross - border firm integration .

in other words , lumber producers may increasingly become globalized , with holdings in both the united states and canada , and as such may begin to question these border protection measures .

the definition of "softwood lumber" subject to the sla had been an issue leading up to the signing of the 2006 agreement .

softwood is a classification of tree species and contrasts with the other major classification , hardwood .

both , however , are misnomers .

some hardwoods , "such as aspen and poplar , are softer ( less dense ) than many softwoods," such as yellow pines .

softwood species are all in the order coniferales — the conifers .

conifers generally have needle - like leaves and cones for reproduction .

these plants are often called evergreens , because most retain their needles in winter .

the hardwood timber species are in the phylum anthophyta — the angiosperms , or flowering plants .

these plants are often called deciduous , because most species in temperate climates lose their leaves in the winter ; however , some temperate - climate species ( eg , holly ) and most tropical and subtropical species are evergreen , retaining their leaves throughout the year .

despite the imprecision , softwood is the term of art for conifer species and is used in this report to indicate lumber produced from conifer species .

this use is also consistent with the definition of softwood lumber in the harmonized tariff schedules and in the 2006 sla .

 ( see below. ) .

lumber is the collective term for products sawn from logs .

this contrasts with the panel products — plywood , particleboard , etc. — where the logs are sliced , peeled , or chipped and the wood pieces are then glued together to form sheets or panels .

it also contrasts with paper products , where wood chips are dissolved to remove the lignin and the fibers adhere by being pressed together under heat .

lumber is grouped into different categories based on cross - sectional dimensions .

boards are lumber products of less than 2 inches in nominal thickness — typically 1 inch thick and 1 inch to 12 inches wide ( in 2-inch increments ) .

dimension lumber are products of 2 inches to 5 inches in nominal thickness — most commonly 2 inches thick and 2 inches to 12 inches wide ( in 2-inch increments ) in nominal dimensions .

timbers are lumber products at least 5 inches thick and wide , and timbers include products destined for further processing .

the vast majority of softwood lumber — nearly 75% — is used for residential construction , remodeling , and repair .

for purposes of the dispute , softwood lumber is defined in annex 1a of the sla using four tariff items under the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( htsus ) : softwood lumber products include all products classified under tariff items 4407.1000 , 4409.1010 , 4409.1020 , and 4409.1090 ( for purposes of description only ) : coniferous wood sawn or chipped lengthwise , sliced or peeled , whether or not planed , sanded or finger - jointed , of a thickness exceeding 6 mm [about 1 / 4 inch] ; coniferous wood , coniferous wood siding and coniferous wood flooring ( including strips and friezes for parquet flooring , not assembled ) continuously shaped ( tongued , grooved , rebated , chamfered , v - jointed , beaded , moulded , rounded or the like ) along any of its edges or faces ( other than wood mouldings and wood dowel rods ) , whether or not planed , sanded or finger - jointed .. .

these tariff items include essentially all the traditional softwood lumber items intended for residential construction , as described above , including softwood drilled and notched lumber and angle - cut lumber and excluding logs , poles , wood fencing , and railway sleepers ( cross - ties ) .

the definitions also allow for products that are classified under certain other htsus subheadings but meet the sla's definition of softwood lumber products .

this definition also excludes certain products , including windows and doors ( with frames ) , garage doors , box springs , pallets , roof trusses , and other fabricated wood products .

