when a state is overwhelmed by an emergency or major disaster , the governor may request assistance from the federal government .

in general , when a request is submitted , representatives from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) meet with the state and compile a preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) .

fema then makes a recommendation to the president concerning whether a declaration should be issued .

the president has the authority to make the declaration or deny the request .

in comparison to when disaster declarations were first introduced in 1953 , the average number of declarations issued per year has increased .

the average number of major disaster declarations issued per year in the 1960s ( the first full decade for declarations ) was roughly 18.6 .

in contrast , from 2000 to 2009 the average number of declarations issued per year was 57.1 .

calendar year 2011 was the busiest year on record with 97 major disaster declarations .

congressional concern over the rising number of declarations is primarily focused on their associated costs because once declared , the majority of disaster relief costs ( at least 75% ) are shifted from the state to the federal government .

the current fiscal environment , including concern over the federal deficit , has heightened congressional interest in the costs of disasters , leading to proposals to offset some portion of disaster assistance spending by implementing new budgetary mechanisms .

the increase in declarations has led some critics to argue that thresholds for issuing major disaster declarations are set too low , allowing too many "marginal incidents" to receive a declaration .

related criticisms and questions have been voiced concerning the declarations process .

for example , are incidents increasing or is the federal government being more generous in its interpretation of disaster or emergency criteria ? .

another point of discussion is the relative capacity of state governments to respond to disaster events .

the federal government's openness in describing factors considered for declarations may have led some state officials to believe they have met the factors under consideration and are entitled to support .

this report provides a historical overview of the three categories of declarations , including the average number of declarations declared and turned down , and the distribution of declarations by incident type and state .

this report discusses a wide range of factors that might be contributing to the increase in declarations and provides policy options that might reduce the number of declarations and some of their associated costs .

prior to 1950 , state and local governments in need of federal assistance after a disaster had to wait until congress met , debated , and then acted upon their request for disaster assistance .

the federal disaster relief act of 1950 ( p.l .

81-875 , hereinafter the disaster relief act ) altered this arrangement and transferred the authority to provide federal disaster assistance from congress to the president .

under the disaster relief act , the president had the authority to decide whether to provide disaster assistance and which federal agencies would provide that assistance .

the president's decision to provide federal aid for an incident is known as a "declaration. .

the first disaster declaration was issued by president eisenhower on may 2 , 1953 , for damages caused by a tornado in georgia .

over the years , the disaster relief act has undergone a series of reforms and amendments , but the president's authority to issue declarations has been retained .

today the principal authority governing federal assistance for emergencies and major disasters in the united states is the robert t. stafford relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) .

under the stafford act , the primary federal agency responsible for coordinating the federal response is fema , located within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the following sections of this report analyze declarations by category since 1953 .

the analysis includes the number of fmag , emergency , and major disaster declarations that have been approved and turned down by the president .

the analysis also includes a breakdown of declarations by incident and by state for emergency and major disaster declarations .

the presentation of the data is based on graduated levels of assistance beginning with fmag declarations and ending with major disaster declarations .

there are a number of factors that might influence the increase in declarations over the past few decades , ranging from increases in weather incidents to changes in federal policies .

this section reviews some of these factors .

if the increase in the number of declarations is a concern for the federal costs that accompany them ( or for other reasons which have been discussed in this report ) , congress may choose to address the issue .

addressing the issue may be conceptualized as two approaches: ( 1 ) limiting the number of declarations and ( 2 ) limiting the amount of spending that can occur after a declaration has been made .

the following section could be used to frame a potential debate on limiting the number of declarations being issued , limiting the assistance provided after a declaration has been declared , or both .

given the variables described in this report that can lead to an increase in the number of declarations , including trends in severe weather patterns , population growth , and development , the upward trend of declarations will likely continue if declarations policies remain unchanged .

some may contend that the policy mechanisms used to address the number of declarations should be shaped in response to the causes of the increase .

others may argue that if the causes are due to an increase in severe weather incidents , population growth , or development , then the declaration process should remain unchanged .

alternatively , thresholds for federal assistance could be adjusted to eliminate what may be perceived to be marginal incidents and focus federal assistance on large - scale disasters .

another method would be shifting a greater share of the responsibility for providing assistance from the federal government to states and localities .

the approach to reduce declarations might shift somewhat if the increase in declarations and their costs is due primarily to federal policies .

if that is the case , it could be argued that methods that constrain the president's discretion to issue declarations or reform fema policies may be more suitable .

if the increase is tied to state policies then mechanisms such as the use of loans or other incentives could be implemented to help decrease the number of state requests for assistance .

finally , as mentioned throughout this report , a combination of all of the above could be implemented .

at the heart of the declaration phenomenon is the role of the government when a disaster strikes .

while it is generally agreed that the government should help disaster victims in time of need , it is debatable whether the fiscal responsibility resides primarily with the federal or the state government .

finding the balance has thus far has been elusive , and altering the declaration process could have important implications for both federal and state officials , as well as disaster victims .

many of the policy options described in this report would shift a greater share of disaster - related costs to states and localities .

it remains to be seen if reducing declarations and / or limiting the amount of disaster assistance provided to requesting states would severely disrupt the state's ability to recover from an incident or if states would be able to adjust to the changes by reallocating available state resources .

