several issues related to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting , on both federal and state lands are addressed in s. 3525 , the sportsman's act of 2012 .

hunting and conservation have been linked since the advent of federal wildlife legislation , such as the lacey act of 1900 ( making it a federal crime to ship game killed in violation of one state's laws to another state ) or the migratory bird treaty act of 1918 ( regulating the killing , hunting , buying , or selling of migratory birds ) .

even so , controversy exists about exactly what hunting , fishing , or shooting sports currently are allowed on federal land and when .

under current law , opening more lands to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting is to be balanced against good game management , public safety , resource management , and the statutory purposes of the lands .

s. 3525 focuses on physical access to federal lands where these activities are already allowed by acquiring lands or rights of way .

s. 3525 would also create or expand sport fishing programs , allow specified imports of polar bear trophies , support a program of regional working groups to conserve populations of migratory birds , and amend the duck stamp program ( which provides funds for acquisition of waterfowl habitat ) , among other things .

s. 3525 would make funding changes for some of these activities , and reauthorize a number of conservation programs , as well as expand an existing program to control nutria , a marshland pest .

s. 3525 is not the only hunting and fishing bill pending before congress .

h.r .

4089 , which passed the house in april 2012 , would alter the management practices of federal agencies with the intent of opening more lands to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting .

while they have many of the same activities in common , the two bills' approaches are quite different .

h.r .

4089 would alter planning practices of agencies , eliminate reviews under the national environmental policy act , and direct certain types of activities to be allowed on lands , even wilderness areas , absent a public safety , national security , or statutory resource protection basis .

the senate bill's approach focuses on physical access to suitable hunting and fishing areas on federal land , in contrast to the house bill's approach of changing federal land management practices .

most of s. 3525 was originally part of an amendment ( s.amdt .

2232 , introduced on june 7 , 2012 ) to s. 3240 ( the 2012 farm bill ) , although the two measures are not completely identical .

on june 19 , 2012 , the amendment was ruled as nongermane to the 2012 farm bill .

s. 3525 , in its current form , was introduced as a separate bill on september 10 , 2012 .

it was placed on senate legislative calendar under general orders on september 11 , 2012 .

because the measure was not referred to a committee , it lacks a committee report .

on september 20 , 2012 , a cloture motion on the motion to proceed to the measure was presented in the senate .

consideration before the fall recess has been scheduled .

title i of s. 3525 focuses on physical access to federal lands for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting , as well as other topics .

it addresses land acquisition to facilitate access for those activities ; authorization of permits to allow import of certain sport - hunted polar bear trophies ; expanded permission for carrying bows and crossbows in national park units ; expanded funding for state land purchase or operation of public target ranges ; and exclusion of lead ammunition and sinkers from regulation under the toxic substances control act .

section 121 of s. 3525 would exempt lead shot , ammunition , and fishing sinkers from provisions of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) .

despite being named as modifying the "definition of toxic substance to exclude sport fishing equipment [under] subtitle c - fishing," the section applies to ammunition as well as to fishing gear .

it would prohibit regulation under tsca of "shot , bullets and other projectiles , propellants , and primers" and "any sport fishing equipment. .

this section is identical to title iv of h.r .

4089 , except that the senate bill adds that the section does not limit the need to comply with other federal , state , or local laws .

this provision appears to seek legislative certainty for a denied citizen petition to force the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers .

on august 27 , 2010 , epa denied one portion of the petition relating to the production of lead for use in ammunition , stating that the agency did not have legal authority to regulate ammunition under tsca .

epa continued to evaluate the petition with respect to fishing tackle and accepted public comments until september 15 , 2010 .

epa denied that portion of the petition on november 4 , 2010 .

on april 30 , 2012 , a lawsuit challenging the denial was dismissed .

on june 7 , 2012 , a suit was filed challenging epa's 2012 denial of a new petition to regulate lead shot under tsca .

s. 3525 would prevent federal regulation through tsca , but not through other statutory authorities: lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act .

consequently , it is unclear whether the provision will have an affect .

fishing programs and assistance are covered in title i , subtitle c , and in title ii , subtitle a of s. 3525 .

sections specifically addressing fish would prohibit the sale of billfish , require a report on artificial reefs , and , through a variety of approaches , provide aid for modifying fish habitat .

title ii , subtitle b , of s. 3525 concerns duck stamps , and contains four sections .

currently , duck stamps are purchased by hunters for the right to hunt migratory birds ; proceeds from their sale go to the migratory bird conservation fund ( mbcf ) for acquisition of migratory bird habitat for inclusion in the national wildlife refuge system .

stamps are good for one year , and cost $15 , a price set in legislation in 1991 .

fws has supported an increase in the price of the stamp to $25 since the fy2009 budget justification .

also , since 2008 , a pilot program has been carried out to test the feasibility of the sale of duck stamps through the internet ; eight states now participate in the pilot program .

in other states , stamps continue to be available at u.s. post offices or other approved sites .

section 222 would allow the secretary of the interior to set a new price of duck stamps at three - year intervals beginning in 2013 .

funds would be collected and expended provided that all amounts in the mbcf from the sale of duck stamps in previous years have been obligated .

section 223 would allow the secretary , in consultation with the migratory bird conservation commission , to waive the requirements for purchase of a stamp for certain individuals , provided there would be only a minimal effect on collections for the mbcf .

section 224 would permanently authorize the electronic issuance of duck stamps .

states would apply to the secretary for authority to issue the electronic stamps , under a procedure specified in the section .

provisions for revocation of state authority to issue electronic stamps are included .

title ii , subtitle c , of s. 3525 would authorize the secretary of the interior to carry out a joint ventures program ( jvp ) in coordination with other relevant federal agencies and with states to promote sustainable populations of migratory birds ; to encourage partnerships with other stakeholders to that end ; to support scientific conservation of these species and their habitats ; and to support bird conservation under the migratory bird conservation act and five other specified relevant statutes .

under the jvp , fws would provide technical and financial support for regional migratory bird conservation partnerships .

eligible partners , according to section 234 ( a ) ( 2 ) , include federal , state , and tribal agencies ; regional or local governments ; landowners ; nongovernmental organizations ; and others .

each partnership agreement under the jvp would establish a management board that includes relevant and diverse stakeholder representatives .

under section 234 ( c ) , each management board , in consultation with fws , would appoint a coordinator for the implementation plan developed by the board .

implementation plans must be approved by the director of fws , and must include a strategy for migratory bird conservation , provisions for communication among members of the group , and a long - term strategy for community outreach and education .

federal employees of any agency could be detailed to a board .

for conservation actions under approved plans , the director may award financial assistance to the parties taking the actions .

no specific dollar figure is given .

the secretary , through the director of fws , could accept gifts from the public to assist jvp conservation actions .

section 236 would require management boards to submit annual reports , and fws would be required to prepare a comprehensive review of the jvp at five - year intervals ; the review would be open to public comments .

section 237 further specifies that the jvp would not preempt other laws nor the authorities of state fish and wildlife laws .

finally , section 238 would exempt any boards or other groups established by the jvp from the federal advisory committee act .

title ii , subtitle d of s. 3525 would reauthorize 10 current laws: north american wetlands conservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

§4406 ( c ) ( 5 ) ) partners for fish and wildlife act ( 16 u.s.c .

§3774 ) national fish and wildlife foundation establishment act ( nfwfea ; 16 u.s.c .

§3702 ) multinational species conservation funds semipostal stamp act of 2010 ( mscfssa ; p.l .

111-241 ; 39 u.s.c .

§416 note ) african elephant conservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

§4245 ( a ) ) asian elephant conservation act of 1997 ( 16 u.s.c .

§4266 ( a ) ) rhinoceros and tiger conservation act of 1994 ( 16 u.s.c .

§5306 ( a ) ) great ape conservation act of 2000 ( 16 u.s.c .

§6305 ) marine turtle conservation act of 2004 ( 16 u.s.c .

§6606 ) neotropical migratory bird conservation act ( nmbca ; 16 u.s.c .

§6109 ) in this list , all the laws cited are simply reauthorized through fy2017 , with three exceptions that also would amend current law .

the nfwfea ( section 243 ) is most extensively amended .

among other things , the section would increase the number of directors on the board of the foundation from 23 to 28 and decrease the number of criteria used for their selection , and would make those criteria more generalized .

terms would be set at six years .

the bill would also require the naming of an executive director by the board .

the section would authorize the foundation to accept restitution and community service payments and other amounts resulting from legal , administrative , or regulatory actions , provided that the amounts further the conservation of fish , wildlife , and plants .

the section would also provide specific procedures for the acceptance of amounts from federal agencies , and would allow the foundation to collect fees for management of these amounts .

federal agencies entering into agreements with the foundation could waive competitive processes normally required by the agency if the waiver would address an environmental emergency and also reduce administrative expenses ; when or if this authority is invoked , the foundation's annual report would need to include a description of the activity and waiver .

the mscfssa would be reauthorized for six years in section 244 .

the section would direct that the public must have a choice of five semipostal stamps , each stamp depicting a different species whose conservation is supported under the multinational species conservation fund .

the nmbca would be reauthorized through fy2017 in section 246 .

but in addition , the section would direct that not less than 75% of the funds made available under the act must be used for projects outside the united states .

section 247 would amend the federal land transaction facilitation act ( fltfa ) .

fltfa was designed to allow proceeds from the disposal of public land to be used to acquire inholdings and other lands to improve federal land management .

it focuses on acquiring property that adjoins protected sites such as wilderness areas and national parks .

under section 205 of the current law , proceeds from the "sale or exchange of public land identified for disposal under approved land use plans" are to be put in the federal land disposal account ( fltfa fund ) .

approved land use plans are those made under the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) that were in effect as of the date fltfa was enacted .

section 206 ( a ) of fltfa states that "notwithstanding any other law [except for laws requiring proceeds to go into state trust funds] the gross proceeds of the sale or exchange of public land under this act shall be deposited in a separate account in the treasury of the united states to be known as the 'federal land disposal account.' .

section 247 of s. 3525 would amend fltfa by extending the expiration of the act and eliminating the expiration of the authorization of the fltfa fund .

the current law prevents revenue going to the fund from sales of the lands listed under the santini - burton act ( p.l .

96-586 ) , and under the southern nevada public land management act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-263 ) .

to that list , section 247 would add lands in the following bills whose sales revenue would not accrue to the fltfa fund: white pine county [nevada] conservation , recreation , and development act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) ; lincoln county [nevada] conservation , recreation , and development act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-424 ) ; owyhee wilderness , nevada , in subtitle f of title i of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §1501 ) ; lands in washington county , utah , subtitle o of title i of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §1971 ) ; carson city , nevada , exchanges , section 2601 of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §2601 ) ; and douglas county , washington , exchanges , section 2606 of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 .

§2606 ) .

section 248 of s. 3525 would amend the nutria eradication and control act of 2003 .

the current law addresses control of this invasive rodent in the states of louisiana and maryland , where it had been most abundant .

the maryland population has been drastically reduced through the program , as has the louisiana population , although re - invasion is a greater problem in that state .

to protect more coastal wetland habitats , where the species has been very destructive , this provision of the senate bill would expand the program to other coastal states where the species has been found .

for fy2012 through fy2016 , the section authorizes $6 million annually .

of that figure , $2 million is allocated to maryland and $2 million to louisiana ; the remainder is allocated to other coastal states .

