changing economic , social , and political conditions at home and abroad have led some analysts to question whether the united states will remain globally competitive in the coming decades .

the possibility that the united states has lost or could lose its historical advantages in scientific and technological advancement — and the prosperity and security attributed to that advancement — has become a primary rationale for a portfolio of otherwise disparate federal programs , policies , and activities .

sometimes identified as "innovation" or "competitiveness" policy , these programs , policies , and activities address research and development , education , workforce development , tax , patent , immigration , economic development , telecommunications , or other policy issues perceived as critical to the u.s. scientific and technological enterprise .

the 2007 america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) is an example of this type of policymaking .

designed to "invest in innovation through research and development , and to improve the competitiveness of the united states," the law authorized $32.7 billion in appropriations between fy2008 and fy2010 for programs and activities in physical sciences and engineering research and in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education .

congress reauthorized certain provisions of p.l .

110-69 — including funding for physical sciences and engineering research and stem education — when it passed the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) .

the 2010 competes act authorized $45.5 billion in appropriations between fy2011 and fy2013 .

given the pivotal role that funding levels played in the design , implementation , and congressional debate about the competes acts , policymakers have paid close attention to trends in these accounts .

this report , which was written to aid congress in tracking these trends , includes two tables summarizing authorization levels and funding for selected competes - related accounts across both authorization periods ( i.e. , fy2008 to fy2010 and fy2011 to fy2013 ) .

readers interested in an analysis of the competes acts and related policy issues are referred to the following publications: crs report r41819 , reauthorization of the america competes act: selected policy provisions , funding , and implementation issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42642 , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42470 , an analysis of stem education funding at the nsf: trends and policy discussion , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41951 , an analysis of efforts to double federal funding for physical sciences and engineering research , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43061 , the u.s. science and engineering workforce: recent , current , and projected employment , wages , and unemployment , by [author name scrubbed] this report has been updated to reflect fy2009 to fy2013 final funding for competes - related accounts .

