the farm commodity provisions of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , as amended ( p.l .

110-246 , the 2008 farm bill ) expire with the 2013 crop year .

consequently , the 113 th congress has been considering an omnibus farm bill that would establish the direction of agricultural policy .

on may 14 , 2013 , the senate agriculture committee reported its version of the bill ( s. 954 , the agriculture reform , food and jobs act of 2013 ) , which was approved by the full senate on june 10 , 2013 ( vote of 66-27 ) .

on may 15 , 2013 , the house agriculture committee completed markup of its version of the bill ( h.r .

1947 , the federal agriculture reform and risk management act of 2013 ) , and floor action began in mid - june .

however , on june 20 , the full house voted to reject the bill ( vote of 195-234 ) .

on july 11 , the full house approved a revised bill , h.r .

2642 , which excluded a nutrition title , and on september 19 approved a nutrition title ( h.r .

3102 ) .

the house adopted a resolution ( h.res .

361 ) on september 28 that combined the texts of h.r .

2642 and h.r .

3102 into one bill ( h.r .

2642 ) for purposes of resolving differences with the senate .

conference on the two measures is pending .

this report compares the so - called "farm safety net" provisions in the two bills .

the broader farming community uses the term farm safety net to refer to the combination of ( 1 ) farm commodity price and income support programs in the 2008 farm bill , ( 2 ) federal crop insurance ( permanently authorized ) under the federal crop insurance act of 1980 as amended , and ( 3 ) five disaster assistance programs in the 2008 farm bill , which are currently unfunded .

title i of both versions of the 2013 farm bill contains commodity and disaster program provisions , and modifications to the current crop insurance program are in title xi of the senate bill and title x of the house bill .

both bills would reshape the structure of farm commodity support , reauthorize several disaster programs , and expand crop insurance coverage .

current farm support for traditional program crops includes direct payments , the counter - cyclical price ( ccp ) program , and the average crop revenue election ( acre ) program .

direct payments — made to producers and landowners based on historical production and fixed payment rates for corn , wheat , soybeans , cotton , rice , peanuts , and other "covered" crops — have accounted for most farm program spending in recent years .

ccp payments are made when crop prices fall below a "target price" ( minus the direct rate ) .

alternatively , producers may select acre , which makes payments when crop revenue drops below a guarantee based on historical revenue .

marketing assistance loans provide additional low - price protection at "loan rates" specified in current law .

under both the senate - passed ( s. 954 ) and house - passed ( h.r .

2642 ) 2013 farm bills , direct payments are eliminated and programs are authorized to replace ccp and acre with conceptually similar programs with new names , payment triggers , and payment formulas .

in both bills , approximately three - fourths of the 10-year , $46 billion - $47 billion in savings ( as estimated by the congressional budget office ) associated with the proposed elimination of current farm programs would be used to offset the cost of updating farm programs ( title i ) , enhancing crop insurance ( title xi ) , and retroactively reauthorizing four disaster programs ( beginning fy2012 ) .

the two titles account for a combined $12.4 billion savings over 10 years in the senate bill ( of $17.9 billion in total savings across all titles ) and $9.8 billion in the house bill ( of $39.0 billion ) .

these titles address the issue of "shallow losses" ( losses incurred by crop producers that are not covered currently by crop insurance ) and provide disaster assistance for livestock producers .

figure 1 summarizes major provisions in the commodity and crop insurance titles of the two bills .

table 1 lists selected provisions and identifies issues for conference committee consideration .

a comprehensive , section - by - section comparison of all titles in the two bills is in crs report r43076 , the 2013 farm bill: a comparison of the senate - passed ( s. 954 ) and house - passed ( h.r .

2642 , h.r .

3102 ) bills with current law .

both s. 954 and h.r .

2642 would eliminate direct payments .

direct payments account for most of current commodity spending and are made to producers and landowners based on historical production of farm program crops .

both bills also borrow conceptually from current farm commodity programs by updating price and / or revenue programs designed to enhance risk protection for producers of "covered" crops .

importantly , the senate bill covers only crop years 2014-2018 .

it also suspends permanent price support authority under the agricultural adjustment act of 1938 and agricultural adjustment act of 1949 , which would increase price supports well above current market levels and create substantial government outlays .

this provision is designed to motivate congress to reexamine agricultural and related policy ( not just farm programs ) when program authority in s. 954 expires in 2018 .

in contrast , the house bill covers crop year 2014 and each succeeding crop year ( i.e. , no program expiration date ) and repeals permanent law .

proponents expect this approach to better protect beneficiaries of farm programs in the long run .

covered commodities are wheat , oats , barley , corn , grain sorghum , long grain rice , medium grain rice , pulse crops ( dry peas , lentils , small chickpeas , and large chickpeas ) , soybeans , other oilseeds , and peanuts .

in response to a world trade organization case brought against the united state by brazil , cotton is not included as a program commodity ; instead it is covered by a new insurance product ( see " stacked income protection plan ( stax ) " ) .

for farm programs , producers do not pay any fees or premiums for participating , unlike the federal crop insurance program , which offers subsidized policies to producers of a wide variety of crops .

under both the senate - passed ( s. 954 ) and house - passed ( h.r .

2642 ) 2013 farm bills , farm support for traditional program crops is restructured by eliminating direct payments , the counter - cyclical price ( ccp ) program , and the average crop revenue election ( acre ) program .

authority is continued for marketing assistance loans , which provide additional low - price protection at "loan rates" specified in current law ( with an adjustment made to the cotton loan rate ) .

a brief summary of the major commodity provisions is provided below .

for details on all sections in title i ( except dairy and sugar provisions ) , see appendix a .

the federal crop insurance program makes available subsidized crop insurance to producers who purchase a policy to protect against individual farm losses in yield , crop revenue , or whole farm revenue .

more than 100 crops are insurable .

the program is permanently authorized by the federal crop insurance act ( 7 u.s.c .

1501 et seq. ) .

but is often modified in farm bills .

in contrast to farm programs in title i , where spending is reduced substantially , both versions of the farm bill increase funding for crop insurance ( title xi ) relative to baseline levels .

crop insurance baseline funding ( budget authority ) for fy2014-fy2023 is estimated by cbo at $84.1 billion .

h.r .

2642 would increase spending by $8.9 billion over the period and s. 954 would increase spending by $5.0 billion , according to cbo projections .

two new insurance products — supplemental coverage option ( sco ) and the stacked income protection plan ( stax ) for cotton — account for most of the additional cost .

 ( the cbo score for each major provision appears in table 3 , below. ) .

many provisions of the crop insurance title are very similar in both bills .

a major exception is a provision in s. 954 , which was adopted as a floor amendment by a vote of 59-33 , that reduces crop insurance premium subsidies by 15 percentage points for producers with average adjusted gross income greater than $750,000 .

also in senate floor action , an amendment to provide mandatory funding of $5 million to maintain crop insurance program integrity was adopted without dissent , 94-0 , and an amendment to eliminate premium subsidies for tobacco crop insurance was defeated ( 44-72 ) .

for details on all sections of the crop insurance title , see appendix b .

five disaster programs were established in the 2008 farm bill for weather - induced losses in fy2008-fy2011 .

both 2013 farm bills retroactively reauthorize four programs covering livestock and tree assistance , specifically fy2012-fy2018 for the senate bill and beginning fy2012 and continuing without an expiration date for the house bill .

the crop disaster program from the 2008 farm bill ( i.e. , supplemental revenue assistance , or sure ) is not reauthorized in either bill , but an element of it has been folded into the new arc program in the senate bill by allowing producers to protect against farm - level revenue losses ( the house bill has only a county - based revenue program ) .

s. 954 also provides disaster benefits to tree fruit producers who suffered crop losses in 2012 ( see above ) .

the following four programs would be reauthorized: 1 .

livestock indemnity program ( lip ) , which would compensate ranchers for a portion of market value for livestock mortality caused by a disaster ( 65% in senate bill , 75% in the house bill ) ; 2 .

livestock forage disaster program ( lfp ) , which would compensate for grazing losses due to qualifying drought conditions or fire on rangeland managed by a federal agency ( both bills increase the payment amount from the 2008 farm bill in some cases ) ; 3 .

emergency assistance for livestock , honeybees , and farm - raised catfish ( elap ) , which would provide annual funding of $15 million ( senate bill ) and $20 million ( house bill ) to compensate producers for disaster losses not covered under other disaster programs ; and 4 .

tree assistance program ( tap ) , which would provide payments to eligible orchardists and nursery growers to cover 65% of the cost of replanting trees or nursery stock ( 70% previously ) and 50% of the cost of pruning / removal following a natural disaster ( in excess of 15% mortality in both cases ) .

farm commodity programs have certain limits that cap payments ( currently $105,000 per person ) and set eligibility based on adjusted gross income ( agi , currently a maximum of $500,000 per person for nonfarm income and $750,000 for farm income ) .

the two bills are somewhat similar and diverge from current law , with s. 954 reducing the farm program payment limit to $50,000 per person for combined amp and arc payments and adding a $75,000 limit on loan deficiency payments ( ldps ) .

under h.r .

2642 , the limit for all title i payments would be $125,000 , of which ldps would be limited to $75,000 and other payments including plc , rlc , and transitional direct payments to $50,000 .

the house bill combines peanuts into the limit with other commodities , while the senate bill continues separate but equal limits for peanuts .

both the senate and house bills change the threshold to be considered "actively engaged" and to qualify for payments , by effectively requiring personal labor in the farming operation .

both bills also tighten limits on agi , with a combined agi limit of $750,000 in s. 954 and $950,000 in h.r .

2642 .

proponents of the changes to agi assert that the new provisions represent a tightening of the limit .

however , some high - income individuals who have been disqualified under the 2008 farm bill might be restored to eligibility , primarily because the proposed combined limit in both bills is higher than the current nonfarm agi limit .

the house bill caps overall farm program spending at $16.96 billion for fy2014-fy2020 for combined payments under price loss coverage and revenue loss coverage ( collectively called farm risk management election ) .

for disaster programs , s. 954 retains the combined $100,000 per person payment limit for lip , lfp , and elap and retains the separate limit of $100,000 for tap .

h.r .

2642 contains a combined payment limit of $125,000 per person for lip , lfp , and elap and a separate limit of $125,000 for tap .

for dairy policy , both bills contain similar , significant changes , including elimination of the dairy product price support program , the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program , and export subsidies .

these are replaced by a new dairy margin insurance program which makes payments to participating dairy producers when the national margin ( average farm price of milk minus average feed costs ) falls below $4.00 per hundredweight ( cwt .

 ) , with coverage at higher margins available for purchase .

a provision in s. 954 makes participating producers subject to a separate program called the dairy market stabilization program , which reduces incentives to produce milk when margins are low — this provision is not present in h.r .

2642 .

in addition , h.r .

2642 requires usda to adhere to standard rulemaking procedures and to determine the market impacts of the new program during the rulemaking process .

separately , federal milk marketing orders have permanent statutory authority and continue intact .

however , s. 954 ( but not h.r .

2642 ) includes two additional provisions: one that requires usda to use a specified pre - hearing procedure to consider alternative formulas for class iii milk product pricing , and a second that requires usda to analyze and report on the potential effects of replacing end - product pricing with alternative pricing procedures .

for more information on dairy policy , see crs report r42736 , dairy policy proposals in the next farm bill .

the objective and structure of the sugar program are left unchanged in both bills , but the senate bill reauthorizes the program through the 2018 crop year , while the house bill reauthorizes the program without an expiration date .

for more information , see crs report r42551 , sugar program proposals for the next farm bill .

funding to write the next farm bill is based on the congressional budget office's ( cbo's ) baseline projection of the cost of mandatory farm bill programs , and on varying budgetary assumptions about whether programs will continue .

the cbo baseline projection is an estimate at a particular point in time of what federal spending on mandatory programs likely would be under current law .

the may 2013 cbo baseline projection is the "scoring baseline" against which s. 954 and h.r .

2642 have been measured .

according to the may 2013 baseline , expected outlays for all mandatory farm bill programs under current law are $973 billion during fy2014-fy2023 ( table 2 ) .

of this amount , budget authority for farm safety net programs is $143 billion over the 10-year period , including $59 billion for commodity programs and $84 billion for crop insurance .

disaster programs do not have baseline funding , since they expired ahead of other farm support programs .

from a budget perspective , programs with a continuing baseline are assumed to go on under current law .

these amounts can be used to reauthorize the same programs ; reallocated among these and other programs ; used as savings for deficit reduction ; or used as offsets to help pay for other provisions .

for more information on the overall farm bill score and budget situation , see crs report r42484 , budget issues shaping a farm bill in 2013 .

table 3 shows the cbo scores of both versions of the farm bill , with a detailed breakout for their respective farm safety net provisions .

for just the farm safety net programs , the 10-year savings amount is $12.8 billion in s. 954 and $9.6 billion in h.r .

2642 .

approximately three - fourths of the 10-year , $46 billion - $47 billion in savings associated with the proposed elimination of current farm programs would be used to offset the cost of revising farm programs ( title i ) , enhancing crop insurance ( title xi ) , and retroactively reauthorizing four disaster programs ( title i ) .

the 10-year savings from commodity programs in the house committee bill is $18.7 billion and savings in the senate bill is $17.4 billion .

in contrast to scoring savings under title i , expenditures for crop insurance in both bills increase relative to baseline levels .

the increase is about $4 billion lower in the senate bill , in part because the new revenue program contains an option for a farm - level guarantee that is expected to reduce demand for crop insurance and offset some costs associated with the crop insurance changes .

a number of researchers have analyzed the proposed changes made to the farm safety net by the senate and house farm bills .

the food and agricultural policy research institute ( fapri ) at the university of missouri concludes in an october 2013 sector - wide study that the economic consequences of the two bills would be similar in many respects , with reduced federal spending and relatively small effects on commodity markets .

comparing the two bills , fapri's analysis indicates that the house bill , given its parameters and structure , would provide substantially more support than the senate bill to producers of rice , barley , and peanuts , while corn and soybean producers would benefit relatively more under the senate bill .

actual program benefits will be sensitive to market conditions and producer participation , with government costs depending in part on eventual enrollment in the supplemental coverage option ( 65% subsidy rate ) and other factors .

under each bill , average net farm income would decline slightly as the sector would receive somewhat less federal support than under a continuation of 2008 farm bill programs .

according to the study , impacts on food prices for consumers would be very small .

a separate analysis by the agricultural and food policy center ( afpc ) at texas a&m university concludes that 53 of 64 of the representative farms ( 80% ) that it models nationwide would receive greater financial benefits ( i.e. , higher average net cash farm income ) under the house bill relative to the senate bill over the life of the farm bill .

the study reports that under a baseline price scenario , the average difference in net cash farm income as a result of differences in policy parameters would be $19,900 per farm , in favor of the house bill in cases when the house bill results in higher cash income than the senate bill .

a major driver is the attractive combination of reference prices ( increased from 2008 farm bill levels ) in the house bill — which provide support through the price loss coverage program when farm prices decline — combined with the supplemental coverage option ( sco ) to address shallow losses beyond a 10% deductible .

 ( in the senate bill , the sco deductible is expanded from 10% to 22% if the farmer also participates in agriculture risk coverage ( arc ) ) .

under a declining price scenario , the proportion of farms receiving greater financial benefits under the house bill declines to 74% compared with 80% under the baseline price scenario , primarily reflecting higher potential income for california rice producers under revenue guarantees in arc compared with potential benefits under sco , which is not designed to protect farmers against multi - year price declines .

other researchers have concluded that the sco approach combined with the new revenue programs ( arc in the senate bill and rlc in the house bill ) could create situations of overcompensation for shallow losses ( out - of - pocket costs absorbed by producers ) , while sco alone is likely to result in fewer such concerns because it is integrated more closely with existing crop insurance coverage .

the potential impact of a multi - year price decline is another major policy concern .

the researchers point out that in the senate bill , the arc program guarantees will decline over time if market prices drop , which lengthens the adjustment period for producers .

this is in contrast to the house bill ( and senate bill for rice and peanuts ) which sets fixed minimum prices in the price and revenue programs .

the house bill increases these parameters differently for each crop relative to their respective ( and recent ) market values , which the authors say could create planting incentives that differ from market signals , thereby shifting acreage toward crops that have more attractive program benefits .

some have expressed concern that costs of farm programs could be sharply higher than cbo estimates .

an analysis by university researchers and sponsored by the american enterprise institute estimates that the cost of the house farm bill would be relatively modest ( about $1.1 billion ) if farm prices remain historically high .

however , it also concludes that the annual cost could exceed $18 billion if farm prices drop to a 15-year average level .

others have criticized the analysis , calling it "an improbable price scenario," contrasting it with a stochastic scoring method used by cbo , which accounts for the probability of various price scenarios that result in either very high or low costs .

appendix a .

title i: commodity programs appendix b .

title xi: crop insurance appendix c. title xii: miscellaneous ( noninsured crop assistance program ) .

