congress has considered puerto rico's "political status" — a term of art referring to the relationship between the federal government and a territorial government — for more than a century .

as figure 1 shows , puerto rico lies approximately 1,000 miles southeast of miami and 1,500 miles from washington , dc .

despite being far outside the continental united states , the island has played a unique role in american politics and policy since the united states acquired puerto rico from spain in 1898 .

it is the largest of the five major u.s. territories , hosts the biggest population , features heavy traffic and commerce with the mainland , and has long - standing ties with the u.s. military ( both as a strategic location and home to service members ) .

beginning in 1900 , congress delegated authority over most local matters to a civilian territorial government .

over the next 50 years , congress recognized a delegate to the u.s. house ( the resident commissioner ) ; granted puerto ricans u.s. citizenship ; and established a federal - style civilian government , including a popularly elected governor and legislative assembly .

whether the island should remain a territory , become a state , or become independent remains unsettled .

status is arguably the dominant issue in puerto rican politics , along which parties align and politics is organized .

for the first time since 1998 , the people of puerto rico went to the polls in november 2012 to vote on whether to change their status and , if so , how .

although the 2012 plebiscite was a territorial initiative rather than a federal one , there could be notable implications for congress .

most importantly , whether initiated by the puerto rican people or congress , any change in the island's political status would require congressional action .

beyond the plebiscite , congress has broad jurisdiction over territories and routinely monitors status developments .

some members of congress — especially those with large puerto rican constituencies or personal connections to puerto rico — also closely follow the issue .

this report provides a foundation for understanding puerto rico's status , why those on the island and in washington continue to be interested in the issue , and how the 2012 plebiscite and its aftermath provides an opportunity to revisit status .

the key issues and questions discussed here may be relevant as the house and senate consider their response .

congress first began considering puerto rico's political status more than a century ago .

some suggest that voters on the island took a decisive step toward change in their answers to question 1 in the 2012 plebiscite , and that a majority opted for statehood in question 2 .

those who support the 2012 plebiscite generally suggest that the choices presented in the plebiscite are the best consensus options available .

others contend that the status quo is preferred and that the 2012 plebiscite design was weighted in favor of statehood and that the results were inconclusive .

congress might now make its own assessment of the results .

the issues raised here are by no means exhaustive , but do appear to represent major points of interest surrounding the plebiscite .

updates will be provided as events warrant .

