it is quite common for congress to enact tax legislation that applies retroactively .

typically , such legislation is retroactive back to the beginning of the year of enactment , but other periods are sometimes used as well .

one question often asked is whether legislation that amends the federal tax laws in a way that retroactively increases a taxpayer's tax liability is constitutional .

the short answer is that retroactive tax legislation is not absolutely barred by the u.s. constitution .

in fact , the supreme court , recognizing that retroactive application of tax laws is sometimes required by "the practicalities of producing national legislation," has deemed it a "customary congressional practice. .

as such , there are few examples of retroactive tax legislation being struck down as unconstitutional .

having said that , it is possible for retroactive tax legislation to violate the constitution .

for example , extended periods of retroactivity might raise concerns under the fifth amendment's due process clause .

other provisions of the constitution may be implicated depending on the particulars of a specific bill ( eg , if the bill appears to target certain taxpayers or penalize past conduct ) .

this report examines the constitutional provisions that might be implicated by retroactive tax legislation , including legislation that seems intended to punish past behavior .

specifically , it looks at how a court might analyze whether retroactive tax legislation violates the due process guarantees of the fifth amendment ; is a taking for purposes of the fifth amendment ; violates the prohibition against ex post facto legislation ; is an unconstitutional bill of attainder ; or violates the equal protection guarantees of the fifth amendment .

retroactive tax legislation potentially implicates the due process clause of the fifth amendment , which states that no person shall "be deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law. .

of the constitutional provisions discussed in this report , this clause presents the most common potential concern for congress because it appears that extended periods of retroactivity might be unconstitutional .

the standard used to determine whether retroactive tax legislation violates substantive due process is whether the retroactive application is "supported by a legitimate legislative purpose furthered by rational means. .

this is known as the rational basis test , and it is a low standard of review by the courts .

once it is met , "judgments about the wisdom of such legislation remain within the exclusive province of the legislative and executive branches...." there have only been a few instances in which the supreme court has held that retroactive application of tax laws violated the due process clause .

while these cases have not been overruled , the supreme court has downplayed their significance , noting they "were decided during an era characterized by exacting review of economic legislation under an approach that has long since been discarded. .

nonetheless , the cases are useful because the court in subsequent cases has contrasted them with permissible legislation , thus indicating they may represent the boundaries of the due process clause .

while it is often asked whether retroactive tax legislation would violate the takings clause of the fifth amendment , it seems unlikely this would be the case .

since the 19 th century , the supreme court has ruled that the sovereign's taxing power and its power to take private property upon payment of just compensation are distinct .

as the court said in 1880 , "neither is taxation for a public purpose , however great , the taking of private property for public use , in the sense of the constitution. .

more recently , the ninth circuit noted that the rule that taxes do not effect takings is "well established. .

most of the retroactivity challenges to taxes have been litigated on a substantive due process , rather than takings , theory .

the supreme court has indicated that , at least for economic legislation , an enactment that does not offend due process is highly unlikely to offend the takings clause .

as discussed above , it is rare for a court to find retroactive tax legislation to violate due process , and the few takings decisions that deal with retroactive taxes find no constitutional infirmity .

if a court can be convinced that what looks like a tax is , in reality , an arbitrary confiscation of property , then the principle that taxes are not takings is circumvented .

as the supreme court said , although there was a seeming exercise of the taxing power , the act complained of was so arbitrary as to constrain to the conclusion that it was not the exercise of taxation , but a confiscation of property ; that is , a taking of the same in violation of the 5 th amendment ; or , what is equivalent thereto , was so wanting in basis for classification as to produce such a gross and patent inequality as to inevitably lead to the same conclusion .

while the courts have reiterated this principle multiple times , research discloses no instance where the supreme court has ever found it to be triggered , thus the "arbitrary" threshold lacks definition .

if a retroactive tax bill seemed to target certain taxpayers , it might be argued that "singling out" a group from others similarly situated is a circumstance said by the supreme court to indicate a taking .

but this is only one factor relevant to whether a taking has occurred , and depends on how one defines the group "similarly situated. .

all things considered , the strength of the "taxes are not takings" principle suggests that retroactive tax legislation will typically not fall on the wrong ( takings ) side of the line of demarcation .

parenthetically , in the unlikely event that a taking were found , the remedy probably would be invalidation of the tax , not the constitutionally stated remedy of "just compensation. .

the supreme court has recognized that where , as with taxes , the government act held to be a taking takes the form of a requirement that money be paid , requiring a dollar of just compensation for every dollar paid is "utterly pointless. .

if legislation appeared to penalize past behavior that was lawful when conducted , it might be argued that a retroactive tax bill violates the ex post facto clause .

it prohibits congress from enacting retroactive penal legislation .

from its earliest days , the court has interpreted the clause to apply only to criminal punishment .

thus , the analysis begins with determining , as a matter of statutory construction , whether the legislation at issue is civil or criminal .

taxation is typically not a criminal punishment , and therefore the ex post facto clause is generally understood not to apply to tax legislation .

having said that , there may be cases where a tax provision appears to be a criminal punishment .

in such cases , the court requires the "clearest proof" to reclassify a civil remedy as a criminal penalty due to the deference owed the legislature's stated intent .

an example of this occurring is burgess v. salmon , where the supreme court recharacterized a tax as a criminal penalty , and held its retroactive application violated the prohibition on ex post facto laws .

the legislation at issue had increased the federal tobacco stamp tax , while also imposing criminal penalties on the transfer of tobacco without the proper stamp .

at the time of the bill's passage , the taxpayer had already paid the stamp tax , and the court held that imposing the higher tax was impermissible .

finding that the higher tax and criminal penalties were "equally authorized," the court concluded that since any criminal proceeding would have violated the ex post facto prohibition , the imposition of the higher tax also violated it since "the ex post facto effect of a law cannot be evaded by giving a civil form to that which is essentially criminal. .

burgess is a rare example of a tax being struck down under the ex post facto clause .

taxes will typically not be seen as equal to a criminal penalty .

thus , for example , in bankers trust co. v. blodgett , the court refused to apply the ex post facto clause to a state law imposing a 2% tax on the value of taxable property in an estate for the five years preceding death if no tax had been assessed or paid during the year preceding death because "[t]he penalty of the statute was not in punishment of a crime…. .

when determining whether a tax provision is a criminal penalty for purposes of the ex post facto clause , a court's analysis could be informed by how taxes are treated in other contexts , such as the fifth amendment's prohibition on double jeopardy .

in these contexts , the court has recognized that a tax provision may at some point lose its character as a tax and become instead "a mere penalty with the characteristics of regulation and punishment. .

a high rate of tax and deterrent purpose are evidence that a tax may in fact actually be a penalty , but are not dispositive .

rather , the court has often looked for other features of the provision that distinguish it from a typical tax , including that its imposition is dependent on the commission of a crime .

tax legislation rarely includes these other factors , strengthening the general conclusion that tax provisions would typically not be considered penalties for purposes of the ex post facto clause .

the constitution expressly prohibits the federal government from enacting bills of attainder .

the supreme court has defined a bill of attainder as a "law that legislatively determines guilt and inflicts punishment upon an identifiable individual without provision of the protections of a judicial trial. .

the basis for the prohibition lies in the separation of powers concern that the enforcement of a bill of attainder would allow the congress to usurp the power of the judicial branch .

by passing a bill of attainder , the legislature assumes judicial magistracy , pronouncing upon the guilt of the party without any of the common forms and guards of trial , and satisfying itself with proofs , when such proofs are within its reach , whether they are conformable to the rules of evidence , or not .

in short , in all such cases , the legislature exercises the highest power of sovereignty , and what may be properly deemed an irresponsible despotic discretion , being governed solely by what it deems political necessity or expediency , and too often under the influence of unreasonable fears , or unfounded suspicions .

at common law , a bill of attainder was a parliamentary act that sentenced a named individual or identifiable members of a group to death .

it was most often used to punish political activities that the parliament or the sovereign found threatening or treasonous .

a bill of pains and penalties was identical to a bill of attainder , except that it prescribed a punishment short of death such as banishment , deprivation of the right to vote , exclusion of the designated individual's sons from parliament , or the punitive confiscation of property .

the prohibition on bills of pains and penalties has been subsumed into the prohibitions of the bill of attainder clause , so that a variety of penalties less severe than death may trigger its provisions .

the court has noted that cases regarding bills of attainder cannot be analyzed in the abstract , as each "turns on its own highly particularized context. .

the two main criteria which the courts look to in order to determine whether legislation is a bill of attainder are ( 1 ) whether specific individuals are affected by the statute ( specificity prong ) , and ( 2 ) whether the legislation inflicts a punishment on those individuals ( punishment prong ) .

finally , if retroactive tax legislation seemed to target certain taxpayers for unfavorable treatment , this could also raise potential equal protection concerns under the fifth amendment .

this would not be due to the bill's retroactivity , but rather because of its targeting of certain individuals .

it seems unlikely this argument would be successful , except perhaps in rare , atypical circumstances .

in general , classifications made for federal tax purposes are constitutionally permissible so long as "they bear a rational relation to a legitimate governmental purpose. .

the same standard applies in situations involving retroactive tax legislation .

as discussed above , the rational basis test is a low standard of review by the courts .

courts typically show great deference to the tax classifications made by legislatures in recognition of "the large area of discretion which is needed by a legislature in formulating sound tax policies. .

as the supreme court has noted , "[i]t has … been pointed out that in taxation , even more than in other fields , legislatures possess the greatest freedom in classification. .

because legislatures have "especially broad latitude" in creating tax classifications , the bar is generally low for finding adequate justification for making classifications in a retroactive tax bill .

tax classifications are usually given deference because they are "a device for fitting tax programs to local needs and usages in order to achieve an equitable distribution of the tax burden" and it is inappropriate for a court , which is not in a position to be familiar with these things , to second guess the legislature .

on the other hand , it seems possible that such deference by a court may not always be appropriate if a bill or its legislative history were to evidence a punitive intent towards a taxpayer or group of taxpayers .

in such cases , any expressed motivations targeting specific taxpayers may lead a court to question the legitimacy of the government's interest .

however , it would seem to be a rare occurrence where such evidence would exist .

