the executive branch has exercised control over agency rulemaking through executive orders such as e xecutive o rder 12866 .

this executive order requires executive agencies to submit significant rules to the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) at the office of management and budget ( omb ) for review ; however , it does not require the independent regulatory commissions ( ircs ) to comply with these requirements .

this report discusses the constitutionality and the potential legal effects of extending centralized review of rulemaking to the ircs .

federal agencies adopt rules to implement statutes that congress has enacted .

these rules , although established by an administrative agency , maintain the force of law .

in order to be able to promulgate rules , congress must grant that agency the power to do so through statute .

to control the process by which agencies create these rules , congress has enacted statutes , such as the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , that dictate what procedures an agency must follow to establish a final , legally binding rule .

unless an agency's authorizing statute provides for different procedures , the apa provides the default practice that all agencies must follow in order to promulgate rules .

the apa provides for both formal and informal rulemaking procedures .

the formal rulemaking procedures only need to be followed when an authorizing statute requires that a rulemaking proceed "on the record" after an opportunity for a hearing .

these formal rulemaking procedures are rare and most agencies follow the informal , "notice and comment" rulemaking procedures outlined in the apa and discussed below .

under informal rulemaking procedures , an agency must first publish a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) in the federal register .

the nprm must include " ( 1 ) a statement of the time , place , and nature of public rule making proceedings ; ( 2 ) reference to the legal authority under which the rule is proposed ; and ( 3 ) either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved. .

after providing notice through the federal register , the agency must allow "interested persons an opportunity" to comment on the proposed rule .

typically an agency will provide at least 30 days for public comment and this time period may be extended if the agency deems necessary .

after the comment period has ended , the agency is required to review the public comments and may then issue a final rule .

when publishing the final rule in the federal register , the agency must provide a "concise general statement" of the rule's "basis and purpose. .

the final rule may not go into effect until at least 30 days after it is published in the federal register , with certain exceptions .

in addition to the apa , congress has enacted numerous statutes that impose obligations on agencies when they engage in rulemaking procedures .

statutes such as the national environmental protection act ( nepa ) , the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) , the congressional review act ( cra ) , and the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) establish additional procedures and practices that the agencies must follow prior to establishing a finalized rule .

furthermore , the president has issued executive orders and guidance documents establishing additional requirements and procedures that agencies must follow before a rule can be finalized .

numerous presidential administrations have attempted to maintain control over the agencies by establishing a centralized review process for certain agency rules .

notably , president reagan's issuance of executive order ( e.o. ) .

12291 required agencies to have proposed and final rules reviewed by omb prior to publication .

upon election , president clinton revised and replaced reagan's order with e.o .

12866 but maintained the centralized review process for "significant regulatory actions. .

clinton's e.o .

12866 was maintained by both the george w. bush and obama administrations and remains in force today .

when both the reagan and clinton administrations issued their respective executive orders , they exempted statutorily designated ircs from this centralized review process .

before discussing the requirements imposed by e.o .

12866 , it is helpful to review briefly some of the features that make the ircs generally insulated from presidential control .

although many groups and scholars have called for the extension of centralized review to the ircs , this extension has not yet occurred .

the following section addresses whether the president has sufficient legal authority to extend such requirements to the ircs , assuming there are adequate legal grounds for general oira review of agency rulemaking ( described above ) .

if the president were to amend e.o .

12866 to include the ircs , this raises the question of what types of action may be taken to enforce agency compliance .

if an agency disregarded the executive order , could the president fire a member of an irc , who has "for cause" removal protection ? .

or , could action be taken through the courts to enforce compliance ? .

alternatively , congress could codify the provisions of e.o .

12866 , which has been previously considered .

a statute mandating compliance with the oira review process could affect the recourse available to the president and the availability of judicial review .

federal agencies regularly adopt rules pursuant to the apa , which have the force of law , to implement the statutes and programs authorized by congress .

beginning with president reagan and continued by president clinton , the executive branch , through oira , has maintained a centralized review process for "significant regulatory actions. .

the provisions of e.o .

12866 establish additional steps that executive agencies must follow before a rule can be finalized .

although debate surrounded whether the president has the authority to impose these procedural obligations on executive agencies , there seems to be fairly broad agreement that he has adequate legal grounds for doing so .

ircs , however , are exempt from e.o .

12866 , but there has been consideration of extending these executive requirements to encompass the ircs .

drawing from principles of the unitary executive , arguments have been made in favor of the president's authority to include ircs in the oira review process as it is part of his constitutional authority to "take care" that the laws are faithfully executed .

others , however , argue that the president does not have legal authority to act because congress has not authorized this process and such action would be in contravention to congress's implied will , as arguably evident by other statutes , to insulate the ircs from presidential control .

however , were the president to extend e.o .

12866 to include the ircs or were congress to codify the provisions of the executive order , questions arise as to the president's , as well as the courts' , ability to enforce compliance .

the president's direct recourse to take action against an irc that disregards the executive order may be limited because members of the ircs typically enjoy "for cause" removal protection .

as the meaning of "for cause" has not been defined by congress or the courts , it is unclear what conduct may permit the president to remove an irc member .

this may still be the case even if the provisions of e.o .

12866 were codified , although failure to follow a statutory requirement could be more credible grounds for removing a member of an irc with "cause. .

courts are unlikely to grant judicial review for an irc's failure to comply with e.o .

12866 , as there is a provision that expressly precludes judicial review for noncompliance .

however , were judicial review provided via statute , claims could be brought against the ircs under the apa challenging agency actions as arbitrary or capricious or otherwise not in compliance with the law .

