community development financial institutions ( cdfis ) have been using small - scale and locally developed strategies to stabilize and advance low - income and financially underserved communities for decades .

cdfis are specialized financial institutions that work in market niches that are underserved by traditional financial institutions .

they provide a range of financial products and services in economically distressed markets , such as mortgage financing for low - income and first - time homebuyers and not - for - profit developers , flexible underwriting and risk capital for needed community facilities , technical assistance , and commercial loans and investments to small start - up or expanding businesses in low - income areas .

cdfis exist in both rural and urban communities .

cdfis include regulated institutions , such as community development banks and credit unions , and nonregulated institutions , such as loan and venture capital funds .

some stakeholders are concerned that a shortage of capital from cdfis will reduce opportunities for new entrepreneurs to establish a business , existing businesses to expand and hire new workers , and consumers to acquire the credit they need to buy or make improvements to a property .

others believe that these goals can be better served through other public policy or private means .

this report begins by describing the community development financial institutions fund's ( fund's ) history , current appropriations , and each of its programs .

the next section of the report analyzes four policy considerations of congressional interest regarding the fund and the effective use of federal resources to promote economic development .

it analyzes the reasons why some individuals may choose not to locate in an underdeveloped community , why government policies may be justified in encouraging economic activity to relocate to underdeveloped communities , and which policies are more successful in addressing aspects of underdevelopment .

lastly , this report examines the fund's programs and management to see if they represent an effective and efficient government effort to promote economic development in low - income and distressed communities .

to be eligible for certain fund - related programs , an organization must be certified as a cdfi , community development entity ( cde ) , or qualified opportunity fund ( qof ) .

cdfis are eligible for cdfi program fa and ta .

cdes are eligible for the nmtc .

qofs are eligible for opportunity zone ( oz ) tax incentives .

the fund's official mission is to increase economic opportunity and promote community development investments in low - income and distressed communities in the united states .

to carry out this mission , the fund is composed of several programs that address multiple needs of distressed communities .

these programs encourage qualified entities to provide financial and technical assistance to meet the needs of local businesses , potential homebuyers , community developers , and potential investors in low - income and distressed communities .

the fund's range of incentives includes equity investment in program awardees , tax credits , grants , loans , and deposits and credit union shares in insured cdfis and state - insured credit unions .

all of the fund's programs use geographically targeted incentives intended to increase community development in underserved and distressed communities , where certain types of economic activity might not otherwise occur .

ideas for geographically targeted community development policies were a feature of federal policy debates throughout the 1980s and early 1990s .

despite bipartisan support for these policies at the time , they were not widely implemented at the federal level until the clinton administration .

this section analyzes four policy considerations that may generate congressional attention regarding the fund's use of federal resources to promote economic development .

first , it analyzes the debate on targeting development assistance toward people versus places .

second , it examines the debate on targeting economic development policies toward labor or capital .

third , it analyzes whether the fund plays a unique role in promoting economic development or whether it duplicates , complements , or competes with the goals and activities of other federal , state , and local programs .

fourth , it examines assessments of the fund's management .

from an economic perspective , what theoretical basis is there for the promotion of development in distressed communities ? .

economic theory suggests firms and workers will locate to the most efficient and productive areas to do business in the long run , without the assistance of government policy .

from this perspective , government policies , such as tax exemptions or tax expenditures , that create incentives to locate in one area at the expense of another result in net social loss of efficiency — where finite resources are not being used to produce their maximum output for the lowest cost .

economic theory indicates that these policies create a distortion in the market , such that resources are directed from an area of higher potential productivity to an area of lower potential productivity .

however , government policy may be economically justified if business investment in distressed communities would generate positive externalities .

positive externalities , also known as spillover benefits , occur when the actions of one individual or firm benefit others in society .

because a given business will tend to only consider its own ( private ) benefit from an activity , and not the total benefit to society , too little of the positive externality - generating activity may be undertaken from society's perspective .

governments , however , may intervene through the use of taxes , subsidies , and other forms of assistance to align the interests of individual businesses with the interests of society to achieve a more economically efficient outcome .

how may government policy generate positive externalities within a community ? .

it is possible that potential investors may invest in an underdeveloped community as long as the potential return on that investment exceeds the potential risk .

if investors are not attracted to a particular community , however , government incentives may be able to change investors' perceived return and risk calculations .

if this initial group of businesses is successful , due in part to the government's incentives , then that success may send positive signals about potential return for other businesses that choose to locate in the community .

in addition , if government incentives encourage employment in the communities , employees may feel they have more of a stake in the community and participate positively in activities outside of work .

although government incentives initially benefit particular businesses or investments , they may also allow the broader community to capture these spillover benefits .

empirical evaluations of geographically targeted economic development policies have been mixed .

evaluations differ , in part , due to several factors , including the use of different evaluation criteria for economic development , different policies or sample areas used for analysis , or the use of different empirical strategies .

many of these studies are based on variations of state and local enterprise zones and federal empowerment zones .

enterprise zones typically provide certain tax incentives and regulatory relief for distressed communities , whereas federal empowerment zones provide certain tax exemptions and employer tax credits for hiring new employees .

some studies have found that geographically targeted policies have a positive effect on several indicators of economic activity in the targeted area .

these studies cite that such policies facilitate entrepreneurship and increase employment in the targeted area .

john ham et al .

find that an empowerment zone designation reduces local unemployment and poverty rates by 8.7% and 8.8% , respectively , whereas an enterprise zone designation reduces local unemployment and poverty rates by 2.6% and 20% , respectively .

leslie papke's review of surveys from participants in multiple u.s. enterprise zones indicates that start - up firms average approximately 25% of new businesses within the targeted zones .

barry rubin and margaret wilder's analysis of indiana's enterprise zone indicates that 76% of the 1,878 jobs created between the beginning of the program in 1983 and 1986 could not be attributed to regional or sectoral growth .

assuming these residual jobs were created in large part due to policy , the researchers calculated that the creation of each of these 1,430 jobs cost taxpayers $1,372 per job , annually .

by contrast , other evaluations indicate that these policies have little effect on economic activity within the targeted area or that they do not contribute to a net increase of economic activity throughout the larger economy .

these studies find that geographically targeted policies encourage some types of economic activity at the detriment of others — thus rearranging the mix of economic activity within the target area .

for example , andrew hanson and shawn rohlin indicate that location - based tax incentives have a positive effect on the firm location in industries that benefit the most from the tax incentives , but net growth in new establishments is offset by declines or slower growth in other industries that are less likely to use the tax incentives .

in addition , some studies indicate that geographically targeted policies may shift activity from a comparative area toward the targeted zone , rather than create new economic activity .

for example , tami gurley - calvez et al .

find that the nmtc may have led to an increase in corporate investment within the targeted areas but that it did not lead to a net increase in corporate investment .

these authors conclude that the nmtc might encourage investment to shift from one lic to another close substitute , as some corporate investors might already be investing in lics to fulfill community reinvestment act requirements .

the effect of geographically targeted economic development policies on local property prices is also an area of contention among researchers .

from a theoretical perspective , government incentives to increase the supply of affordable property increase the demand for that property .

that greater demand drives rents higher .

if local residents do not benefit from the increase in economic activity , then higher property values may encourage those with lower incomes to move out of the community .

given the lack of consensus among researchers on the effectiveness of geographically targeted economic policies , policy makers may opt to more narrowly define the primary objective of development .

at its core , the debate is a question of whether development policies should help people or places .

if the primary objective is to improve business and employment opportunities relative to other areas , then these policies might be effective .

if the primary objective of such policies is to create new jobs , then the effect of these policies may be limited .

if policy makers wish to help the poor , then it might be asked why government assistance should only be extended to the poor living in distressed communities ( as opposed to the poor living in nondistressed communities ) .

each standard for evaluation implies a different set of metrics and results in a different set of trade - offs .

assuming geographically targeted policies can positively affect economic development within the intended community , what type of benefit is most effective ? .

policies can provide a benefit related to labor costs , capital costs , or both ( i.e. , total costs ) .

in other words , should development policies target workers , business owners , or both ? .

when a geographically targeted subsidy is applied to one of these two factors of production , economic theory suggests two behavioral responses occur .

the first response is that total output ( i.e. , economic activity ) increases .

this increase in total output increases the use of both capital and labor , to some degree .

economists label this the output effect of production .

the second response is a substitution effect , whereby firms use one factor of production at the detriment of the other .

the net effect of the output effect and substitution effect determines the total effect of the policy .

in other words , the total effect reflects whether the policy benefits labor more than capital or vice versa .

for example , a labor subsidy , such as a payroll tax credit for hiring a worker , provided within a particular area will encourage labor - intensive firms to locate within that same area .

all firms ( whether attracted by the labor subsidy or already operating in the area ) will tend , in addition to expanding operations , to substitute their use of labor for capital .

if the objective of the labor subsidy is to promote employment , then the substitution effect ( the use of more labor , relative to capital ) reinforces the benefits of the output effect ( the use of more labor , due to expanded operation ) .

in other words , the policy is expected to result in a net increase in employment .

by contrast , a capital subsidy , such as tax deductions for capital investments , provided within a particular area will encourage capital - intensive firms to locate within that area .

all firms ( whether attracted by the capital subsidy or already operating in the area ) will tend , in addition to expanding operations , to substitute their use of capital for labor .

if the objective of the capital subsidy is to promote employment , then the substitution effect ( the use of more capital , relative to labor ) offsets the benefits of the output effect ( the use of more labor , due to expanded operation ) .

moreover , if the substitution effect is more powerful than the output effect , a capital subsidy may end up decreasing employment in the area .

in this instance , the net effect of the capital subsidy is less employment in the area than before the policy .

policies that relate to total costs may balance the trade - off between the promotion of capital or labor in the targeted area .

if producers are indifferent between using labor or capital , then a policy that provides equally weighted incentives toward the employment of labor and capital will result in a positive income effect , with no substitution effect .

however , if producers use relative factor price differentials to inform the mix of capital and labor they employ , then the result of a policy that relates to total costs will depend on the strength and direction of the substitution effect .

studies indicate that geographically targeted tax incentives for business owners ( eg , the nmtc ) have a positive but limited effect in increasing the economic well - being of other individuals living within the target area .

timothy bartik's review of 57 empirical studies on the effect of state and local preferential tax incentives for employers in a state or metropolitan area found that 57% of the studies found at least one statistically significant effect on generating development in the target area .

bartik found that the average measure of responsiveness , or elasticities , or change between tax measures and economic activity in a targeted state or metropolitan area ranges from - 0.25 across all studies to - 0.51 for studies that include statistical controls for both public service and fixed effects .

in other words , the study concluded that a 10% reduction in all taxes within a particular geographic zone would generate a 2.5% to 5.1% increase in economic activity within the same zone .

legislative interest in identifying duplicative federal programs has grown as some members of congress have become concerned about the size or efficient management of federal budgetary resources .

gao defines duplicative programs as federal programs that overlap with the goals or activities of other federal , state , or local policies .

some say the fund's programs duplicate other federal , state , local , and private - sector efforts to increase economic development in distressed and low - income communities .

the fund's website contains a guide that provides a list of possible financing sources for cdfis .

at the federal level , various programs exist as possible sources of finance for cdfis .

these programs are managed by executive agencies , such as usda , sba , hhs , hud , interior , treasury , and commerce .

based on this variety of possible funding sources for cdfis , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , under president george w. bush , said the fund's core cdfi program was not unique because several states administer similar programs and cdfis can use private - sector equity investment to accomplish activities they would otherwise accomplish with the fund's awards .

in addition , the nmtc is not the only tax incentive designed to encourage economic development in distressed communities .

the senate committee on the budget print on tax expenditures lists several other tax incentives that are meant to achieve similar goals as the nmtc .

these incentives provide short - term development assistance ( eg , disaster relief provisions ) , enhance tribal area development , and encourage business and capital investment in target communities .

the bush era's omb also stated that the nmtc was not unique because other federal , state , and local tax credit programs are available through agencies such as hud and commerce's economic development agency .

however , others believe the fund plays a unique or complementary role to the programs mentioned above .

first , fund supporters most commonly argue that community lenders are ready and willing to fill financing gaps , but they often struggle to find the amount of capital and liquidity they need to meet loan demand in distressed communities .

although certain cdfis may be eligible for similar forms of assistance from other federal programs ( eg , guaranteed loans from sba ) , the fund's limitations to activities in distressed communities allows cdfis to compete with other entities that face similar economic , environmental , and geographic challenges .

second , fund programs have supported alternatives to predatory lending institutions in distressed communities — notably in tribal communities .

third , some argue that the fund's programs complement , not compete with , the goals and programs of other federal initiatives .

for example , former assistant secretary for financial institutions michael barr testified before the house committee on financial services that funding for the community reinvestment act encourages more entities to invest in cdfis .

in contrast to the assessment by the bush era's omb , some say the fund provides incentives for activity that private - sector investors would not otherwise engage in .

for example , the fund enables more cdfis to provide affordable , critical - gap financing for businesses .

in other words , the fund encourages cdfis to provide short - term loans to businesses or homebuyers to cover immediate financial obligations while that borrower secures sufficient funds to make a full payment or find a more stable financing scheme .

in addition , cdfis provide technical assistance and training to borrowers to reduce default risk .

for these reasons , some representatives from national banking chains argue that cdfis complement traditional banking products in distressed communities and lics and help these financial markets operate more efficiently .

concerns over the fund's management primarily involve questions over the transparency and consistency of the fund's award evaluation processes .

early on in the fund's history , there were concerns in congress about whether the applications for awards were being issued based on an objective and transparent criteria .

additionally , there were concerns over the fund's ability to monitor and evaluate the performance of award recipients .

these initial concerns have been largely addressed as the fund has incorporated feedback and recommendations from outside parties , such as the treasury's office of inspector general .

the fund also has developed the community investment impact system ( ciis ) , which is a database that cdfis and cdes use to submit their institution level reports ( ilrs ) and transaction level reports ( tlrs ) to the fund .

the fund issues annual reports and releases this data to the public .

some members of congress have expressed concern regarding the lack of cdfis that serve u.s. territories and rural communities .

however , a 2012 gao report concluded that the policies and procedures of the cdfi and nmtc programs help ensure that awards and allocations generally are proportionate to the numbers of qualified applicants that serve metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas .

in addition , some members of congress have expressed interest in the performance of cdfis compared with their non - cdfi peers .

in addition , some members of congress raised concerns over the use of funds from the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) for assistance to cdfis .

president obama authorized a program that made certified cdfis eligible to receive capital investments at a discounted dividend , with the intent of increasing the supply of credit to community banks .

some maintained that tarp's temporary funds were not intended to target regional banks and that the program functionally resulted in a bypass of the typical appropriations process for the fund .

appendix a. inactive programs bank on usa program in his fy2011 budget request , president obama proposed the bank on usa program as a means to facilitate access to , and evaluate the effectiveness of , affordable , high - quality financial products , services , and education to unbanked and underbanked individuals .

title 12 of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) authorized the fund to "encourage initiatives for financial products and services that are appropriate and accessible for millions of americans who are not fully incorporated into the financial mainstream. .

although the president requested more than $41 million in funding for bank on usa for fy2012 and $20 million for fy2013 , congress did not approve funding for the program .

there was no request for bank on usa appropriations in the president's fy2014 budget request .

financial education and counseling pilot program the financial education and counseling ( fec ) pilot program provided grants in fy2010 to organizations that provided financial education and counseling services to prospective homebuyers .

the goals of the fec pilot program were to increase the financial knowledge and decision - making capabilities of prospective homebuyers , assist prospective buyers to plan for major purchases , and provide information on how to improve credit scores .

certified cdfis , a housing and urban development - approved housing counseling agency , credit union , or government entity could request fec funding for administrative expenses for fec - related programs .

section 1132 of hera of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) authorized the secretary of the treasury to create fec pilot programs .

for fy2009 , congress appropriated $2 million to the fund for the fec program .

treasury selected five organizations to receive $400,000 for their services toward the mission of the program .

in fy2010 , congress appropriated $4.15 million , of which $3.15 million was designated for an eligible organization in hawaii .

a 2011 gao report concluded that treasury's process for selecting fec grantees was applied consistently using established criteria .

in 2010 , the four grantees served a combined total of 311 clients .

however , gao could not meaningfully assess the impact of the program or the effectiveness of individual grantees because grantees had been providing services under the fec program for less than a year .

appendix b .

certified native cdfi .

