the veterans health administration ( vha ) , within the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , operates the nation's largest integrated direct health care delivery system , provides care to approximately 6.7 million unique veteran patients , and employs more than 311,000 full - time equivalent employees .

while medicare , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) are also publicly funded programs , most health care services under these programs are delivered by private providers in private facilities .

in contrast , the va health care system could be categorized as a veteran - specific national health care system , in the sense that the federal government owns a majority of its health care delivery sites , employs the health care providers , and directly provides the majority of health care services to veterans .

it should be noted that va health care is not a health insurance plan similar to what many individuals or employers purchase in the private health insurance market and does not have the same health insurance plan characteristics , such as coinsurances , deductibles , and premiums .

this report provides responses to frequently asked questions about health care provided to veterans through the vha .

it is intended to serve as a quick reference to provide easy access to information .

where applicable , it provides the legislative background pertaining to the question .

whether a veteran is required to pay for va health care services depends primarily on ( 1 ) whether the condition being treated is service - connected , and / or ( 2 ) the veteran's enrollment priority group .

62 veterans who are enrolled in the va health care system do not pay any premiums ; however , some veterans are required to pay copayments for medical services and outpatient medications related to the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

table 6 summarizes which priority groups are charged copayments for inpatient care , outpatient care , outpatient medication , and long - term care services .

only veterans in priority group 1 ( those who have been rated 50% or more service - connected ) and veterans who are deemed catastrophically disabled by a va provider are never charged a copayment , even for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

for veterans in other priority groups , vha currently has four types of nonservice - connected copayments for which veterans may be charged: outpatient , inpatient , extended care services , and medication .

veterans in all priority groups are not charged copayments for a number of outpatient services , including the following: publicly announced va health fairs ; screenings and immunizations ; smoking and weight loss counseling ; telephone care ; laboratory services ; flat film radiology ; and electrocardiograms .

for primary care outpatient visits , there is a $15 copayment charge and for specialty care outpatient visits , a $50 copayment .

veterans do not receive more than one outpatient copayment charge per day .

that is , if the veteran has a primary care visit and a specialty care visit on the same day , the veteran pays only for the specialty care visit .

for veterans required to pay an inpatient copayment charge , rates vary based upon whether the veteran is enrolled in priority group 7 or not .

veterans enrolled in priority group 8 and certain other veterans are responsible for the va's full inpatient copayment .

veterans enrolled in priority group 7 and certain other veterans are responsible for paying 20% of the va's inpatient copayment .

veterans in priority groups 1 through 5 do not have to pay inpatient or outpatient copayments .

veterans in priority group 6 may be exempt due to special eligibility for treatment of certain conditions .

for veterans required to pay long - term care copayments , these charges are based on three levels of nonservice - connected care , including inpatient , noninstitutional and adult day health care .

actual copayments vary depending on the veteran's financial situation .

the vha bills private health insurers for medical care , supplies , and prescriptions provided to veterans for their nonservice - connected conditions .

while the va cannot bill medicare , it can bill medicare supplemental health insurance carriers for covered services .

veterans are not responsible for paying any remaining balance of the va's insurance claim that is not paid or covered by their health insurance carrier .

any payment received by the va is used to offset ''dollar for dollar'' a veteran's va copayment responsibility .

for medication copayments , veterans are not billed if they have a service - connected disability rating of 50% or greater , are former prisoners of war ( pows ) , catastrophically disabled , or if the medication is for a service - connected disability .

veterans enrolled in priority groups 2 through 6 have a $960 calendar - year cap on the amount that they can be charged for these copayments .

veterans who are unable to pay va's copayment charges may submit requests for assistance , including waivers , hardships , compromises , and repayment plans .

beginning january 1 , 2017 , va is proposing to change the copayment rate of nonservice - connected conditions that are treated in an outpatient setting .

currently , medication copayments are either $8 or $9 per 30-day or less supply .

the new proposed rule , if adopted in 2017 , would place medications into three tiers .

for a 30-day or less supply of medication , tier 1 medications would cost $5 ; tier 2 would cost $8 ; and tier 3 would cost $11 .

provided the v eterans meet certain eligibility criteria , they could contribute towards health savings accounts ( hsas ) .

the surface transportation and veterans health care choice improvement act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-41 ) expands the ability of veterans who receive care from the va for service - connected conditions to contribute towards health savings accounts .

hsas are one way individuals can pay for unreimbursed medical expenses ( deductibles , copayments , and services not covered by health insurance ) on a tax - advantaged basis .

only eligible individuals can establish and fund hsas .

to be an eligible individual , one must be covered under a qualifying high - deductible health plan ( hdhp ) , cannot have any other insurance or coverage except what is permitted , and cannot be claimed as a dependent on a different taxpayer's return .

in general , an individual's eligibility to contribute to an hsa is determined on a monthly basis .

previously , receiving care from va limited veterans' ability to contribute to hsas .

veterans who were otherwise eligible to contribute to an hsa ( i.e. , veterans who were eligible individuals ) could contribute in a month only if they had not received care from the va in the preceding three months .

veterans who were otherwise eligible but had received care from the va in the preceding three months were not allowed to contribute to the hsa for the month .

under p.l .

114-41 , individuals are not prohibited from contributing to an hsa merely because they receive medical care from the va for a service - connected disability .

in other words , individuals who are otherwise eligible to contribute to an hsa will not be prevented from doing so merely because they receive care from the va .

this change went into effect january 1 , 2016 .

the va has the authority to bill most health care insurers for nonservice - connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the va health care system .

the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-272 ) , enacted into law in 1986 , gave the vha the authority to bill some veterans and most health care insurers for nonservice - connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the va health care system to help defray the cost of delivering medical services to veterans .

this law also established means testing for veterans seeking care for nonservice - connected conditions .

congress authorized the vha to collect reasonable charges for medical care or services ( including the provision of prescription drugs ) from a third party to the extent that the veteran or the provider of the care or services would be eligible to receive payment from the third party for ( 1 ) a nonservice - connected disability for which the veteran is entitled to care ( or the payment of expenses of care ) under a health plan contract ; ( 2 ) a nonservice - connected disability incurred as a result of the veteran's employment and covered under a worker's compensation law or plan that provides reimbursement or indemnification for such care and services ; or ( 3 ) a nonservice - connected disability incurred as a result of a motor vehicle accident in a state that requires automobile accident reparations ( no fault ) insurance .

similarly , the vha can receive payments from medicare supplemental coverage plans for nonservice - connected conditions for which the veteran receives care at vha facilities .

veterans are not responsible for paying any remaining balance of the va's insurance claim not paid or covered by their health insurance .

any payment received by the va is used to offset ''dollar for dollar'' a veteran's va copayment responsibility .

the va is statutorily prohibited from billing medicare 80 in most situations .

additionally , veterans are responsible for paying all medicare premiums , deductibles , and co - insurance .

the va has no authority to reimburse medicare beneficiaries for expenses they incur to obtain medical care under medicare .

81 in general , medicare is prohibited from reimbursing for any services provided by a federal health care provider unless the provider is determined by the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to be providing services to the public as a community institution or agency ; the provider is providing services through facilities operated by the indian health service ( ihs ) ; or the services were provided in an emergency ( in a hospital setting ) .

medicare is also prohibited from making payments to any federal health care provider who is obligated by law or contract to render services at public expense .

therefore , the vha is statutorily prohibited from receiving medicare payments for services provided to medicare - covered veterans .

although the legislative history does not indicate congressional intent for this decision , "a safe assumption to be drawn from the exclusion of medicare [from paying for health care services provided through other federal entities] is that congress wanted to avoid the unnecessary transfer of federal funds from medicare to the va when the money is all coming out of the same coffer. .

it should be noted that there is a narrow exception to this statutory prohibition of medicare reimbursing the vha .

under current law the vha can be reimbursed by medicare ( notwithstanding any condition , limitation , or other provision in title xviii of the social security act ) when the va provides services to medicare - covered individuals who are not eligible for care under chapter 17 of title 38 united states code ( u.s.c. ) .

and who are afforded va care or services under a "sharing" agreement .

medicare can reimburse veterans for va copayment amounts charged for va authorized services provided by non - va sources ( or provide credit toward medicare may also pay for ( medicare covered ) services for which the va does not make any payment .

"for example , if a veteran is authorized 'fee basis' care at va expense for a service - connected back injury , and treatment for a different condition for which the va does not pay , medicare can pay for the ( covered ) services that are not reimbursable by the va." appendix a. va priority groups and their eligibility criteria the va classifies veterans into eight enrollment priority groups based on an array of factors including ( but not limited to ) service - connected disabilities or exposures , prisoner of war ( pow ) status , receipt of a purple heart or medal of honor , and income .

the criteria for each priority group are summarized in figure a - 1 .

the eight priority groups fall into two broad categories .

the first group is composed of veterans with service - connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test .

these veterans are regarded by the va as "high priority" veterans , and they are enrolled in priority groups 1-6 .

veterans enrolled in priority groups 1-6 include the following: veterans in need of care for a service - connected disability ; veterans who have a compensable service - connected condition ; veterans whose discharge or release from active military , naval , or air service was for a compensable disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty ; veterans who are former prisoners of war ( pows ) ; veterans awarded the purple heart ; veterans who have been determined by the va to be catastrophically disabled ; veterans of world war i ; veterans who were exposed to hazardous agents ( such as agent orange in vietnam ) while on active duty ; and veterans who have an annual income and net worth below a va - established means test threshold .

the va looks at applicants' gross household income ( earned and unearned ) and deductible medical expenses for the previous year to determine their specific priority categories and whether they have to pay copayments for nonservice - connected care .

in addition , veterans are asked to provide the va with information on any health insurance coverage they have , including coverage through employment or through a spouse .

the va may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service .

the second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups — primarily veterans with nonservice - connected medical conditions and with incomes above the va - established means test threshold ( see table a - 1 ) .

these veterans are enrolled in priority groups 7 or 8 .

