foster care is a temporary living arrangement for children who cannot remain safely in their own homes .

for nearly every child who enters foster care , a first goal of the child welfare agency is to ensure necessary services are identified , and provided , so that the child can quickly and safely return to his or her parents .

most children who leave foster care do so to be reunited with parents or other family members .

for some children , however , this is not possible .

in those cases , the child welfare agency must work to find a new permanent home for these children and this may be accomplished through adoption or legal guardianship .

as the u.s. constitution has been interpreted , responsibility for the protection of children and the well - being of children and their families , is considered primarily a state duty .

however , congress has long sought to assist states in improving their child welfare services .

in exchange for federal funding to support provision of foster care and other child welfare services , states must meet certain federal requirements .

under title iv - e of the social security act , states , territories , and tribes who meet those requirements are entitled to claim partial federal reimbursement for the cost of providing foster care , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance to children who meet federal eligibility criteria .

the title iv - e program , as it is commonly called , provides support for monthly payments on behalf of eligible children , as well as funds for related case management activities , training , data collection , and other costs of program administration .

in fy2011 , states ( including the 50 states and the district of columbia ) spent $12.4 billion under the title iv - e program , and received federal reimbursement of $6.7 billion , or 54% of that spending .

at the federal level , the title iv - e program is administered by the children's bureau , an agency within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , administration on children , youth , and families ( acyf ) .

at the state level , the child welfare agency , which is often a part of the state's human services or social services department , administers the title iv - e program .

some state agencies administer the program centrally , while others supervise the administration of the title iv - e program by counties .

in either case , the state child welfare agency is the recipient of the federal title iv - e funding and is responsible for ensuring that the title iv - e program is administered in accordance with federal policy .

roughly two - thirds of the title iv - e dollars spent in fy2011 supported provision of foster care .

further , the very large majority of children who receive title iv - e adoption assistance were previously in foster care , as were all children who receive title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance .

this report begins with a brief discussion of why children come to the attention of the child welfare agency and how they may subsequently enter foster care .

it next outlines the requirements states must meet to receive federal title iv - e funds ; the kinds of assistance and activities that can be provided with title iv - e dollars , and on whose behalf those dollars may be spent ; and the way that federal funding is authorized for this program .

finally , the majority of the report focuses on title iv - e program eligibility criteria and spending that is specific to each of the program's three components: foster care maintenance payments , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance .

the title iv - e program is jointly funded by the federal government and the states .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and one tribe ( port gamble s'klallam ) participate directly in the title iv - e program .

this means they are entitled to seek federal reimbursement for a part of the cost of providing foster care , adoption assistance and kinship guardianship assistance on behalf of children who meet federal eligibility criteria .

as used in this report , the term "states," refers to all 50 states , the district of columbia and puerto rico , each of which must meet all the same program requirements to receive title iv - e funding .

direct access to federal title iv - e support was authorized for indian tribes , tribal organizations or tribal consortia , effective with the first day of fy2010 .

as of early september 2012 , only one tribe had completed the process of developing , submitting , and receiving approval of a tribal title iv - e program .

however , additional tribes continue to work toward this goal and hhs anticipates more tribal plans will be approved in the upcoming year .

to receive direct title iv - e funding , a tribal entity must meet substantially the same program requirements as those made of states .

 ( for further details related to tribal title iv - e participation requirements , see appendix a . ) .

table 1 shows the total dollars spent under the title iv - e program by program component , as well as the share of that total spending provided by the federal government and the states .

the title iv - e program was created in 1980 as part of the adoption assistance and child welfare act ( p.l .

96-272 ) .

that law moved earlier authorized federal funding for foster care from title iv - a of the social security act to the new title iv - e and established initial support for adoption assistance .

notable among the many acts that have amended the title iv - e program since its 1980 enactment are the adoption and safe families act of 1997 ( asfa , p.l .

105-89 ) , which emphasized children's safety , along with achieving permanency for children as quickly as possible ( particularly via adoption when appropriate ) ; and the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) , which focused new attention on ensuring the well - being of children in foster care , allowed states to choose to extend federal foster care assistance to youth up to age 21 , phased in expanded federal eligibility for title iv - e adoption assistance , and gave states the option of providing kinship guardianship assistance under the title iv - e program .

most title iv - e dollars are used to provide foster care to children who meet federal eligibility criteria .

on the last day of fy2011 , there were fewer than 401,000 children in foster care , but one - half or fewer of those children were estimated to be receiving title iv - e assistance .

foster care is a temporary living arrangement intended to ensure a child's safety and well - being while the state child welfare agency works to ensure the child may be safely and permanently returned to his or her own home .

if a court determines this is not possible or appropriate , the agency must then work to find a new permanent home for the child via adoption , legal guardianship , or placement with another fit and willing relative .

the number of children entering foster care each year hovered just above or below 300,000 from the late 1990s through the middle of the 2000s .

since that time , however , it has declined to roughly 250,000 children annually .

children entering care in a given fiscal year join those who previously entered care and have not yet exited .

the total number of children in foster care on the last day of the fiscal year peaked in fy1999 at 567,000 but has since declined in nearly every year and , as of the last day of fy2011 , stood at fewer than 401,000 .

the decline in the overall number of children in foster care has long been driven by an increase in children leaving foster care for adoption ( or guardianship ) and , more recently , by the decrease in children entering care .

on a national basis , less than half of all children who are in foster care receive federally supported foster care maintenance payments under the title iv - e program .

 ( the share of children in foster care who receive this support varies significantly by state. ) .

children for whom foster care is determined necessary for their safety ( or in their best interest ) but who do not meet the federal title iv - e eligibility criteria may not be assisted with title iv - e program funds .

instead states must use state , local , or other ( non - title iv - e ) federal dollars to provide support to children who do not meet title iv - e eligibility criteria .

federal title iv - e foster care eligibility criteria are discussed next in this report , and this discussion is followed by a look at foster care spending trends under the title iv - e program .

title iv - e training support is available for all three program components: foster care , adoption assistance and kinship guardianship .

since fy2000 , the total amount of title iv - e program dollars spent for training purposes has declined in most years .

the federal share of the total title iv - e training costs is the same for all states and is generally 75% ; ( certain time - limited exceptions are discussed below ) .

most dollars spent for training under the title iv - e program are related to its foster care component and are included in this report under the discussion of the title iv - e foster care program .

however , all kinds of title iv - e training , whether related to foster care , adoption assistance , or kinship guardianship , are discussed in this section of the report .

 ( see figure 4 ) .

federal reimbursement related to training is largely limited to costs that are incurred by the state to train individuals who will provide care , or other services , to title iv - e eligible children and for training on topics that directly relate to activities required under the title iv - e plan .

states may seek partial federal reimbursement for the cost of providing short - term training , directly or via a contract , to individuals specified in the law ( see text box ) .

topics that may be covered with these training funds must be related to carrying out the title iv - e program and may range from administrative tasks ( eg , how to maintain confidential records ) to social work practice ( eg , how to assess needs in a family - centered manner ) .

while title iv - e - supported training may also address broad topics relevant to carrying out the title iv - e program — for example , caregiver mental health or substance abuse issues — it may not support training related to treating those needs ( i.e. , providing mental health services or substance abuse treatment ) .

similarly , while title iv - e funds may be used to provide training about the impact of child abuse and neglect on children , it may not be used to provide training to workers on how to specifically conduct a child abuse and neglect investigation .

this is because neither treating a caregiver for substance abuse or mental health issues , nor investigating child abuse and neglect are considered within the scope of the title iv - e program .

the state agency may also use title iv - e to support "long - term" training for individuals who are employed by a public child welfare agency or those who are preparing for that employment .

long - term training may be provided as direct financial assistance to current or prospective employees who are students or through grants to schools .

states may claim federal reimbursement under the title iv - e program for 50% of the cost to plan , develop , and operate a statewide automated child welfare information system ( sacwis ) .

most sacwis costs are believed to follow from operation of a foster care program .

however , as is the case with title iv - e training costs , costs related to sacwis may stem from provision of foster care , adoption assistance , or kinship guardianship assistance .

the following discussion includes all sacwis - related spending reported by states , whether categorized as an operation or a development cost .

states are not required to have a sacwis , but choosing to do this enables a state to seek federal reimbursement under title iv - e for costs that would otherwise not be allowed .

as of september 2012 , 36 states have an operational sacwis , three are developing a sacwis , and 13 states have a non - sacwis model information system .

 ( see table 4 . ) .

in establishing the ability of states to make sacwis claims , congress stipulated that any system developed must comply with hhs regulations , interface with state child abuse and neglect data collection and afdc ( now tanf ) data collection systems ( to the extent practicable ) ; and provide more efficient , economical , and effective administration of state child welfare programs , as determined by hhs .

under the sacwis rule , states are required to develop "comprehensive" child welfare data collection systems that include child welfare services , foster care and adoption assistance , family preservation and support services , and independent living .

further , to encourage states to establish a sacwis , congress initially approved an enhanced title iv - e reimbursement rate of 75% for sacwis development costs ( and a 50% reimbursement rate for operation ) .

the enhanced development rate was in place from fy1994-fy1997 .

beginning with fy1998 , however , federal reimbursement of costs for both the development and operation of sacwis is available at 50% .

states operating or developing an approved sacwis may claim federal title iv - e reimbursement for an approved system ( both development and operation costs ) without regard to whether the system serves foster or adoptive children who meet or do not meet the title iv - e assistance criteria .

a sacwis must be designed to allow access to case level information across federal programs ; accordingly states may also claim certain system development costs across more than one program .

however , most sacwis costs that are not related to operation of a child welfare program under title iv - e or title iv - b must be allocated to the program they benefit .

since the establishment of this funding under title iv - e , states have invested $4.7 billion in sacwis operation and development costs and the federal government has reimbursed more than half ( 55% or $2.6 billion ) of those costs .

table 5 shows title iv - e sacwis claims made by states for fy1994 – fy2011 .

as part of the adoption assistance and child welfare act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-272 ) , congress established federal support for assistance to any child that the state determines cannot , or should not , be returned home ; there is a specific factor or condition that makes it reasonable to conclude that the child cannot be placed for adoption without assistance ( eg , child is older or part of a sibling group to be adopted together ) ; and , efforts have been made to place the child without assistance , unless this would be against the child's best interest ( eg , if the child has bonded with a foster parent who is clearly the best person to adopt the child but cannot do so without assistance ) .

in the title iv - e program , children who meet these criteria are referred to as children with "special needs," and the very large majority of these children were previously in foster care .

in its report on the legislation that became the 1980 adoption assistance and child welfare act , the house ways and means committee wrote that the "primary objective" of the bill was to "promote reforms in state foster care and child welfare services programs that will significantly increase the number of children placed in permanent homes .

those reforms would not be complete without the provision of adoption assistance. .

all states were required to establish a title iv - e adoption assistance component as part of their title iv - e program ( no later than the first day of fy1983 ) .

by fy1984 there were 11,600 children receiving title iv - e adoption assistance on an average monthly basis .

that number rose steadily , reaching 146,900 for fy1997 .

in november 1997 congress enacted the adoption and safe families act ( asfa , p.l .

105-89 ) .

among other purposes , that law sought to increase the number of children who left foster care for permanent adoptive homes .

it sped up the permanency planning time frame for children who entered foster care , and also required states to take steps to ensure the legal availability of a child for adoption if the child had been in care for a certain length of time or if there was no requirement to make "reasonable efforts" to reunite the child with his or her parent .

asfa also authorized adoption incentives to provide cash awards to states that increased adoptions of children out of foster care .

the law's enactment was followed by strong growth in the number of children adopted with public child welfare agency involvement .

that number stood at roughly 31,000 in fy1997 , grew to more than 51,000 by fy2000 and — despite a significant decrease in the number of children in foster care across this time period ( i.e. , a decline in the pool of children out of which most special needs adoptions occur ) — has remained at or above 50,000 adoptions in all but one fiscal year , through fy2011 .

adoptions out of foster care also began to occur more quickly in this time period .

the average length of time a child who was adopted from foster care had spent in care declined by roughly one year , from 46 months for those adopted in fy2000 to 34 months for those adopted in fy2011 .

the increased number of children adopted from foster care helped to drive significant growth in the number of children who receive title iv - e adoption assistance .

as of fy1997 , there were about 146,400 children receiving title iv - e adoption assistance on an average monthly basis .

that number rose to 285,600 during fy2002 — the first year in which the number of children receiving title iv - e adoption assistance surpassed the number who were receiving title iv - e foster care maintenance payments — and it climbed to 423,200 by fy2010 .

states reported the first ever decline in the title iv - e adoption assistance caseload for fy2011 , when an estimated 413,800 received that assistance on a monthly basis .

some of the reported caseload decline for fy2011 might be due to children who joined the caseload following asfa and are now leaving it because of age .

 ( in most cases , adoption assistance does not extend beyond age 18 , although there are situations in which it may continue until age 21. ) .

separately , the decline may be related to those federal adoption assistance eligibility criteria that are linked to the income test and other requirements of the prior law cash welfare program known as aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) .

while congress has acted to phase out those federal eligibility criteria for purposes of title iv - e adoption assistance , the afdc criteria are expected to continue to apply to the majority of adopted children until at least fy2015 and will not be entirely irrelevant to title iv - e adoption assistance eligibility until the first day of fy2018 .

apart from these potential reasons for the change in the caseload , some of the reported "decline" might also be related to data quality concerns .

specifically , there were significant changes in the reporting form used to collect data on the number of children receiving title iv - e adoption assistance , and that form first went into effect with fy2011 .

figure 5 shows the change in title iv - e foster care and adoption assistance caseloads beginning with fy1984 .

the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) authorizes states to seek partial federal reimbursement for kinship guardianship assistance payments made on behalf of eligible children who leave foster care for placement in a "legal guardianship" with a grandparent or other relative .

enactment of this form of title iv - e assistance followed more than a decade of state experimentation with subsidized guardianship programs both independently , and under child welfare demonstration projects ( as authorized by section 1130 of the social security act ) .

in a 2007 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) recommended that congress consider enacting federal support of guardianship as a way to reduce the disproportionate representation of african american children in foster care .

like the foster care and adoption assistance components of the title iv - e program , this federal support is authorized on a permanent and open - ended basis .

however , states are not required to provide this assistance to eligible children .

instead a state may choose to amend its title iv - e plan to provide for this kind of assistance .

if a state amends its plan to add a kinship guardianship assistance component , it must enter into a written and binding kinship guardianship agreement with the prospective relative guardians of eligible children .

as of early september 2012 , 31 states had submitted a title iv - e plan amendment to enable them to seek federal reimbursement for kinship guardianship assistance provided on behalf of eligible children .

the plan amendment for one of those states ( virginia ) remained under review , but all of the others had been approved .

through fy2011 , most of those states had not yet submitted any claims for federal reimbursement of title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance .

however , states may seek this reimbursement for up to two years from the date on which they incurred the expense — provided the expense was incurred on or after the effective date of their plan amendment .

 ( see table 11 for states with approved plan amendments , effective dates of those amendments , and states that had made claims through the end of fy2011. ) .

the law permits states that previously operated a subsidized guardianship assistance program as part of a child welfare demonstration project ( a.k.a. , a waiver project ) to receive federal reimbursement for assistance and services provided to children who were receiving assistance and services under that project as of september 30 , 2008 .

a state does not need to have an approved title iv - e plan amendment related to kinship guardianship assistance to make these title iv - e claims ( but it may ) .

through fy2011 , three states had submitted post - demonstration related kinship guardianship assistance claims .

two of those states have an approved title iv - e plan that includes kinship guardianship assistance ( illinois and michigan ) and one state does not ( iowa ) .

for states providing kinship guardianship assistance under an approved title iv - e plan amendment , the same general rules apply with regard to the general kinds of costs and the amount of federal reimbursement that may be claimed .

kinship guardianship assistance payments made on behalf of eligible children are reimbursed at the state's fmap ( which may range from 50% to 83% ) .

administrative costs for the program may be reimbursed at 50% .

as is true for title iv - e adoption assistance , the kinds of administrative claims that may be made are generally more limited than those for foster care ( in large part because once a child is no longer in foster care the requirements for case planning and review no longer apply ) .

however , states are required to provide a relative guardian with funds necessary to meet the full non - recurring costs of finalizing a legal guardianship or $2,000 , whichever is less , and they may claim federal reimbursement of 50% of the cost of that assistance .

finally , states may also seek reimbursement for title iv - e program training related to serving children who receive title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance .

the federal reimbursement rate for most of those training claims is 75% .

 table 12 shows all eligible spending claimed by states under the title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance component , and the federal share of those claims that were reimbursed to states , through fy2011 .

 ( all spending related to children who were previously assisted as part of a title iv - e subsidized guardianship demonstration project is shown in the payments column of table 12 . ) .

the average monthly number of children assisted is also shown as it was reported by states .

however , these data are known to be incomplete for fy2011 because some states that made claims for kinship guardianship assistance did not report the average monthly number of children receiving assistance .

as part of its mid - session budget review ( conducted in summer 2012 ) hhs estimates that federal outlays for title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance will rise to $81 million for fy2013 ( with 14,000 children assisted on an average monthly basis ) and will climb to $174 million by fy2017 ( with 28,000 children assisted on an average monthly basis ) .

if a child's plan for permanently leaving foster care is placement with a relative guardian and receipt of kinship guardianship assistance , the title iv - e agency must describe all of the following in the foster child's written case plan: the steps taken to determine that neither reuniting the child with his / her parents ( s ) nor adoption are the appropriate permanency option for the child .

the efforts the agency has made to discuss with the relative foster parent the option of adopting the child "as a more permanent alternative to legal guardianship" and , if the relative foster parent has chosen not to pursue adoption , why this is the case .

the reason that placement with a fit and willing relative under a kinship guardianship assistance arrangement is in the child's best interests .

the reason for any separation of siblings during placement .

the efforts made by the state agency to discuss with the child's parent , or parents , the kinship guardianship assistance arrangement or the reasons why the efforts were not made .

the ways in which the child meets the eligibility requirements for a kinship guardianship assistance payment .

this case plan requirement applies to children while they are in foster care .

once a child leaves foster care permanently , there is no requirement for the title iv - e agency to maintain a case plan for the child .

to be eligible for title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance payments , there must be a kinship guardianship assistance agreement in place — between the state agency and the eligible prospective relative guardian – under which the child is placed with the relative who becomes his / her legal guardian .

further , the child must have been eligible for title iv - e foster care maintenance payments while living in the home of that prospective relative guardian , and the child must also meet certain age and limited other criteria .

finally , the state must make certain determinations regarding the appropriateness of kinship guardianship as a permanency goal for the child .

eligibility for title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance payments is tied to a child's previously established eligibility to receive a title iv - e foster care maintenance payment .

specifically , a child must have been eligible to receive title iv - e foster care maintenance payments while living for no less than six consecutive months in the home of his or her prospective relative guardian .

among other things , the link to the title iv - e foster care eligibility criteria effectively means that the child must have entered foster care through a voluntary placement agreement ( between the title iv - e agency and the child's parent ( s ) / guardian ) or after a judge determined that continuing to live in his or her own home would be "contrary to the welfare" of the child .

further , the income available in the family home from which the child was removed must be at or below the eligibility standard for the prior law cash welfare program , known as afdc , as that program existed in the state on july 16 , 1996 .

the link to the title iv - e foster care eligibility criteria also means that the home of the prospective relative guardian must have met the licensing requirements for a foster family home and , further , that the prospective guardian met the federal background check and approval procedures ( including the requirement that the relative must not have been found to have committed certain felonies ) .

 ( for all the criteria linked to title iv - e foster care maintenance payment eligibility see table 2 . ) .

states are separately required to have specific background check procedures for prospective relative guardians , including fingerprint - based checks of national crime databases and child abuse and neglect registry checks , and these checks must be conducted before a relative guardian may receive kinship guardianship assistance payments on behalf of an eligible child .

in program guidance , however , hhs notes that if a state has established an "appropriate" time frame during which a background check remains valid , and that time frame had not expired when the foster parent seeks to become the child's relative guardian , the state does not need to redo that check but may consider the prospective relative guardian background check requirement as met .

as discussed above , for an individual to be eligible to receive title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance payments on a child's behalf , he or she must have been the foster parent of the child for at least six consecutive months , must have met the foster family home licensing requirements , and must not have any of the statutorily prohibited felony convictions on his or her record .

in addition , an eligible legal guardian must be the grandparent or other relative of that child and must , as determined by the state , have a strong commitment to permanently care for the child through legal guardianship .

the term "relative" is not defined in the statute for purposes of the title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance program .

states are permitted to define "relative" for purposes of their title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance program ( as part of their title iv - e plan amendment ) .

for example , they may choose to define the term to include only individuals who have biological or legal ties to the child , or they can define it more broadly to include "[t]ribal kin , extended family and friends or other 'fictive kin.' .

additionally , for a child to be eligible for title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance payments , a state must determine that neither being reunited with his or her parents , nor adoption , are appropriate permanency options for the child ; that the child demonstrates a strong attachment to the prospective relative guardian ; and that , if the child is age 14 or older , he or she has been consulted about the kinship guardianship arrangement .

a child may not receive title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance after the age of 18 unless the state determines that the child has a mental or physical disability that warrants continued assistance ( but only up to age 21 ) ; or if the state has elected the option to extend title iv - e assistance to youth after age 18 , up to the age of 19 , 20 , or 21 ( as the state specifies in the plan ) and provided that the child entered the guardianship arrangement after his or her 16 th birthday and he / she is a secondary or post - secondary student , is employed at least 80 hours a month , is participating in an activity designed to promote or reduce barriers to employment , or is medically unable to do any of those activities .

states that elect to amend their title iv - e plan to permit title iv - e foster care maintenance assistance to youth in foster care after their 18 th birthday must also provide extended assistance to an otherwise eligible youth in a title iv - e kinship guardianship arrangement ( up to same age as for youth in foster care ) , provided that youth entered the arrangement after his or her 16 th birthday and meets all other relevant requirements .

a state may , but is not required to , provide title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance to a sibling of a child who is eligible for that assistance , provided the sibling is placed with the same relative guardian as the eligible child and both the relative guardian and the title iv - e agency agree that this joint placement is appropriate for the siblings .

the placement does not have to occur at the same time .

further , the sibling of the eligible child does not need to meet certain other eligibility requirements ( eg , previously eligible for a title iv - e foster care maintenance payment while living with the relative guardian ) .

hhs has advised states that they may establish additional conditions on receipt of title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance that make eligibility for this assistance more limited in their state than what federal law would permit .

however , hhs must approve those conditions as part of the state's title iv - e plan amendment related to kinship guardianship .

some examples of conditions state might impose , as provided by hhs in july 2009 guidance , include requiring that a child must have lived in foster care with the prospective relative guardian for more than the 6-month time period required in federal law ; requiring a child to be a certain age before he / she is eligible ( eg , 12 or older ) ; requiring the relative guardian to inform the agency if the child's biological parents plan to stay with the guardian on a long term basis and / or requiring cooperation with child support enforcement .

states that seek reimbursement for kinship guardianship assistance payments must enter into a written and binding kinship guardianship agreement with the prospective relative guardian of an eligible child .

the agreement must , at a minimum , stipulate that it will remain in effect without regard to the state in which the relative guardian lives and must specify: ( 1 ) the amount of , and manner in which , the kinship guardianship assistance payments will be made on the child's behalf , including the manner in which the amount may , in consultation with the relative guardian , be adjusted periodically based on the circumstances of the relative and the needs of the child ; and ( 2 ) the additional services and assistance the child and relative will be eligible for under the agreement , including the procedure the relative guardian may use to apply for additional services as needed ; and ( 3 ) that the state will pay all non - recurring expenses associated with obtaining legal guardianship of the child , or $2,000 of those expenses , whichever is less .

a kinship guardianship assistance agreement remains in effect ( as provided in the terms of the agreement ) as long as the child meets the eligibility criteria for age ( described above ) , the relative guardian remains legally responsible for the child , and as long as he / she is providing support to the child .

the law provides that a kinship guardianship assistance payment may never be more than the amount the child would receive as a foster care maintenance payment , if he or she remained in a foster family home .

 ( this does not preclude adjustments for inflation or changes due to different needs of the child , provided the changes are consistent with what would happen if the child were in foster care. ) .

while the kinship guardianship agreement does not need to specifically address health care coverage , the law provides that any child who meets the federal eligibility criteria to receive a title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance payment remains categorically eligible for medicaid .

appendix a. tribal participation in the title iv - e program direct federal support for tribes under the title iv - e program was first authorized effective with fy2010 .

specifically , the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) permits any indian tribe , tribal organizations or tribal consortia that has an approved title iv - e plan to receive support for foster care , adoption assistance , and if the tribe chooses this , kinship guardianship assistance .

as of april 1 , 2012 , the port gamble s'klallam tribe ( located on the kitsap peninsula in washington state ) became the first tribe to independently operate a title iv - e program .

other tribes are working toward approval of a title iv - e plan and hhs expects to approve some new tribal plans during fy2013 .

alternatively , p.l .

110-351 also continues to permit states and tribes to enter into agreements whereby the state agrees to pass through certain title iv - e funds to tribes for support of children in tribal custody , including for costs related to child placement , training , and other title iv - e program administration costs .

further , the law , as amended by p.l .

110-351 , requires states to negotiate in good faith with any tribe in the state that seeks to enter into an agreement with the state to operate some or all parts of a title iv - e program for children under tribal authority .

the federal title iv - e reimbursement rate ( paid to a state ) for children under tribal authority who are covered by a title iv - e agreement is equal to the tribal fmap ( as described below and which may be greater than a state's fmap but not less than that amount ) .

this appendix provides an overview of the statutory provisions related to tribal receipt of direct federal funding under the title iv - e program .

requirements for direct title iv - e funding to tribes the law requires that hhs apply the requirements and entitlements of the title iv - e program to any tribe that has an approved title iv - e plan in the same manner as those requirements and entitlements apply to a state — unless the statute specifically directs otherwise .

the large majority of title iv - e provisions apply to tribes seeking direct title iv - e funding and states in the same manner .

however , in the case of a tribe , the law modifies the title iv - e plan requirement related to statewide operation , requiring instead that a tribe define the service area or areas that are to be covered in the plan .

tribal title iv - e plans must also include evidence demonstrating that the tribe has not had any uncorrected significant or material audit exceptions under federal grants or contracts that directly relate to the administration of social services for the three years prior to the date on which the tribe submits its title iv - e plan for approval .

further , the law also clarifies that , under a tribal title iv - e plan , licensing of foster family homes or child care institutions must be done by an established tribal authority .

a tribal child's eligibility for title iv - e foster care , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance is generally the same as eligibility for a child under a state - operated title iv - e program .

for children in foster care under a tribal title iv - e plan , the law stipulates that the afdc rules of the state in which the child lived when he / she was removed from his / her home ( as those rules were in effect on july 16 , 1996 ) apply for purposes of determining the child's title iv - e eligibility .

as noted above , tribal licensing standards apply for purposes of approving or licensing tribal foster family homes and tribal child care institutions .

however , the law does not modify the separate title iv - e plan requirements related to background checks of prospective caregivers .

therefore , under a tribal title iv - e plan , background checks for prospective foster or adoptive parents must meet all of the requirements included in title iv - e of the social security act .

these checks are similar , but not identical to background checks implemented in indian country under the indian child protection and family violence act .

like states , tribes seeking direct title iv - e funding must have an approved title iv - e plan that points to tribal law or policy that meets federal requirements for the program and they must also have an approved child and family services plan , under which they receive title iv - b , subpart 1 ( stephanie tubbs jones child welfare services program ) funding .

finally , they must develop processes to enable them to successfully claim federal title iv - e reimbursement , including those to determine eligibility for title iv - e assistance as well as cost allocation methodologies , and they must regularly report certain data to hhs , children's bureau regarding children in tribal foster care custody and those who are adopted .

federal reimbursement for tribal title iv - e program costs foster care maintenance payments , as well as adoption assistance and guardianship assistance payments , are to be reimbursed at a tribe's unique "fmap" ( "federal medical assistance percentage" ) .

that percentage is determined by statutory formula and is based on the per capita income of the population in the tribe's title iv - e service area ( as defined in the tribe's title iv - e plan ) .

a tribal fmap ( or reimbursement rate ) must never be lower than the rate of reimbursement for any state in which the tribe is located and may not be higher than 83% .

as is the case for states , tribal training costs under the title iv - e program are to be reimbursed at 75% of the tribe's eligible spending and title iv - e child placement , data collection and reporting , and any other costs necessary for the proper and efficient administration of the program are to be provided at 50% of the tribe's eligible spending .

with a few exceptions ( which are the same as those provided for states as described in the body of this report ) , tribes may only seek federal reimbursement for costs related to children who are eligible for title iv - e assistance .

therefore , tribes operating a title iv - e program must be able to accurately determine ( subject to periodic federal review ) title iv - e eligibility in order to receive any federal support under the program .

for training and administrative claims , tribes must have a valid cost allocation methodology that determines both what share of training , child placement , and other program administration costs are done on behalf of title iv - e eligible children , as well as a method to determine what part of the administrative and training costs are allocable to title iv - e. hhs notes that — while title iv - e program rules , and general hhs cost allocation principles apply — the u.s. department of the interior , bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) is the "cognizant" agency for purposes of tribal cost allocation .

further , the indirect cost rates established for use in bia programs may be used in the title iv - e program , provided the methodology for the cost rate is supplied in the tribe's title iv - e cost allocation methodology ( cam ) .

in general , any part of title iv - e spending that is not reimbursed by the federal government must be provided from non - federal sources .

however , certain federal laws explicitly provide that funds received by a tribe via a limited number of specific programs may serve as "non - federal" dollars in other programs .

accordingly , tribes may use any federal funds from such a program to provide the "non - federal" share of title iv - e spending .

in addition , tribes are permitted to use in - kind third party expenditures to meet the non - federal share of title iv - e administrative and training costs .

beginning with fy2012 , the tribal child welfare interim final rule permits tribes to use in - kind expenditures to meet the full non - federal title iv - e administrative ( 50% ) and training ( 25% ) costs .

data collection and reporting requirements tribes operating a title iv - e program must collect and report data to the hhs children's bureau regarding children in foster care or those adopted under the auspices of the public child welfare agency .

data must be submitted electronically as part of the adoption and foster care analysis and reporting system ( afcars ) and in a format prescribed by federal regulations .

twice a year , the tribe must submit data on 1 ) each child who spent at least 24 hours in foster care under the tribal title iv - e agency's care and placement responsibility ( during the prior six months ) ; and 2 ) each child who was placed for adoption by the tribal title iv - e agency or for whom that agency provided adoption assistance during that same 6-month period .

data must be reported without regard to whether the child is eligible for title iv - e foster care or adoption assistance .

tribes seeking direct title iv - e funding are required to have a statewide information system capable of tracking each child in foster care .

as part of meeting this requirement , they may develop a tribal automated child welfare information system ( tacwis ) but are not required to do so .

a tacwis ( referred to for states as sacwis , or statewide automated child welfare information system ) facilitates cross - program and cross - agency sharing of data by the tribe ( and within the tribe ) and must meet federal design standards .

tribes with an approved planning document for a tacwis may make title iv - e claims for federal reimbursement that are related to the development of a data collection system ( including hardware costs ) .

those tribes may also submit claims for federal reimbursement related to the operation of a required title iv - e data collection and reporting system .

tribes with an approved title iv - e plan that do not have a tacwis may only submit regular title iv - e administrative claims related to operation ( not development ) of a required data collection and reporting system .

states report certain additional , closely related child welfare data via the national child abuse and neglect data system ( ncands ) and the national youth in transition database ( nytd ) .

however , neither of these data systems is defined or required in the title iv - e foster care , adoption assistance and guardianship assistance program .

tribes operating a title iv - e program are not required to report data via these systems .

transfer of a child's care and placement responsibility the indian child welfare act ( icwa ) provides specific federal rules regarding notice and transfer of certain child custody proceedings ( eg , removal and placement in foster care ) from a state court to a tribal court or authority .

those requirements remain unchanged by the authorization of direct federal support to tribes under title iv - e of the social security act .

separately , for purposes of ensuring continued title iv - e eligibility and / or payments ( as well as medicaid eligibility ) , the fostering connections act required hhs to regulate on the issue of transferring care and placement responsibility of a child from a state child welfare agency to a tribal child welfare agency .

the regulations are to apply whenever the tribal child welfare agency has an approved title iv - e plan to receive direct federal title iv - e funding , or , if the tribe receives title iv - e funding via a tribal - state title iv - e agreement .

hhs issued interim final regulations on this matter in early 2012 .

they provide that each state must establish and maintain transfer procedures , in consultation with indian tribes .

at a minimum those procedures must 1 ) provide for the state to determine the child's eligibility for title iv - e assistance at the time of the transfer of care and placement responsibility ( if this determination has not already been made ) ; and 2 ) provide that the state will supply to the tribe essential documents and information necessary to continue a child's eligibility for title iv - e assistance and for medicaid .

essential documentation and information includes , but is not limited to — judicial determinations that the home from which the child was removed was contrary to his / her welfare and that reasonable efforts to reunite the child and / or to complete the child's permanency plan have been made consistent with title iv - e requirements ; other documentation the state has , related to the child's title iv - e eligibility , and information and documentation related to his / her eligibility or potential eligibility for other federal programs ; the child's written case plan , including health and education records ; and information and documentation of the child's placement settings , including a copy of the most recent provider's license or approval .

tribal title iv - e implementation grants and technical assistance implementation grants as the above discussion indicates , preparing to submit and gain approval of a title iv - e plan requires significant planning .

to assist tribal entities seeking to prepare a title iv - e plan , the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act established tribal title iv - e implementation grants valued at up to $300,000 .

these one - time grants are available only to tribes that plan to develop and submit a title iv - e plan to hhs within 24 months of receiving the funding .

the statute provides that a tribal grantee must repay the full grant amount if it does not submit a title iv - e plan for approval within 24 months of its receipt of these funds .

however , hhs is permitted to waive this repayment if it determines that the failure to submit such a plan within that time frame was due to circumstances beyond the control of the tribe .

a tribe is not required to seek ( or receive ) this grant funding prior to submitting a title iv - e plan for approval .

however , a tribe that seeks and receives these funds may use them to support any effort necessary to develop a plan to carry out a title iv - e program .

these include costs relating to the development of data collection systems , a cost allocation methodology , agency and tribal court procedures necessary to meet the case review system requirements under the title iv - e program , or any other costs attributable to meeting any other requirement necessary for approval of a title iv - e plan .

through september 1 , 2012 , hhs had awarded tribal implementation grants to 12 tribes , tribal organizations or consortiums: tohono o'odham nation – sells , az ; confederated salish & kootenai tribes – pablo , mt ; keweenaw bay indian community – baraga , mi ; sac and fox nation – stroud , ok ; washoe tribe of nevada and california – gardnerville nv ; navajo nation – window rock , az ; chickasaw nation – ada , ok ; yurok tribe – del norte , ca ; shoshone - bannock tribes – fort hall , id ; lummi nation – bellingham , wa ; and south puget intertribal planning agency – shelton , wa ; and the confederated tribe of siletz indians – or .

according to hhs , as of early september 2012 , all of these tribes continue to work to finalize a title iv - e plan .

technical assistance p.l .

110-351 also requires hhs to provide "information , advice , educational materials , and technical assistance" to tribes , generally , regarding the services or other activities funded under the child welfare programs authorized in title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act .

this technical assistance is to be available to tribes seeking to operate title iv - e or title iv - b programs and to tribes and states seeking to enter into title iv - e tribal - state agreements or otherwise to satisfy the requirements for state and tribal collaboration or cooperation included in title iv - e or title iv - b of the social security act .

in september 2009 , hhs awarded funding to the tribal law and policy institute ( based in west hollywood , california ) for a national resource center for tribes .

the award is expected to last for up to five years .

for more information about what the resource center offers , readers are encouraged to visit its website at http: / / www.nrc4tribes.org .

appendix b. afdc income standard and federal foster care coverage rate appendix c. additional table .

