congressional authorization of federal assistance to state and local governments can be traced back to the continental congress and its approval of the granting of nationally owned land to states formed out of the northwest territory .

those lands were to be sold for the support of public education .

congress subsequently granted millions of acres for wagon road and canal construction , 64 million acres for improvements to river navigation , and several thousand acres for the establishment and support of land grant colleges .

the first federal cash grant program was adopted in 1808 , to provide funds to states to support the national guard .

since that time , there has been dramatic growth in federal cash assistance programs , now commonly referred to as "federal grant programs" or "federal domestic assistance programs. .

these programs transfer money , property , services , or other items of value for which the principal purpose is to accomplish a goal authorized by congress .

a broader definition of federal domestic assistance would include loans .

there are currently 2,179 congressionally authorized federal domestic assistance programs .

the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) indicates that of these , 1,714 are federal grant programs , which can be further broken out as formula ( 225 ) and project ( 1489 ) grant programs administered by 26 federal agencies .

eight federal agencies administer 67% ( 1,143 ) of these programs , distributed as follows .

as the number of congressionally authorized grant programs has increased over time , congressional interest in these programs , in terms of their efficiency and effectiveness , both individually and collectively , has also increased .

the increasing cost of federal grants - in - aid assistance has also attracted congressional interest .

figure 2 illustrates that federal outlays for grants to state and local governments have grown from $13.2 billion ( in constant fy2005 dollars ) in 1940 to $514.6 billion in 2011 .

the growing number , perceived fragmentation , and complexity of these programs create challenges for federal agencies interested in standardizing various financial and administrative aspects of grant program management .

as a result , there is wide variation across and within federal agencies in the administration of federal grant programs .

this variation in federal grant administration makes it difficult for congress to compare program performance , both within and across federal agencies , and to exercise its oversight of federal agencies .

federal agencies administering grant programs face challenges in providing timely , accurate , and detailed information on federal grant awards .

this can be attributed , in part , to the way grant funds are distributed from the federal to the local level .

this may also be attributed to the limitations of the databases used to track the distribution of funds .

these limitations include questions regarding the validity of the data , and the limited ability to track the distribution of grant funds to the subgrant recipient level .

without complete and valid information about the distribution of federal grant funds , congress may have a diminished capacity to engage in effective oversight of federal grants .

in recent years , many scholars , various think tanks , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , and the u.s. office of management and budget ( omb ) have argued that the increased number of federal grant programs , especially those with specific purposes , has resulted in increased complexity and fragmentation in the administration of federal grants .

this report is designed to assist congress in its oversight of federal grants - in - aid programs by providing an overview of federal grants - in - aid generally ; a description of the typical life cycle of a federal grant , including the processes for selecting , awarding , administering , and overseeing a federal grant award ; and an analysis of the tracking of federal grants currently being done by federal agencies .

the effective administration of federal grants is influenced by the way a federal agency structures grant management functions .

the structure of federal grants management varies widely across and within federal agencies .

generally , most federal grants are awarded to state governments , which then pass through grant funds to local entities either by formula or through a competitive process .

this process is known as federal grant pass - through .

portions of federal grants may also be passed - through when states award contracts to private sector entities .

this means grant seekers at the local level often need to apply to their state when seeking local funds .

figure 3 illustrates the federal grant funding stream .

the pass - through structure may be a result of the need to balance a federal interest in accountability and program effectiveness with a state need for autonomy and flexibility .

the pass - through structure may also be because state governments may have more resources available to conduct oversight of federal funds than local governments or nonprofit organizations .

states also retain discretion in determining the specific projects to be funded within the state if funds are passed - through the state .

this increases state autonomy to determine the use of federal funding within the constraints of the federal grant authorization and federal agency grant guidance .

the states , as primary grant recipients , are able to impose state priorities on federal grant funds and have discretion to determine the allocation methodology .

in some cases , federal funds are awarded to states under a formula , but states then pass - through funding through a competitive in - state application process .

the life cycle of a federal grant traditionally includes four stages: pre - award , grant award , grant program administration , and post - award / audit .

figure 4 illustrates the life cycle of a federal grant .

federal agencies administering grant programs face challenges in providing timely , accurate , and detailed information on federal grant awards .

the validity and reliability of federal grant distribution data is critical for the oversight of federal grant administration .

challenges in obtaining accurate and timely data on the distribution of federal grants may be attributed to the limitations of the databases used to track the distribution of funds .

there is limited ability to track the distribution of federal grant funds .

currently , the primary source of data is information submitted by federal agencies to usaspending.gov .

questions have been raised regarding the quality of data provided by usaspending.gov .

until recently , other reports provided detailed information on the distribution of federal grant funds .

however , the elimination of these reports places greater emphasis on the quality of information in usaspending.gov since it has now become the primary source of data on the distribution of federal grant funds .

the federal aid to states ( fas ) and the consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) were first published in 1983 and have been available on the internet since the early 1990s .

the fy2010 reports , issued in august 2011 , were the last reports issued due to the termination of funding .

the fas and cffr reports summarized geographic distribution of federal grant funds to states and counties and were the primary documents used to track federal funding .

fas and cffr contained state summary data and aggregate figures by federal department and agency .

the cffr included payments to state and local governments and to nongovernmental recipients .

both reports were issued approximately 12 to 18 months after the close of the fiscal year .

this delay raised questions about the timeliness of the information in the fas and cffr , but the timeliness may be offset in part by the value in standardized information that could be used to analyze the distribution of federal grants across time .

without complete , valid , and standardized information about the distribution of federal grant funds , congress may have a diminished capacity to engage in effective oversight of federal grants .

questions can be raised about how federal agencies differ in the administration of federal grants and whether any differences are attributed to differences in the grant programs or in the administration of the grants .

questions regarding broader federal grant management transparency may involve consideration of whether some agencies are more aggressive in promoting transparency and what best practices might service as a foundation to developing a strategy to improve the administration of federal grants .

variation in federal grant administration makes it difficult for congress to compare program performance within and among federal agencies , and to exercise its oversight of federal agencies .

