surface transportation authorization acts authorize spending on federal highway and public transportation programs , surface transportation safety and research , and some rail programs .

the most recent multi - year authorization for federal surface transportation programs , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) , reauthorizes federal surface transportation programs and activities through september 30 , 2014 .

map - 21 authorizes roughly $105 billion for fy2013 and fy2014 combined .

it also extended fy2012 surface transportation authorizations to the end of the fiscal year , raising the act's total authorization to approximately $118 billion .

the comparatively short two - year authorization reflects the difficulty faced by congress in funding surface transportation within a constrained budgetary environment .

the highway trust fund ( htf ) has provided most of the funding for surface transportation authorization bills since its creation in 1956 .

the htf is supported mostly from taxes on gasoline and diesel fuel , but a sluggish economy and improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency have reduced fuels tax revenues below projections .

the taxes were last raised in 1993 and are fixed in terms of cents per gallon , so revenues do not rise along with motor fuel prices .

consequently , congress faced a choice of cutting transportation spending , increasing motor fuels taxes , or providing general fund transfers to supplement the htf revenues .

in the end , congress chose to transfer money from the general fund to the htf to fund a two - year authorization .

congress also made major changes in the structure and formula of the highway and transit programs .

the number of highway programs was reduced by roughly two - thirds .

mass transit programs were also reduced through consolidation .

although the eligibilities of many former programs were absorbed into new or modified programs under map - 21 , the changes have the potential to increase efficiency .

the six large core programs under the previous authorization , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) , were consolidated into five .

the new national highway performance program absorbed the interstate maintenance , national highway system , and federal - aid highway bridges programs .

off - system highway bridges were included in the surface transportation program .

the congestion mitigation and air quality program ( cmaq ) and the highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) were both retained , and the recreational trails , safe routes to schools , transportation enhancements , and certain other eligibilities were combined into a new core program , transportation alternatives ( ta ) .

roughly 92% of the highway program funding under map - 21 is distributed by formula and is under the control of the state departments of transportation .

the number of discretionary programs , formerly under the control of the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) , has been reduced .

in addition , map - 21 is free of project earmarking .

these changes continue a long - term shift away from detailed federal control of project decisions to a policy of limited federal oversight of project control exercised at the state and metropolitan levels .

unlike previous authorizations , map - 21 does not use separate formulas to distribute funds for individual programs .

instead , it applies a broad initial calculation across virtually all the formula programs and then assigns a percentage of the available funding to each formula program .

the initial calculation sets each state's apportionment share under most of the formula programs .

in place of the old formula factors , such as , for example , lane miles on principal arterial routes , map - 21 relies on a performance - based approach to rewarding progress toward national goals .

map - 21's use of the initial calculation eliminated the need for an equity bonus program to guarantee that each state would receive at least a proportion of its residents' payments into the htf , as in safetea .

instead , map - 21 sets each state's share in the initial distribution for fy2013 and fy2014 based on the apportionment it received in fy2012 , adjusted in fy2014 to assure that each state receives 95% or more of its highway tax contribution to the htf .

this adjustment may not be necessary , as all states have received more in apportionments and allocations than their tax payments to the htf in every year since fy2007 .

map - 21 also did not include the budgetary "firewalls" and spending guarantees that were maintained under both safetea and its predecessor law , the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( p.l .

105-178 ) .

these firewalls and spending guarantees made it difficult for surface transportation spending levels to be lowered during the annual appropriations process .

under map - 21 the ability of the appropriators to lower authorized funding levels has been restored .

during the map - 21 debate congress considered funding sources other than grants .

the act provides for a major expansion of the transportation infrastructure financing and innovation act ( tifia ) and some modest changes in federal tolling provisions .

tifia is touted as allowing for the leveraging of almost ten times the amount authorized .

tolling changes reaffirm the support for value and congestion pricing and allow for tolling of new interstate route construction .

public transportation is provided with slight spending increases under map - 21 .

transit programs have undergone significant structural change .

the new state of good repair program replaces the fixed guideway modernization program , and transit authorities are required to develop asset management systems .

the bus and bus facilities program is funded at less than half the level of fy2012 and the funds are distributed by formula rather than being earmarked .

the federal program for freight transport proposed in the senate surface transportation bill ( s. 1813 , 112 th congress ) was not included in map - 21 as enacted .

the act did retain many planning provisions related to identifying infrastructure components most critical to freight , including the designation of the "primary freight network. .

map - 21 also seeks to accelerate transportation project delivery by altering the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) compliance process and other environmental reviews .

however , it is not certain that the enacted changes will speed project completion , and there is reason to think that some projects may face additional delay due to the new law .

the federal - aid highway program ( highway program ) is an umbrella term for an array of programs administered by fhwa .

the highway program is primarily state - run .

the state departments of transportation ( state dots ) largely determine where and how money is spent , but have to comply with detailed federal planning guidelines .

the state dots award the contracts and oversee project development and construction .

states and / or local governments usually must provide a matching share , typically 10% for interstate system projects and 20% for other roads .

map - 21's highway and research titles authorize $81.99 billion over two years , $40.96 billion for fy2013 and $41.03 billion for fy2014 ( see table 1 ) .

map - 21 eliminates the equity bonus program .

instead the bill provides , for fy2013 , a state with the same total apportionment as it received in fy2012 .

for fy2014 , the total available for distribution is based on states' fy2012 share of apportionments with an adjustment , if necessary , to assure a 95 cent return on each dollar that a state's highway users pay to the highway account of the htf .

map - 21 does not include highway program earmarks .

map - 21 eliminates or consolidates most discretionary programs .

law previous to map - 21 allowed tolling of non - interstate federal - aid highways .

however , toll - free interstate highways , other than bridges or tunnels , could be converted to toll roads only under a pilot program limited to three projects .

no states have applied to use tolls to fund new interstate routes under the interstate system construction toll pilot program , but some states are adding express toll lanes to existing roads and imposing congestion pricing under the express lanes demonstration program and the value pricing pilot program .

map - 21 allows for the construction of totally new interstate highways as toll roads , essentially mainstreaming the interstate system construction toll pilot program .

it also allows for the addition of toll lanes on an existing interstate highway as long as the total number of "free" lanes is not reduced .

the act eliminates the long - standing requirement that a toll agreement be executed with the fhwa prior to tolling a facility under the mainstream tolling programs .

the act requires that by october 1 , 2016 , all federal - aid highway toll facilities implement interoperable tolling technology .

tolls are important revenue streams for many public private partnerships and alternative financing mechanisms .

the continued support in congress for using congestion pricing fits well with expanded tolling of hov and express lanes as well as the now allowable tolling of extended interstate routes .

congress , on the other hand , did not expand the interstate reconstruction and rehabilitation pilot program following public statements by participants that they were hoping to direct as much of the burden of tolls to interstate travelers as possible .

the tifia program provides secured loans , loan guarantees , and lines of credit for major surface transportation projects .

loans must be repaid with a dedicated revenue stream , typically a project - related user fee .

map - 21 greatly enlarges tifia by increasing its funding from $122 million annually to $750 million in fy2013 and $1 billion in fy2014 .

dot estimates that after administrative costs and application of the obligation limitation it will have $690 million for credit subsidy support in fy2013 and $920 million in fy2014 .

assuming an average subsidy cost of 10% , this may provide dot with the capacity to lend $6.9 billion in fy2013 and $9.2 billion in fy2014 .

map - 21 also increases the maximum share of project costs that tifia may provide from 33% to 49% , probably lowering the share of nonfederal resources leveraged with federal loans .

another change made by map - 21 is permitting tifia credit assistance to be provided for a program of projects secured by a common security pledge .

this would be accomplished through a "master credit agreement. .

prior to map - 21 , tifia only allowed agreements on a project - by - project basis .

the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority ( metro ) , for one , has sought this change to accelerate the financing of 12 transit projects ( known as the 30 / 10 initiative ) .

the master credit agreement also establishes a way to make a commitment of future credit assistance contingent on the availability of funds .

the threshold cost for a single project to be eligible for tifia assistance remains $50 million , or $15 million for intelligent transportation system projects , except that map - 21 includes a threshold of $25 million for rural infrastructure projects .

map - 21 also sets aside 10% of program funds to assist rural projects .

additionally , whereas loans for urban projects must be charged interest not less than the treasury rate , rural projects that are assisted by the rural setaside are to be offered loans at half the treasury rate .

rural projects are defined very expansively to include any project in an area other than a city with 250,000 or more inhabitants .

prior to map - 21 , projects seeking tifia assistance were evaluated by dot on eight criteria .

map - 21 eliminates these selection criteria and now permits tifia assistance for any eligible project .

one of the key eligibility criteria is creditworthiness .

to be eligible , a project's senior debt obligations and the borrower's ability to repay the federal credit instrument must receive an investment - grade rating from at least one nationally recognized credit rating agency .

the tifia assistance must also be determined to have several beneficial effects: fostering a public - private partnership , if appropriate ; enabling the project to proceed more quickly ; and reducing the contribution of federal grant funding .

other eligibility criteria include satisfying planning and environmental review requirements and being ready to contract out construction within 90 days after the obligation of assistance .

applications for assistance must be accepted by dot on a rolling basis .

changes to the tifia program , particularly the big increase in funding , have generally been well received .

nevertheless , there is some concern that the increase in tifia's share of project costs to 49% will reduce the non - federal share of project costs and possibly also "crowd out" private financing .

although dot's ability to administer quickly such a large funding boost is also a concern , the agency acted to begin ramping up credit assistance by issuing a notice of funding availability just several weeks after map - 21's enactment .

map - 21 does not contain other major alternative financing provisions , such as federal funds to capitalize state infrastructure banks or increased volume limits on private activity bonds .

nor were there provisions to create a national infrastructure bank or to reinstate build america bonds .

the public transit provisions of map - 21 are contained in division b , the federal public transportation act ( fpta ) of 2012 .

like map - 21 as a whole , the fpta authorizes funds for the remainder of fy2012 and for fy2013 and fy2014 .

moreover , like map - 21 as a whole , the transit provisions simplify the structure of the public transit program , eliminate discretionary programs in favor of formula programs , and introduce performance management .

arguably the biggest change made by map - 21 in transportation planning is a requirement for the use of performance management throughout the planning process .

performance management requires establishing performance measures and setting targets .

map - 21 makes changes in planning requirements at the national , state , and metropolitan levels .

transportation project development is initiated and completed largely at the local , tribal , or state level , with ultimate project approval at the federal level from fhwa or fta .

generally , the stages include initial project planning , preliminary design / engineering and environmental review , final design and rights - of - way acquisition , construction , and facility operation and maintenance .

although issues that may delay project delivery can occur at any of phase of development , legislative efforts during the reauthorization debate focused on expediting overall project delivery by streamlining the environmental review process .

for surface transportation projects approved for funding under federal - aid highway or public transportation programs , the environmental review process involves fhwa or fta working with other federal and state or tribal agencies to ensure project compliance with all local , state , tribal and federal environmental requirements .

this interdisciplinary undertaking is accomplished largely by documenting dot's consideration of a proposed project's environmental impacts as required under the national environmental policy act ( nepa , 42 u.s.c .

§4321 et seq. ) .

procedures necessary to document compliance with nepa were the primary focus of legislative efforts to expedite overall environmental compliance in map - 21 .

however , the act also includes provisions not entirely applicable to the nepa process , but relevant to other processes likely to take place during the planning or preliminary design phase .

the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement ( cmaq ) program was established to fund projects and programs that may reduce emissions from transportation - related pollutants , particularly in nonattainment and maintenance areas .

pursuant to the clean air act , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has set ambient air quality standards for certain pollutants .

of relevance to transportation planning agencies are the national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) for ozone , carbon monoxide , and particulate matter ( distinguished as coarse and fine particulate , referred to as pm 10 and pm 2.5 , respectively ) .

a geographic area that meets or exceeds naaqs for a criteria pollutant is considered to be in "attainment" ; an area that does not meet a standard is in "nonattainment. .

a "maintenance" area is one that was previously in nonattainment , but is currently attaining the naaqs subject to a maintenance plan .

map - 21 section 1113 amends the following cmaq program requirements: eligible projects ( §149 ( b ) ) .

explicitly includes the addition of turning lanes to the projects eligible for funding .

special rules ( §149 ( c ) ) .

allows a state to obligate its cmaq funds for a project in a nonattainment area regardless of the criteria pollutant the project aims to reduce ; and specifies that cmaq funds could be used for electric and natural gas vehicle infrastructure .

states flexibility ( §149 ( d ) ) .

specifies that a state with a nonattainment area may use a certain amount of its apportioned stp funds for projects eligible under the cmaq program , determined in relation to 2009 funding levels for projects funded under the cmaq program .

evaluation and assessment of projects ( §149 ( i ) ) .

directs dot to develop and maintain a database to disseminate information describing cmaq projects and , in consultation with epa , evaluate the cost - effectiveness of a range of projects .

states and mpos are required to consider this information in selecting projects or developing performance plans ( as required under amended section 149 ( l ) , discussed below ) .

optional programmatic eligibility ( §149 ( j ) ) .

allows technical assessment of selected program or projects , conducted at the discretion of mpos , to demonstrate emissions reductions .

that data could be used to show that similar projects meet cmaq eligibility requirements .

priority for use of funds in pm 2.5 area ( §149 ( k ) ) .

in nonattainment or maintenance areas for pm 2.5 , states and mpos shall prioritize cmaq fund distribution for projects proven to reduce those pollutants , including diesel retrofits .

§149 ( l ) performance plan .

requires mpos to prepare performance plans for cmaq - funded projects .

§149 ( m ) operational assistance .

allows states to obligate apportioned cmaq funds for operating costs of transit projects or systems previously eligible for funding under the cmaq program .

whether the federal government should make a more focused effort towards funding freight improvements was a major policy question leading up to the reauthorization debate .

the senate version of map - 21 ( s. 1813 ) created a separate funding program for freight transport but this was not enacted in the final bill .

instead , the local cost share for freight specific projects was reduced to 5% in the case of projects on the interstate highway system and 10% for other projects .

map - 21 enacted many planning provisions related to identifying infrastructure components most critical to freight transport .

this includes designation of a "primary freight network" ( pfn ) consisting of 27,000 centerline miles of existing roadways , based primarily on freight volume and in consultation with shippers and carriers ( for comparison , the existing interstate highway system consists of approximately 47,000 centerline miles ) .

the secretary of transportation can designate up to an additional 3,000 centerline miles of existing or planned roads as part of the pfn based on their future importance to freight movement .

states can designate "critical rural freight corridors" based on the density of truck traffic if they connect the pfn or interstate system with sufficiently busy freight terminals .

a larger national freight network ( nfn ) will include the critical rural freight corridors , portions of the interstate system not designated as parts of the pfn , and roads in the pfn .

dot , in consultation with partners and stakeholders , will develop a national freight strategic plan that will include identification of highway bottlenecks .

dot is required to report every two years on the condition and performance of the nfn .

each state is encouraged , but not required , to create a state freight advisory committee made up of representatives of the freight community and a state freight plan "that provides a comprehensive plan for the immediate and long - range planning activities and investments of the state with respect to freight" ( §1118 ) .

among other things , a state's freight plan is to describe how it will improve the ability of the state to meet the national freight goals established by dot .

no major changes to current truck size and weight provisions are included in map - 21 , but a new study and inventory of current state laws is required .

the act increases the weight allowance for truck idle reduction technologies from 400 lbs .

to 550 lbs .

and allows states to issue overweight permits to trucks carrying relief supplies if a major disaster is declared .

the surety bond filing requirement for truck brokers and ocean freight forwarders was raised from $10,000 to $75,000 with the intention of fighting fraud in the industry .

truck brokers and freight forwarders marry shippers ( cargo owners ) with carriers on an individual shipment basis .

small brokers contend this change is unnecessary and is being used by larger firms as a means of putting them out of business .

since brokers do not own any transportation assets , entry and exit in the industry is relatively easy .

the bond is employed as a means of ensuring brokers have sufficient financial stake in the business and / or as a means of paying creditors when firms do go out of business .

section 1536 of map - 21 states as a non - binding sense of congress that the administration should request and congress should fully expend each year all of the revenues collected in the harbor maintenance trust fund for the operation and maintenance of the nation's federally maintained ports .

the provision also expresses the importance of protecting other critical army corps programs , including inland navigation , flood and coastal storm protection , and ecosystem restoration , from funding reductions .

the provision also directs the administration to provide an annual estimate of national harbor maintenance needs , including an estimate of the percentage of waterways that will be available for use based on the annual budget request as well as how much funding would be needed to achieve 95% availability of the nation's ports and waterways within three years .

section 100124 reduces the percentage of u.s. food aid that must be shipped on u.s. - flag ships ( which must be owned and crewed by u.s. citizens ) from 75% to 50% and repeals the requirement that 25% of bagged or processed food aid be shipped through great lakes ports .

the purpose of this so - called "cargo preference" law is to promote u.s. - flag shipping because the ships may be used to deploy military hardware and supplies during war or national emergency .

operating expenses under the u.s. flag are significantly higher than those under many foreign flags , which is why congress supports u.s. - flag vessels through cargo preference , with the additional shipping cost paid by dot's maritime administration .

section 100124 repeals a provision of the food security act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-198 , subtitle c ) , which increased the cargo preference requirement from 50% to 75% of food aid tonnage .

