in an effort to curb youth smoking , section 907 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act ( tobacco control act ) banned all flavorings in cigarettes except menthol .

the ban took effect three months after the tobacco control act became law .

this ban was in response to the burgeoning market for cigarettes with flavors , like spice , fruit , and candy , that appealed to youth .

although menthol cigarettes also appeal to youth , they represent over a quarter of all the cigarettes smoked , meaning they have broad appeal among adults also .

rather than ban menthol cigarettes , therefore , congress authorized the food and drug administration ( fda ) to "ban or modify the use of menthol in cigarettes based on scientific evidence. .

the fda is studying the matter and has taken no action to date with respect to banning menthol in cigarettes .

clove cigarettes , which are banned by the tobacco control act as non - menthol flavored cigarettes , are primarily imported from indonesia , while menthol cigarettes are primarily produced domestically .

the united states and indonesia are members of the world trade organization ( wto ) , a multilateral international economic organization created by the marrakesh protocol , which was signed in 1994 .

the agreement establishing the world trade organization ( wto agreement ) includes a number of agreements to which all wto members must agree .

among these agreements are the agreement on technical barriers to trade ( tbt agreement ) and the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt 1994 ) .

article 2.1 of the tbt agreement requires wto members to treat "like" imported products no less favorably than "like" domestic products with respect to domestic regulations that set forth product characteristics .

article 2.2 of the tbt agreement provides that such regulations cannot be "more trade restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate objective , taking account of the risks non - fulfillment would create. .

indonesia brought a claim before the wto , arguing , among other things , that imported clove cigarettes are like domestically produced menthol cigarettes ; that the tobacco control act treats clove cigarettes less favorably than menthol cigarettes in violation of article 2.1 ; and that the tobacco control act is more trade restrictive than necessary under article 2.2 .

indonesia also claimed that the ban , in taking effect after three months , violates article 2.12 of the tbt agreement , which requires a "reasonable interval" between a law's publication and its taking effect .

the panel hearing indonesia's claim agreed with indonesia as to articles 2.1 and 2.12 , but rejected its argument with respect to article 2.2 .

the united states appealed the panel's finding with respect to articles 2.1 and 2.12 to the appellate body .

indonesia did not appeal the panel's finding with respect to article 2.2 .

although the appellate body disagreed with the panel's interpretation of certain terms , it upheld the panel's conclusion that the tobacco control act violated article 2.1 of the tbt agreement , concluding that clove cigarettes are like menthol cigarettes and that clove cigarettes receive less favorable treatment under section 907 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) than menthol cigarettes .

in reaching this conclusion , the appellate body treated this as a case of de facto , not de jure , discrimination .

it concluded that article 2.1 should be interpreted in conjunction with article iii:4 of the gatt 1994 and that likeness under article 2.1 , therefore , is based on the competitive relationship of the products .

the appellate panel stated also that detrimental impacts on like imported products are permissible provided they are due exclusively to legitimate regulatory distinctions .

the appellate body rejected that the united states had a legitimate reason for banning clove cigarettes , while not banning menthol cigarettes .

the united states had argued that because millions of adults smoke menthol cigarettes , a ban would result in the development of a black market for menthol cigarettes and the health care system being overwhelmed by the many people who satisfied their nicotine addiction by smoking menthol cigarettes .

the appellate body focused on the purpose of the ban , which was to ban cigarettes with characterizing flavors that mask the harshness of cigarette smoke because such cigarettes appeal to youth smokers .

however , the appellate body stated that menthol cigarettes share with clove cigarettes the very characteristic that justified the ban — they have a characterizing flavor that masks the harshness of tobacco smoke .

moreover , the appellate body questioned the likelihood of the development of a black market and the health care system being overwhelmed by menthol smokers in the event the united states were to ban menthol cigarettes , noting that regular cigarettes contain nicotine and would remain available .

therefore , the appellate body found that the decision to exempt menthol cigarettes from the ban on flavored cigarettes was not justified by a legitimate policy distinction .

however , it reiterated that public health concerns , such as curbing youth smoking , are legitimate regulatory ends .

as mentioned above , indonesia claimed that the tobacco control act was more trade restrictive than necessary in violation of article 2.2 , but the panel found that indonesia failed to make its case .

indonesia did not appeal that conclusion .

in particular , the panel found that the ban's purpose , to reduce youth smoking , was a legitimate regulatory end ; that indonesia failed to demonstrate that the ban would make no "material contribution" to the goal of reducing youth smoking ; and that indonesia had failed to establish that there were less trade restrictive measures that the united states could take that would achieve a comparable reduction in youth smoking .

accordingly , the panel concluded that indonesia had failed to establish that the ban on clove cigarettes was more trade restrictive than necessary .

because indonesia did not appeal that part of the decision , the panel's conclusion stands .

article 2.12 of the tbt agreement requires a "reasonable interval" between publication of a technical regulation and its effective date .

indonesia complained that the tobacco control act provided an interval between publication and effective date of three months while the term "reasonable interval" meant not less than six months .

indonesia based this claim on the fact that paragraph 5.2 of the doha ministerial decision on implementation - related issues and concerns ( doha ministerial decision ) interpreted "reasonable interval" within article 2.12 to mean not less than six months .

paragraph 5.2 , indonesia argued , was a legally binding interpretation under article ix:2 of the wto agreement .

without finding that paragraph 5.2 was a legally binding interpretation under article ix:2 , the panel determined that it must "guide" the panel's interpretation of "reasonable interval. .

in the alternative , the panel found that paragraph 5.2 could be considered a subsequent agreement of the parties within article 31 ( 3 ) of the vienna convention on the law of treaties ( vienna convention ) .

ultimately , it found that the tobacco control act violated article 2.12 .

the appellate body determined that paragraph 5.2 was not a legally binding interpretation under article ix:2 of the wto agreement , but it was a subsequent agreement under article 31 ( 3 ) of the vienna convention .

therefore , the burden to present a prima facie case that the interval provided by the tobacco control act is less than six month fell on indonesia , as the complaining member , and the burden to rebut this prima facie showing by demonstrating that the interval is reasonable fell on the united states , as the responding member .

because the appellate body concluded that indonesia presented a prima facie case which the united states failed to rebut , it held that the tobacco control act violated article 2.12 of the tbt agreement .

in response to the appellate body's decision , the united states suggested that it will likely maintain the ban on clove cigarettes and stated that it will act in a way that respects its obligations under the wto agreement .

however , it appears that the united states has not yet settled on a course of action .

at the april 24 , 2012 , meeting of the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) , the united states made a statement about the appellate body's decision .

the united states explained that the tobacco control act was aimed at "cigarettes that were smoked by a small fraction of the population and predominantly by young people. .

although tobacco and menthol cigarettes , which are smoked by "tens of millions of addicted adults," pose a serious public health issue , those issues are different from the issue which the tobacco control act was intended to address — youth smoking .

the united states noted that the panel , in finding the tobacco control act consistent with article 2.2 of the tbt , concluded that the tobacco control act serves the legitimate objective of reducing youth smoking by removing "trainer cigarettes" from the market and that it was not more trade restrictive than necessary .

however , in light of those conclusions , the united states found it "very hard" to understand the appellate body's conclusion that the tobacco control act breaches article 2.1 of the tbt agreement .

in particular , the united states appreciated that the appellate body recognized that members may make "legitimate regulatory distinctions between like products , even where there is a detriment to the competitive conditions for the group of like imported products compared to the group of like domestic products. .

however , the united states stated that the appellate body's findings and analysis on article 2.1 are "problematic" because it fails to appreciate that , "from the perspective of public health regulation , there is a clear difference between a product , such as clove cigarettes , that is smoked in the united states experimentally by a small number of young people but relatively few adults , and a product such as menthol cigarettes , that is not only used by youth during initiation but also by tens of millions of addicted adults. .

because the appellate body recognized that the panel failed to explain why it rejected the u.s. regulatory approach and , therefore , made no factual findings , the united states asserted , the appellate body should have overturned the panel's conclusion .

instead , the united states complained , the appellate body engaged in its own analysis and rejected the u.s. explanation without citing to any facts to support its view that the basis for the distinction was not legitimate .

"the appellate body thus reached conclusions that were not , as they should be in any dispute , based on panel findings or undisputed facts. .

by doing so , the united states stated , the appellate body in effect put itself in the position of regulator , weighing the risks and benefits from including menthol cigarettes in the ban .

the united states asserted that the appellate body rejected the judgment of the u.s. regulators that menthol cigarettes should not be included in the ban and substituted its own judgment on the basis that "it is not clear" that the concerns of the u.s. regulators would materialize if menthol cigarettes were banned .

"the result in this dispute should be of grave concern to any member regulating for the benefit of public health as , without the benefit of analysis based in any factual findings , it was decided that a public health regulation must be applied to additional types of products , despite the potential harms of an extended ban. .

finally , the united states expressed disappointment with the appellate body's determination that the tobacco control act's interval of three months between publication and effective date was not "reasonable" and thus inconsistent with article 2.12 of the tbt agreement .

first , the united states asserted , the appellate body's treatment of paragraph 5.2 of the doha ministerial decision undermines its own finding that paragraph 5.2 was not a legally binding interpretation of "reasonable interval" under article ix:2 of the wto agreement .

"[b]y treating paragraph 5.2 of the doha decision as a 'subsequent agreement' that establishes the meaning of the covered agreements , the appellate body report effectively eliminates the safeguards that members have included in article ix:2 of the wto agreement. .

second , the united states stated , by finding that a prima facie case under article 2.12 of the tbt agreement is establishing that the technical regulation allows less than six months between publication and effective date , the appellate body reversed the burden of proof for article 2.12 claims .

"[a]s members generally recognize , it must be the complaining party's burden to prove all the elements of its legal claim .

this should include that the complaining member's producers could not have adapted to the requirements within the interval actually allotted and that a period of not less than six months would be effective to fulfill the legitimate objective of the challenged measure. .

on may 24 , 2012 , the united states issued the following statement at the meeting of the dsb about how it intends to respond to the conclusions of the appellate body: [t]he united states wishes to state that it intends to implement the recommendations and rulings of the [appellate body] in a manner that protects public health and respects the obligations of the united states under the wto agreement .

•    in this regard , the united states would emphasize the [panel's] finding that the u.s. measure reflects the overwhelming view of the scientific community that banning clove and other flavored cigarettes benefits the public health by reducing the likelihood that youth will enter into a lifetime of cigarette addiction .

•    accordingly , the [panel] found that a ban on clove cigarettes meets the requirements of article 2.2 of the tbt agreement and is thus no more trade restrictive than necessary to fulfill a legitimate public health objective .

the united states will need a reasonable period of time in which to implement in this dispute .

the united states and indonesia agreed that 15 months — until july 24 , 2013 — was a reasonable period of time for the united states to comply with the appellate body decision .

the statement that the united states will act in a manner that protects the public health , coupled with the highlighting of the panel's finding that section 907 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) reflects the overwhelming view of the scientific community that banning clove and other flavored cigarettes benefits the public health , appears to suggest that the united states intends to maintain the ban on clove cigarettes .

the united states also states that it will act in a way that respects its obligations under the wto agreement .

it is unclear from this statement what the united states intends to do .

the appellate body determined that section 907 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the tobacco control act violates article 2.1 of the tbt agreement in that it bans clove cigarettes , which are predominantly imported from indonesia , while allowing menthol cigarettes , which are predominantly produced domestically .

the appellate body concluded that clove cigarettes and menthol cigarettes are like products: with respect to end - uses , they are both capable of satisfying a nicotine addiction and creating a pleasurable smoking experience ; and , with respect to consumer tastes and habits , they compete with each other and are substitutable within the youth segment of the overall market .

the appellate body also determined that section 907 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) treats clove cigarettes less favorably than menthol cigarettes and that this less favorable treatment is not justified by a legitimate regulatory distinction .

the united states had argued that because millions of adult smokers are addicted to menthol cigarettes , banning them would run the risk of menthol smokers overwhelming the health care system as they sought treatment for nicotine withdrawal and turning to a black market to obtain menthol cigarettes .

however , the appellate body noted the addictive ingredient in cigarettes is nicotine and that regular cigarettes , which contain nicotine , would continue to be available .

the appellate body also found that section 901 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) violated article 2.12 of the tbt agreement because it did not provide a "reasonable interval" between its publication and its effective date .

in arriving at this finding , it determined that paragraph 5.2 of the doha ministerial decision is not a legally binding interpretation of "reasonable interval" under article ix:2 of the wto agreement because it did not satisfy the procedural requirements of article ix:2 .

the appellate body determined , however , that paragraph 5.2 of the doha ministerial decision constituted a subsequent agreement on the meaning of "reasonable interval" within article 31 ( 3 ) of the vienna convention .

it also determined that a complaining member establishes a prima facie case by establishing that the technical regulation allows less than six months between publication and effective date .

a responding member rebuts a prima facie case by establishing that the time provided by the technical regulation is reasonable .

the u.s. statement in response to the appellate body's decision seems to suggest that the united states intends to maintain the ban on clove cigarettes , while at the same time respecting its obligations under the wto agreement .

it appears the united states has not yet decided how it intends to accomplish this goal .

the united states and indonesia agreed to a compliance date of july 24 , 2013 .

