on january 2 , 2013 — absent congressional action — largely across - the - board spending cuts will be automatically imposed as stipulated in the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

the term used to describe an automatic cancellation of budgetary resources to achieve the policy goal of deficit reduction is sequestration .

the approaching fiscal cliff has led to forecasts of a possible recession in 2013 , and concern among policymakers about the impact of sequestration on employers and their employees .

several studies have estimated the potential effect on employment of cutting the budgets of different agencies and programs .

this report reviews and summarizes this empirical research , which policymakers may take into consideration when deliberating whether to modify the bca or enact alternative deficit - reducing legislation .

before proceeding to the review , the report briefly describes how the bca will limit future government spending .

congressional concern about growth of the federal deficit and debt resulted in enactment of the bca on august 2 , 2011 .

the act reduces the budget deficit in two ways .

first , it places statutory limits on the amount of most spending through the annual appropriations process from fy2012 to fy2021 , and it enforces the caps through sequestration in any year in which congress appropriates an amount greater than the discretionary spending limit for that year .

second , it creates an automatic process to reduce spending by $1.2 trillion over the fy2013-fy2021 period through a combination of sequestration and lower statutory caps on discretionary spending if the joint select committee on deficit reduction , which was established by the bca , does not develop and submit to congress an alternative proposal that achieves at least equivalent budget savings .

because the committee failed to agree upon a deficit reduction plan , the sequestration process is scheduled to go into effect on january 2 , 2013 .

generally speaking , the bca would evenly split ( in dollar terms ) the $1.2 trillion in automatic reductions over the nine - year period between defense and nondefense spending categories .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) is required to determine the annual amount of spending to be cut from defense and nondefense budgets after 18% attributable to debt service savings ( $216 billion ) is subtracted from the act's $1.2 trillion in deficit savings ( $984 billion ) , or almost $54.7 billion from the defense and $54.7 billion from the nondefense budget functions per fiscal year from 2013 through 2021 ( $984 billion divided by nine years ) .

within the defense and nondefense functions , the annual amount of spending reductions must then be divided proportionally between their respective discretionary and mandatory programs .

many programs are exempt from sequestration ( eg , social security and medicaid ) however .

the bca also limits cuts in medicare payments to 2% .

to offset this limit , the bca requires the omb to increase and reallocate the sequester proportionally across non - exempt non - medicare mandatory spending and nondefense discretionary programs .

in addition , the bca allows the administration to exempt any military personnel account if congress is so notified by august 10 .

because the omb exempted all military accounts in letters to the senate president and to the house speaker dated july 31 , 2012 , the sequester of other defense programs must be increased uniformly to offset the exemption .

the end result , as delineated in the bca , will be spending cuts in four categories: defense discretionary appropriations , defense mandatory ( direct ) spending , nondefense discretionary appropriations , and nondefense direct spending .

on august 1 , 2012 , jeff zients of the omb testified that "it is impossible at this time to determine the exact amount of the reductions that will be required in any given account or program" because appropriations for fy2013 have not been enacted .

members of congress expressed their dissatisfaction with the lack of information from the administration on implementation of the bca by passing the sequestration transparency act .

president obama signed the bill into law on august 7 , 2012 ( p.l .

112-155 ) .

it required the administration to provide a detailed report to congress on the budget accounts that will be subject to sequestration and on the percentages by which the accounts will be reduced to achieve the savings required by the bca .

the omb report , released in mid - september 2012 , provided the following preliminary estimates of percentage reductions in fy2013: 9.4% for non - exempt defense discretionary appropriations and 10% for non - exempt defense direct spending ; 8.2% for non - exempt nondefense discretionary appropriations and 7.6% for non - exempt direct spending ; and 2% for medicare .

the studies examined below use reductions for 2013 that differ somewhat from those of the omb because they were prepared before the administration issued its report .

spending by the federal government supports ( creates or maintains ) jobs in three ways .

it does so directly by paying the salaries of federal employees and by contracting with firms in various industries ( eg , shipbuilding ) to produce final products ( eg , an aircraft carrier ) .

jobs supported in this way are referred to as direct jobs .

federal government spending also supports jobs indirectly when contractors use a portion of their federal awards to buy outputs from businesses in other industries ( eg , navigational instruments manufacturing ) that are incorporated in the finished products of prime contractors .

the jobs supported by ( dependent on ) the purchases of prime contractors are referred to as indirect jobs .

lastly , when workers in direct jobs ( eg , federal employees and employees of shipbuilders ) and indirect jobs ( eg , employees of navigational equipment manufacturers ) spend their paychecks ( eg , at grocery stores and doctors' offices ) , additional jobs are supported by federal spending .

these are referred to as induced jobs .

an input - output model is commonly used to provide a snapshot of these transactions ( sales ) between industries and ultimately , of the jobs dependent on these transactions .

in this case , the model is used to trace the output by industry that results from the government ( eg , the department of defense , dod ) and consumers ( eg , employees of suppliers to shipbuilders and of the dod ) purchasing final products ( eg , aircraft carriers and groceries ) .

the model expresses these transactions as the value of output supported by one dollar of spending ( demand ) in a given industry .

productivity factors ( the ratio of employment to output ) are then applied to each industry to translate the output supported by one dollar of demand to the employment supported by one dollar of demand .

in effect , most of the studies reviewed below applied these employment multipliers to their estimates of reduced agency spending under the bca to calculate the approximate number of jobs by industry and state that would no longer be supported by federal purchases ( i.e. , projected job losses ) .

any projections involve considerable uncertainty and thus margins for error .

in this case , the specifics of how the administration would implement sequestration were not known at the time the studies were conducted .

in addition , the state - by - state job impacts of the analyses — which appeared to garner the most attention — were based on the perhaps unlikely assumption that the distribution of program spending by industry in the past would continue in the forecast period .

for example , dod might not uniformly reduce procurement across industries .

instead , it might disproportionately cut purchases of ships compared with past budgets .

if so , major shipbuilding centers ( eg , virginia and maine ) would likely be subject to larger adverse employment shocks than projected .

cutting federal spending will result in some employers losing business and some workers losing jobs .

because sequestration is scheduled to occur while the economy is slowly recovering from the 2007-2009 recession , those firms that sell their products to the government ( either directly or indirectly ) might have difficulty finding other buyers in the near term and the laid - off employees of these firms might have difficulty quickly finding new jobs .

achieving deficit reduction by some means other than the bca's about equal split of automatic budget reductions between non - exempt defense and nondefense programs might alter the composition of employers and employees who bear the burden of the cuts , but the impact on total u.s. employment may be similar .

