prior to the september 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states , insurers generally did not exclude or separately charge for coverage of terrorism risks .

the events of september 11 , 2001 , changed this as insurers realized the extent of possible terrorism losses .

estimates of insured losses from the 9 / 11 attacks are over $40 billion in current dollars , the largest insured losses from a non - natural disaster on record .

these losses were concentrated in business interruption insurance ( 34% of the losses ) , property insurance ( 30% ) , and liability insurance ( 23% ) .

although primary insurance companies , those who actually sell and service the insurance policies bought by consumers , suffered losses from the terrorist attacks , the heaviest insured losses were absorbed by foreign and domestic reinsurers — the insurers of insurance companies .

because of the lack of public data on , or modeling of , the scope and nature of the terrorism risk , reinsurers felt unable to accurately price for such risks and largely withdrew from the market for terrorism risk insurance in the months following september 11 , 2001 .

once reinsurers stopped offering coverage for terrorism risk , primary insurers , suffering equally from a lack of public data and models , also withdrew , or tried to withdraw , from the market .

in most states , state regulators must approve policy form changes .

most state regulators agreed to insurer requests to exclude terrorism risks from commercial policies , just as these policies had long excluded war risks .

terrorism risk insurance was soon unavailable or extremely expensive , and many businesses were no longer able to purchase insurance that would protect them in future terrorist attacks .

although the evidence is largely anecdotal , some were concerned that the lack of coverage posed a threat of serious harm to the real estate , transportation , construction , energy , and utility sectors , in turn threatening the broader economy .

in november 2002 , congress responded to the fears of economic damage due to the absence of commercially available coverage for terrorism with passage of the terrorism risk insurance act ( tria ) .

tria created a three - year terrorism risk insurance program to provide a government reinsurance backstop in the case of terrorist attack .

the tria program was amended and extended in 2005 and 2007 .

following the 2007 amendments , the tria program is set to expire at the end of 2014 .

 ( a side - by - side of the original law and the two reauthorization acts is in table 1 . ) .

the executive branch has been skeptical about the tria program in the past .

bills to expand tria were resisted by then - president george w. bush's administration , and previous presidential budgets under president obama called for changes in the program that would have had the effect of scaling back the tria coverage .

congress declined to act on these budgetary proposals at the time and no such legislative proposals were contained in the president's fy2013 or fy2014 budget proposal .

the fy2015 budget "proposes to extend the terrorism risk insurance program and to implement programmatic reforms to limit taxpayer exposure and achieve cost neutrality" but does not detail what these reforms might be .

the insurance industry largely continues to support tria , as do commercial insurance consumers in the real estate and other industries that have formed a "coalition to insure against terrorism" ( ciat ) .

not all insurance consumers support renewal of tria , however , with the consumer federation of america questioning the need for the program .

although the april 2013 bombing in boston was termed an "act of terror," by the president , whether the bombing is considered as such under tria depends on a certification by the secretary of the treasury in conjunction with the attorney general and the secretary of state .

such certification has not been issued .

the massachusetts department of insurance has collected information on insured losses from the boston bombing and the losses from tria covered lines of insurance appear to be under the $5 million threshold established in the act .

 ( see precise criteria under the tria program on page 6 . ) .

the original tria legislation's stated goals were to ( 1 ) create a temporary federal program of shared public and private compensation for insured terrorism losses to allow the private market to stabilize ; ( 2 ) protect consumers by ensuring the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risks ; and ( 3 ) preserve state regulation of insurance .

although congress has amended specific aspects of the original act , the general operation of the program largely follows the original statute .

the changes to the program have largely reduced the government coverage for terrorism losses , except that the 2007 amendments expanded coverage to losses due to domestic terrorism , rather than limiting the program to foreign terrorism .

a terrorist attack with some form of ncbr weapon would often be considered the most likely type of attack causing large scale losses .

the current tria statute does not specifically include or exclude ncbr events ; thus , the tria program in general would cover insured losses from terrorist actions due to ncbr as it would for an attack by conventional means .

the term insured losses , however , is a meaningful distinction .

except for workers compensation insurance , most insurance policies that would fall under the tria umbrella include exclusions that would likely limit insurer coverage of an ncbr event , whether it was due to terrorism or to some sort of accident , although these exclusions have never been legally tested in the united states after a terrorist event .

if these exclusions are invoked and do indeed limit the insurer losses due to ncbr terrorism , they would also limit the tria coverage of such losses .

language that would have specifically extended tria coverage to ncbr events was offered in the past , but was not included in legislation as enacted .

in 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) was directed to study the issue and a gao report was issued in 2008 .

h.r .

4871 provides for higher federal cost sharing and a lower program trigger in the event of an ncbr attack , but does not specifically address ncbr exclusions .

other tria extension bills in the 113 th congress have not specifically addressed ncbr events .

 table 1 presents a side - by - side comparison of the original tria law , along with the reauthorizing laws of 2005 and 2007 .

 table a - 1 contains illustrative examples of how the recoupment for the government portion of terrorism losses under tria might be calculated in the aggregate for various sizes of losses .

the amount of the deductible in the chart is simply assumed to be 30% of the insured losses for illustrative purposes .

without knowing the actual distribution of losses due to a terrorist attack , it is impossible to know what the actual deductible will be .

the conclusions of the chart with regard to recoupment , however , hold across different actual deductible amounts .

the specific provisions of the law define the "insurance marketplace aggregate retention amount" ( column f ) as the lesser of $27.5 billion or the total amount of insured losses ( column a ) .

the "mandatory recoupment amount" ( column g ) is defined as the difference between $27.5 billion and the aggregate insurer losses that were not compensated for by the program ( i.e. , the total of the insurers' deductible ( column b ) and their 15% loss share ( column c ) ) .

if the aggregate insured loss is less than $27.5 billion , the law requires recoupment of 133% of the government outlays ( column h ) .

for insured losses over $27.5 billion , the mandatory recoupment amount decreases , thus the secretary would be required to recoup less than 133% of the outlays .

depending on the precise deductible amounts , the uncompensated industry losses ( column d ) may eventually rise to be greater than $27.5 billion , which would then mean that the mandatory recoupment provisions would not apply .

the secretary would still retain discretionary authority to apply recoupment surcharges no matter what level uncompensated losses reached .

