the conservation reserve program ( crp ) is the largest federal , private - land retirement program in the united states .

the program provides financial compensation for landowners to voluntarily remove land from agricultural production for an extended period ( typically 10 to 15 years ) for the benefit of soil and water quality improvement and wildlife habitat .

the program was first authorized in the food security act of 1985 ( 1985 farm bill , p.l .

99-198 ) , initially as both a supply management tool for removing land from agricultural production , thus lowering commodity supply and potentially raising prices , and for providing environmental benefits .

currently , close to 25.6 million acres are enrolled in the program with total funding of approximately $2 billion annually .

acres enrolled in crp have shown a number of positive environmental benefits including reduced soil erosion ; water quality improvements through vegetative cover , buffer strips , and reduced fertilizer application ; and wildlife population improvement from increased habitat .

while a number of natural resource improvements are attributed to the program , the program contains a number of controversial elements as well , including the economic and environmental effect of permitted activities , such as haying and grazing on crp acres and the reduction of enrolled acres due to high crop prices and farm bill reauthorization .

program and funding authority for crp was reauthorized and extended through fy2018 by the agricultural act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 ) .

the program is administered by the farm service agency ( fsa ) at the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , with technical support from the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) and other usda agencies .

the 113 th congress reauthorized crp as part of the farm bill , but reduced the acreage cap to achieve a cost savings .

other pressures from high crop prices , increased demand for land , and the potentially low rental rates could also impact the program's ability to enroll the most desirable acres in the future .

despite these challenges , supporters encourage maintaining crp enrollment because of the numerous environmental gains achieved by the program , including improved water quality , soil health , and wildlife species habitat .

balancing the cost of maintaining such benefits with the cost of the program could continue to be a challenge for congress .

appendix a .

continuous sign - up initiatives continuous sign - up is designed to enroll the most environmentally sensitive land into crp through specific conservation practices or resource needs .

continuous sign - up includes a number of initiatives that target acres with specific resource concerns or support additional conservation practices .

these are described below .

conservation reserve enhancement program ( crep ) initially implemented in 1997 , crep is a joint federal - state continuous sign - up program under crp .

crep targets geographic regions with agricultural - related environmental concerns , such as maryland's chesapeake bay and florida's everglades .

some states ( eg , new york and ohio ) have multiple crep projects , each targeting a different area of the state .

projects are designed to address specific environmental objectives through targeted crp enrollments .

sign - ups are continuous , non - competitive , and typically provide additional financial incentives beyond annual rental payments and cost - share assistance .

there are currently 45 crep agreements in 33 states .

farmable wetland program ( fwp ) the farmable wetland program ( fwp ) enrolls farmable or prior converted wetlands into crp .

in exchange for additional financial incentives , landowners agree to restore the hydrology of the wetland , establish vegetative cover , and prohibit development .

for land to be considered eligible it must meet one of the following criteria: a wetland or converted wetland cropped at least 3 of the immediately preceding 10 crop years ; a constructed wetland that receives flow ( surface and subsurface ) from a row crop agriculture drainage system and is designed to provide nitrogen removal in addition to other wetland functions ; land in a commercial pond - raised aquaculture in any year between 2002 through 2007 ; or cropland that was cropped at least 3 of 10 crop years between 1990 and 2002 , and is subject to the natural overflow of a prairie wetland .

the enrollment of buffer acreage is also permitted to enhance wildlife benefits .

no more than 100,000 acres may be enrolled in fwp in any state and no more than 750,000 acres nationally .

the enrollment of wetlands ( described under the first and second bullets above ) is limited to 40 contiguous acres .

"flooded farmland," or that defined in the fourth bullet above , is limited to 20 contiguous acres , and has a 20-acre limit .

transition incentive program ( tip ) the 2014 farm bill reauthorized the transition incentive program ( tip ) option for expiring crp contracts .

under tip land from expiring crp contracts may be transitioned back into sustainable grazing or crop production by a beginning , veteran , or socially disadvantaged farmer or rancher .

the land must be from a retired or retiring owner or operator ( not a family member ) in exchange for up to two additional years of annual crp rental payments following the expiration of the crp contract .

the program was authorized to spend up to $33 million between fy2014 and fy2018 .

this is an increase over the previously authorized $25 million in the 2008 farm bill .

other initiatives several other initiatives under crp have been developed over time , mostly in response to administration priorities .

table a - 1 includes a list of recent initiatives and their enrollment size .

appendix b. crp provisions in the 2014 farm bill table b - 1 compares crp provisions in the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) and prior law .

u.s. code citations are included in brackets in the 'prior law' column .

corresponding section numbers in p.l .

113-79 are included in brackets in the 'enacted 2014 farm bill' column .

