one of the central features of the 1996 welfare reform law ( personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , prwora , p.l .

104-193 ) was its focus on requiring and promoting work and job preparation for parents ( mostly single mothers ) in needy families with children .

that law created the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , and completed a decades - long evolution in policy , from one where cash assistance was provided to families headed by single mothers to permit them to stay at home and care for their children to one of encouraging and ultimately requiring work .

it is sometimes said that tanf requires adult recipients to work in exchange for their family's cash assistance .

however , this is not what federal law says .

in any given month , many recipients work or are engaged in work - related activities ; however , many are not so engaged .

tanf establishes numerical work participation performance standards that apply to a state's total caseload , not individual recipients , and leaves to states the decision about how to meet those standards .

it is the states that determine who is required to work or participate in activities .

it is also the states that determine the activities that meet an individual recipient's work requirements .

tanf's work rules generally date back to the 1996 welfare reform law , which was enacted following a period of growth in the welfare rolls .

cash assistance caseloads increased greatly from 1960 through the mid - 1970s , ushering in a period of debate about "welfare reform. .

the caseloads again began to increase in the very late 1980s , reaching a peak of 5.1 million families on the rolls in march 1994 .

discussion of tanf work rules today is in a different context than occurred in the late 1980s or early 1990s .

the cash assistance rolls diminished greatly , and stood at 1.9 million families in fy2011 .

in any given month in fy2011 , state tanf welfare - to - work efforts could touch a population of about 1.3 million adults .

this report examines the work participation standards and requirements for cash assistance recipients of the tanf block grant , which was created in the 1996 welfare reform law .

this report provides a short history of work requirements in programs that provide cash assistance to needy families with children ; reviews the major studies that contribute to the knowledge of what types of welfare - to - work programs are effective ; discusses the tanf work provisions that apply directly to individuals and analyzes fy2011 data on engagement in work and work - related activities of adults in tanf households ; discusses the tanf work participation standards that apply to states and analyzes fy2011 data on participation as they relate to those standards ; and discusses some issues that congress might consider in the future , such as how the work standards can address changing circumstances and the difficulties of measuring the performance of states in the context of a block grant .

in the early 20 th century , prior to the enactment of a federal cash - in - aid program for families caring for dependent children in their own homes , many states had laws providing aid to mothers with dependent children , often called "mothers' pensions. .

the general purpose of these pensions was summarized by a 1914 report published by the then - newly created children's bureau ( then operating under the u.s. department of labor ) , which described the basic function of the various state pension laws as "preventing the breaking up of the home when on account of death or disability the support of the natural breadwinner of the family is removed. .

by 1921 , 40 states and the then - territories of alaska and hawaii had laws providing support for children in their own homes .

the intended recipients were , for the most part , widows and women whose husbands were disabled , were imprisoned , or had deserted the family .

however , restrictions on eligibility varied by state and in some cases only widows were eligible .

limited state budgets meant that in many cases these early programs operated only partially or not at all .

a missouri law of 1911 applied only to kansas city and limited expenditures for all pensions to $12,000 annually .

in cases where funds were insufficient , a juvenile court would select "the most urgent cases" to receive pensions .

the great depression exacerbated the degree to which counties dropped or downsized their programs , and by 1935 the number of families eligible for such aid under state laws was three times greater than the number of families actually receiving it .

 , concern over the lack of sufficient support under state programs , as well as an increase in demand for financial help as a result of the great depression , prompted president franklin d. roosevelt to establish by executive order the committee on economic security ( ces ) in 1934 to serve the broader purpose of "[providing] at once security against several of the great disturbing factors in life. .

within six months , the ces had designed a proposal for the nation's first comprehensive federal social insurance program , which included aid to "children deprived of a father's support. .

in their report to the president in january 1935 , the ces urged the creation of federal grants - in - aid to release from the wage - earning role the person whose natural function is to give her children the physical and affectionate guardianship necessary not alone to keep them from falling into social misfortune , but more affirmatively to rear them into citizens capable of contributing to society .

in essence , the committee was proposing a program to provide mothers with the financial assistance necessary to remain at home with their children .

later that year , following the recommendations of the ces , the aid to dependent children program ( adc ) was established as a federal grant - in - aid program to states to help them fund cash assistance to needy families with children .

authorized under the social security act of 1935 ( p.l .

74-271 ; h.r .

7260 ) , adc grants provided assistance to children under the age of 16 who had "been deprived of parental support or care by reason of death , continued absence from the home , or physical or mental incapacity of a parent. .

cash benefits provided under adc were primarily intended to enable mothers ( typically widows ) to stay at home and rear children .

echoing the sentiment voiced in the ces report to the president , the house report accompanying h.r .

7260 stated that these benefits were to assist in aiding the families on relief who were "without a potential breadwinner other than a mother whose time might best be devoted to the care of her young children. .

over the coming decades , the demography of adc recipients began to change .

some of this change reflects changing demographics in the general population , such as the increase in female - headed families headed by divorced , separated , or never - married mothers as opposed to widows .

also affecting the demography of the adc caseload was social security policy changes .

at the program's onset , the most common adc family was headed by a widow .

social security benefits to widows , widowers , and child survivors were created in the social security amendments of 1939 , and those receiving adc increasingly were families where the father was alive but absent .

by 1942 , the proportion of adc families with women who were divorced , separated , or unmarried was about equal to the proportion of women who were widows .

the caseload also became increasingly nonwhite .

though federal policy documents connected with the establishment of adc stressed child - rearing as the policy rationale for providing aid , the expectations for work among low - income women may have differed at the state level .

some states adopted rules barring "employable" mothers from aid .

additionally , in the last half of the 20 th century , female participation in the workforce was on the rise , as norms for middle - class mothers changed with respect to child - rearing and work .

the assumption that women should remain in the home with their children began to diminish .

the 1950s ushered in an increased focus on the self - sufficiency and rehabilitation of public aid recipients , and amendments to the adc law began to reflect this reorientation .

in 1956 , the law ( p.l .

84-880 ; h.r .

7225 ) was amended to include the provision that its purpose was to not only provide financial assistance to needy families with children , but also "to help such parents or relatives to attain the maximum self - support and personal independence consistent with the maintenance of continuing parental care and protection. .

the senate finance committee report accompanying h.r .

7225 further explained that "[s]ervices that assist families and individuals to attain the maximum economic and personal independence of which they are capable provide a more satisfactory way of living for the recipients affected. .

the 1956 amendments also added disability insurance to the social security program , again potentially aiding some families that might otherwise rely on adc for benefits .

with the advent of the 1960s , the focus on self - sufficiency progressed from symbolic statements and funding for services to actual federal program requirements .

at first , however , these requirements focused on men when cash assistance was extended to families with two able - bodied parents with one unemployed .

in 1961 , in the midst of a recession and high unemployment , president kennedy called on congress to amend the adc program to include the children of the unemployed .

that year , the law was changed to temporarily extend eligibility for adc to dependent children of unemployed parents .

for a state to provide assistance to families on the basis of unemployment , they were required to include in their state plan provisions for ensuring that the unemployed parent was registered for job placement services .

if the parent refused to accept employment without "good cause" ( as determined by the state ) , the state was required to halt assistance to the family .

for the first time since the program's inception , adc now had the beginnings of federally mandated work requirements for families receiving assistance .

continuing in this vein of promoting self - sufficiency , president kennedy's speech to congress the next year emphasized a shift toward favoring services over cash assistance .

public welfare , he stated , "must be directed increasingly toward prevention and rehabilitation ... we must place more stress on services instead of relief. .

also in 1962 , the name of the program was changed to aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) to reflect the enlarged focus of the program and to emphasize the maintenance of two - parent families .

the social security amendments of 1967 ( p.l .

90-248 ) enacted both financial incentives for adult recipients to work and , for the first time , requirements for afdc mothers to work .

these amendments required states to disregard from a family's countable income some earnings when determining its "need" and benefits .

they also created the first work program under afdc — the work incentive program ( win ) .

win was compulsory for fathers , and states could determine whether it would be compulsory or voluntary for mothers .

in practice , two - thirds of participants in the win program between 1968 and 1971 were mothers .

in 1971 , the federal rules changed to require all parents to enroll in win , with the exception of mothers with children under the age of six .

afdc work requirements continued to evolve in the 1980s .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-35 ) gave states the option to require "workfare" ( unpaid work in exchange for cash assistance ) through community work experience programs ( cwep ) .

the family support act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-485 ) ended win , replacing it with the job opportunity and basic skills ( jobs ) training program .

it was designed to provide afdc recipients either job training and education or the quick acquisition of a job .

it also removed the participation exemption for many single parents by lowering the age - of - youngest - child exemption from six to three years ( at state option , this could be lowered further to one year ) , while also increasing funding for child care .

significantly , jobs legislated minimum participation rates for states in order to be eligible for their full federal fund allotment .

the program also placed an increased focus on education , as evidenced by the requirement that states offer education to any adult lacking a high school diploma and the provision of federal funding for such activities .

the progression of welfare from a cash assistance - based program to one of work incentives , requirements , and supports culminated in the mid - 1990s with welfare reform .

with the signing of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) , afdc was replaced by the temporary assistance for needy families program .

tanf instituted a range of work - related requirements that apply to both states and recipients .

these requirements , and the extent to which they are being met , will be discussed below .

welfare was the subject of a great deal of research from the 1960s through the 1990s .

economic theory suggested that providing assistance without work reduces work effort , and a fairly large number of empirical studies supported that contention .

additionally , proposals to replace the existing welfare system with a negative income tax ( with a minimum guaranteed income ) was the subject of some of the first large - scale social experiments beginning in the 1960s and continuing into the 1980s .

these experiments found that such policies reduced work effort and potentially even led to an increase in marital dissolutions .

the negative income tax with an income guarantee was offered as welfare reform during the nixon and carter administrations , but not thereafter .

tanf was influenced by two major types of research published in the 1980s and early 1990s .

the first was analyses of how long families remained on welfare .

the second was a series of experimental evaluations of welfare - to - work initiatives: programs that offered employment services and education or training that encouraged participation , required participation , or did a combination of both .

tanf was created by the 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , p.l .

104-193 ) .

on the eve of that law's enactment , federal law already had in place rules requiring mandatory participation in welfare - to - work activities for some recipients .

aid to families with dependent children required certain recipients to participate in activities , and it had a sanction for those who failed to participate .

states were also subject to participation standards .

many states had already gone further than federal law in requiring work of more recipients , increasing sanctions for noncompliance , and fashioning their own welfare - to - work approaches under "waivers" of afdc federal rules .

the clinton administration granted welfare waivers to 43 states .

thus , though ending afdc and creating tanf was a major change in social policy , the welfare - to - work aspects of tanf represent a step in the evolution of welfare - to - work policies .

tanf is a broad - based block grant that provides funds to states , the territories , and indian tribes to help them finance cash welfare programs for needy families with children as well as provide a wide range of other benefits and services to either ameliorate the effects or address the root causes of child poverty .

the basic federal block grant for the 50 states and district of columbia is funded at a total of $16.5 billion per year .

states are required , under a provision known as the maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement , to expend from their own funds a minimum total of $10.4 billion per year in addition to federal funds on tanf or tanf - related programs .

the statutory purpose of tanf is to increase state flexibility to achieve the following goals: 1. provide assistance to needy families so that children may be cared for in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; 2. end the dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting job preparation , work , and marriage ; 3. prevent and reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies and establish annual numerical goals for preventing and reducing the incidence of these pregnancies ; and 4. encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

though the block grant is a set amount , states may use tanf funds to finance any activity "reasonably calculated" to achieve any of these four tanf goals .

this gives states broad leeway in spending tanf funds .

in general , state moe funds can be used for these same activities ( there are some technical differences in the use of federal and state funds ) .

states determine the size of tanf benefits , and there is a wide range of benefit amounts among the states .

in july 2011 , the maximum monthly benefit for a family of three varied from $923 per month in alaska and $788 per month in new york city to $170 in mississippi .

tanf has a five - year time limit on receipt of cash assistance financed by federal funds .

recipients of cash assistance also must cooperate in having their children's paternity established and other requirements relating to enforcement of child support orders .

tanf funds may be used to support work in various ways , including through helping states finance tax credits for low - income working families , providing assistance with transportation , and funding child care .

tanf funds may supplement those from a separate child care block grant as tanf funds may be transferred to the child care block grant or spent within tanf itself on child care .

cash welfare itself accounted for less than 30% of all tanf and moe funds in fy2011 .

the cash welfare rolls and the amount of funds spent on cash assistance have declined substantially since the creation of tanf .

in 1994 , the combined federal and state expenditures on afdc cash assistance were $22.7 billion .

by fy2011 , this had declined to $9.6 billion .

the decline would be even steeper in inflation - adjusted dollars .

in fy2011 , tanf cash assistance was received by 1.9 million families per month .

within these families , there were 1.3 million work - eligible adults .

the next several sections of this report provide a description of tanf work - eligible adults ; briefly discuss tanf's work requirements as they apply directly to work - eligible individuals ; and discuss the tanf work participation standards — the main performance measure for tanf that assesses state welfare - to - work efforts .

all tanf's work requirements are actually requirements on states as conditions of receiving federal block grant funds .

there are essentially two sets of work requirements: ( 1 ) those that require states to have certain program rules that apply directly to recipients , which are described in the following sections ; and ( 2 ) numerical performance standards computed in the aggregate for each state .

this second set of work requirements is discussed later in the report .

the previous section of this report describes how states have engaged work - eligible individuals in work or related activities .

however , that is not how state welfare - to - work programs are formally assessed .

this assessment is done through the tanf work participation standards , which is the focus of much of the attention on tanf's work provisions .

these standards are set in federal law , and include target participation rates , rules for disregarding certain families from the participation rate , and rules for determining whether the state gets credit for participation in terms of countable activities and minimum hours requirements .

states that fail to meet their target participation rates are at risk of being penalized through a reduction in their block grant .

the participation standard serves two purposes .

first , it is a measure of how the state is performing in engaging recipients in work or work activities .

secondly , it reinforces the notion that participation in work or work activities in return for receiving welfare assistance is a policy goal of tanf .

the purpose of this section is twofold: 1. it describes the detailed rules of the tanf work participation standard ; and 2. it provides data ( for fy2011 ) on the number of families included in the participation rate calculation , their engagement in countable work activities , and their hours of engagement .

congress last debated tanf reauthorization proposals during the 2002 through 2005 period .

president george w. bush's tanf reauthorization proposal would have raised the participation standard percentage from 50% to 70% , ended the caseload reduction credit and replaced it with a credit for employed persons who leave the rolls , further limited counting pre - employment activities as a recipient's sole or primary activity , and raised the full hours standard to 40 hours per week but provided partial credit for fewer hours per week .

the house passed bills incorporating most of the bush administration's proposals three times during the 2002-2005 periods .

 ( the major change not accepted by the house was ending the caseload reduction credit. ) .

the senate finance committee also reported three bills that raised the percentage standard , but they differed in terms of the form of the employment credit and would have expanded the ability of states to count pre - employment activities toward the work standard .

neither the house - passed nor the senate finance committee approaches were adopted .

instead , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) made its changes to revise the caseload reduction credit , require hhs to issue regulations standardizing the definition of work activities , and require states to verify work participation .

if congress would again consider raising participation standards , it would beg the question of why state participation rates have been fairly steady at 30% , with overall engagement basically steady at a little less than half of all work - eligible individuals .

in 1995 , as welfare reform was being considered , mdrc ( the organization that evaluated many welfare - to - work programs ) noted that the participation standard being contemplated at the time was much higher than those achieved in any program — including the most effective programs — that were tested up to that date .

as noted a number of times in this report , states have faced much - reduced standards because of credits .

however , without additional research , and potentially experience , it is not known what higher participation standard is achievable for states and the consequences for state programs in achieving such a higher standard .

the 2002-2005 debate did not result in a full - blown reauthorization of tanf .

president obama's administration has not proposed a comprehensive reauthorization of tanf either , but instead provided some general principles to guide congress's discussion: when congress takes up reauthorization , the administration will be prepared to work with lawmakers to strengthen the program's effectiveness in accomplishing its goals .

this effort should include using performance indicators to drive program improvement and ensuring that states have the flexibility to engage recipients in the most effective activities to promote success in the workforce , including families with serious barriers to employment .

this section will examine a number of issues that congress might address in reassessing tanf and welfare - to - work issues .

it discusses some changes in the economic and policy environments external to tanf that could affect future discussions ; discusses the ( brief ) experience of subsidized employment programs funded through tanf in 2009 and 2010 ; examines some innovations in education and workforce programs that have yet to be tested in the context of welfare - to - work programs ; and discusses the issues regarding the way tanf welfare - to - work programs are monitored and assessed .

tanf was the culmination of a decades - long evolution of assistance programs for disadvantaged children , most of whom lived with single mothers .

it was created in 1996 , and it reflected the policy concerns of the 1980s and 1990s in terms of welfare receipt and dependency .

the tanf work participation rules and policy goals reflect that time .

they emphasized and set as policy goals work and job preparation aimed to move families as quickly as possible from welfare to work .

it allowed only time - limited job search ( maximum 12 weeks in a fiscal year ) , and de - emphasized longer - term education and training .

though tanf emphasizes work , it does not require all families to have a working member or one who is participating in activities .

the children in disadvantaged families — the families served by tanf assistance — live in varied settings , with many families in circumstances that do not lend themselves to participation in welfare - to - work programs .

in fy2011 , out of 1.9 million families on the rolls in a typical month , about 306,500 were counted as "participating" by the official tanf work participation rate measure .

many families do not have a work - eligible member , as the parents are disabled and receiving ssi , the children are being cared for by non - parent relatives ( eg , grandparents ) , or the parents are ineligible immigrants .

the work participation standards have generally required that states engage less than 50% of all families with a work - eligible individual in countable activities .

in examining the economic trends among single parent families with children since 1996 , a congressional research service analysis concluded: in the years immediately preceding 1996 welfare reform , and in the years since , the nation's income safety net has been transformed into one supporting work .

cash - welfare work requirements , the end of cash welfare as an open - ended entitlement by limiting the duration that individuals may receive federally funded benefits , and expanded earnings and family income supplements administered through the federal income tax system have helped to change the dynamics between work and welfare .

the transformed system has helped to both reduce single mothers' reliance on traditional cash welfare and reduce poverty among their children .

however , in the 2000s , even before the onset of the 2007-2009 recession , the decline in the cash assistance rolls slowed , and child poverty began to increase .

most measures of welfare - to - work activity discussed in this report — the official participation rate and a broader measure of the percentage of work - eligible individuals in activities — were all fairly stagnant over the fy2002-fy2011 period .

additionally , the base of knowledge about what type of welfare - to - work program is effective for whom is little changed from the time welfare reform was enacted .

the period of innovation and experimentation that preceded welfare reform produced evidence that helped shape tanf: experiments showed mandatory work requirements can increase employment and reduce welfare receipt , and earnings supplements can also serve as incentives to work in addition to raising incomes and even improving the development trajectory of children in participating families .

post - welfare reform research has generated no similar breakthroughs as yet .

a question facing policy makers is whether the status quo regarding tanf welfare - to - work efforts is satisfactory , or whether ( and how ) policy makers may want to improve program performance or address changing needs or opportunities .

another question facing policy makers is whether the current structure of assessing welfare - to - work programs propels or impedes program innovations that can address changing circumstances among the disadvantaged .

tanf evolved from a program focused on cash welfare to a broad - based block grant that can fund a wide range of benefits and services related to either ameliorating or addressing the causes of child poverty .

yet tanf's work participation rate remains the major official assessment of how well the program is doing .

policy makers also face questions about whether the sole focus of assessing tanf ought to be its welfare - to - work performance , or whether attention should also be paid to how well tanf does in terms of meeting other goals related to improving the circumstances of families with children .

appendix a .

additional tables appendix b. methodological notes tanf national data files this report includes an analysis of work participation from the tanf national data files for fy2011 .

the national data files are based on data states are required to collect monthly and report to hhs on a quarterly basis based on section 411 of the social security act .

these data provide information at the family and individual recipient levels , and include various demographic and economic data .

section 411 also requires that states report information required to compute tanf work participation rates , and hhs has specified that states report information on the average weekly hours of engagement in each of the 12 countable tanf work activities ( see table 6 ) .

states may report engagement in other activities not countable toward the official tanf work participation standards , but they are not required to do so .

the tanf national data files represent a sample of all tanf families and recipients receiving assistance .

thus , the estimates here are subject to sampling error .

additionally , there also may be nonsampling error associated with files if states miscoded some characteristics .

there might also be some state - to - state variation in reporting practices that could affect data quality and the comparison of information from the files across states .

the tanf national data files differ slightly from the data used by hhs to compute the official tanf work participation rates .

states may revise their data reports after submission to hhs .

the publically available tanf national data files and the data used to compute official participation rates may reflect differing revised versions of the data .

data analysis in conducting the data analysis for this report , certain decisions were made to try to reduce the possibility of including erroneously reported data .

for example , the analysis excluded participation in an activity when 90 hours or more of participation per week were reported .

additionally , some recipients had implausible birth dates reported for them .

no age was computed for these persons .

