a long - standing challenge for aviation security is the need to reliably detect explosives and bomb - making components concealed under clothing .

the aviation and transportation security act of 2001 ( atsa ; p.l .

107-71 ) mandated 100% explosives detection screening of checked baggage .

however , atsa did not specifically address the threat posed by bombs carried in the aircraft cabin .

terrorist plots , including a december 2001 attempted shoe - bombing incident , the august 2004 downing of two russian airliners , the august 2006 liquid explosives plot in the united kingdom , the december 2009 attempted bombing of a delta - northwest flight from amsterdam on approach to detroit , and the may 2012 discovery of a similar plot orchestrated by terrorist operatives in yemen , have served to focus policy attention on the threat to civil aviation posed by concealed improvised explosive devices .

in 2004 , the 9 / 11 commission recommended that the transportation security administration ( tsa ) and congress give priority to improving the detection of explosives on passengers .

the commission further recommended that , as a start , all individuals selected for secondary screening at airport checkpoints undergo explosives screening .

mirroring the 9 / 11 commission recommendation , the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ; p.l .

108-458 ) directed tsa to give high priority to developing , testing , improving , and deploying airport checkpoint screening technologies to detect nonmetallic , chemical , biological , and radiological weapons , as well as explosives on passengers and in carry - on items .

in 2004 , initial field trials of walk - through explosives trace detection portals , or "puffer" machines , revealed reliability problems , leading tsa to suspend further deployment of and investment in these systems .

tsa instead moved forward with the evaluation and eventual system - wide deployment of whole body imaging ( wbi ) technologies , which tsa also refers to as advanced imaging technology ( ait ) systems .

in contrast to the "puffer" machines , ait systems do not search for traces of explosive materials .

instead , they generate images that can reveal anomalies underneath passenger clothing , allowing detection of concealed items , such as explosives , detonators , and both metallic and nonmetallic weapons .

in response to the failed december 25 , 2009 , attempted bombing of a detroit - bound international flight using an improvised explosive device , tsa accelerated its investment in ait .

currently , tsa uses ait systems for primary screening of both randomly selected and targeted passengers in conjunction with walk - through metal detector screening .

passengers selected for ait screening may elect to either submit to the ait scan or alternatively undergo a pat - down by a trained same - sex tsa screener .

since 2007 , tsa has been procuring and deploying two competing ait technologies for screening airline passengers: x - ray backscatter and millimeter wave imaging systems .

x - ray backscatter systems use a low - intensity x - ray beam that moves at high speed to scan the entire surface of the body .

the first body scanners using low - intensity x - ray backscatter technology were developed in the early 1990s .

the x - ray backscatter systems currently used by tsa have evolved from these early commercial versions , having significantly improved resolution as well as special privacy algorithms that generate front and back images similar to chalk outlines ( see figure 1 ) .

tsa implemented "chalk outline" filtering , known as a privacy algorithm , to allay privacy concerns , as raw , unfiltered x - ray backscatter images resemble high - resolution photographic negatives .

trained tsa screeners review these filtered images .

millimeter wave imaging systems emit non - ionizing electromagnetic radio waves in the millimeter wave ( 30-300 gigahertz ) spectrum to render images of what lies directly underneath clothing and near the skin .

deployed systems generate images that look like photographic negatives ( see figure 2 ) .

privacy filters are applied to these images to selectively blur faces .

millimeter wave systems are capable of generating a 3-d view by scanning the full 360 degrees around an individual .

this 3-d scan renders front and back images that are viewed by trained tsa screeners .

however , tsa is currently field testing automated target recognition ( atr ) algorithms that are intended to eventually replace human image analysis of millimeter wave images ( see figure 3 ) .

tsa is currently retrofitting deployed units , and all future millimeter wave systems procured by tsa will come with atr .

atr is described in further detail in the discussion of " privacy concerns . .

as of august 2012 , tsa had deployed about 700 ait units at more than 180 of the roughly 450 commercial passenger airports .

tsa currently plans to acquire and deploy a total of 1,800 units throughout the country by the end of fy2014 .

once all fy2012 funds are expended , tsa projects that it will have acquired 1,250 units , about 69% of the planned total .

the acquisition cost per unit is about $175,000 .

in addition , tsa incurs costs associated with installing and maintaining ait systems , training personnel , and operating the deployed units .

tsa hired and trained an additional 8,000 screeners through fy2011 to meet the anticipated workload increases associated with operational deployment of the first 1,000 ait units .

these additional operational costs can add substantially to the overall cost of deploying and operating ait .

inferring from tsa statements , the annualized cost for purchasing , installing , staffing , operating , supporting , upgrading , and maintaining checkpoint ait systems currently sums to about $455 million and will increase to about $1.17 billion once the planned 1,800 units are fully deployed .

this equates to roughly $655,000 annually per deployed ait unit .

tsa argues that , at about 1,000 deployed ait units , the operating cost translates to roughly $1 per traveling passenger .

however , this figure does not reflect the cost per scan because only a small percentage of passengers undergo a whole body scan .

as tsa does not divulge the percentage of passengers screened using ait , the cost per scan cannot be accurately estimated .

tsa selects passengers for ait screening using both random and targeted selection techniques .

tsa considers the specific selection methods to be sensitive security information , and this information is not made public .

initially , tsa procurements of x - ray backscatter units were greater , but more recently tsa has acquired larger numbers of millimeter wave systems .

as of february 2012 , roughly 44% of total ait deployments were x - ray backscatter units , but that percentage had dropped to about 35% by august 2012 .

public perceptions of possible health risks associated with x - ray backscatter systems , coupled with technological advances in second - generation millimeter wave systems that will replace human observers with automated threat detection capabilities , may have influenced tsa toward favoring millimeter wave systems over x - ray backscatter systems .

tsa cites several independent polls indicating widespread public support and understanding of the need for and use of ait .

the polling data indicate that about 75% to 80% of americans support the use of ait at airport checkpoints .

nonetheless , ait remains controversial .

among respondents expressing concerns regarding the use of full - body scanners in a 2010 travel leaders study , roughly 48% raised privacy issues , 27% worried about potential known or unknown health risks , and about 20% expressed concerns over delays in getting through security .

concerns have also been raised over screening individuals with special needs , the effectiveness of the technology , screener staffing requirements , and tsa's deployment strategy .

although tsa has put in place policies and procedures to address concerns regarding ait scanning , these measures are not tied to specific statutory mandates and could be modified in the future without legislative action .

a number of related bills have been introduced in the 112 th congress .

however , none of these bills has moved out of committee .

the aircraft passenger whole - body imaging limitations act of 2011 ( h.r .

1279 ) would require the national academy of sciences to determine that ait does not pose a threat to public health , and would require the use of privacy filters or other privacy - protecting technology before ait could be used for passenger screening .

it would further restrict ait or pat - down screening from being used as a primary screening method .

the bill would also prohibit and establish penalties for storing , transferring , sharing , or copying ait images .

the checkpoint images protection act of 2011 ( h.r .

685 ) would establish penalties for the unauthorized recording or distribution of security screening images , while the transportation security administration authorization act of 2011 ( h.r .

3011 ) would require tsa to certify that atr software is installed on all deployed ait machines , and that image retention capabilities on all such machines are disabled .

also , the traveler screening act , or the "rights act" ( s. 2207 ) , would require the tsa ombudsman's office to better track public complaints about screening , determine best practices to resolve frequent passenger complaints , resolve passenger complaints , and field advance notification calls from individuals with special needs to arrange for accommodation at screening checkpoints .

this bill would also require the tsa ombudsman to appoint tsa employees to serve as passenger advocates at all of the busiest ( category x ) airports .

under the conditions specified in the bill , individuals selected as passenger advocates must not have been subject to disciplinary action by tsa and would be required to receive special training in conflict resolution as well as sufficient medical training to recognize legitimate complaints and concerns regarding medical conditions and disabilities .

