the corporate income tax system has been a focus of many recent debates about tax reform and the economy .

many economists and policy makers argue that reform of the corporate income tax system is needed , although a variety of rationales on why and how have been offered .

some argue that a simpler system with lower tax rates is necessary to encourage domestic investment , employment , and economic growth .

others argue that reform is needed to close loopholes and restrict access to tax havens , both of which are seen by some to allow corporations to avoid taxes too easily .

a number of others have advocated for corporate tax reform on the basis that the current system puts american corporations at a disadvantage when compared with foreign competitors .

many believe it is a combination of these arguments that justify reforming the corporate tax system .

this report presents information and research on the corporate tax to help policy makers understand and evaluate arguments presented in the tax reform debate .

many of the topics and ideas discussed here are analyzed in greater detail in the other crs reports and academic research referenced throughout .

this report first reviews the structure of the corporate income tax .

data on which companies pay the corporate tax , corporate tax revenue , and how the u.s. system compares to the rest of the world are then presented and analyzed .

next , the economic effects of the corporate tax are reviewed — including a discussion of the purpose of the corporate tax , who bears the burden of the tax , and how to evaluate alternative corporate tax systems .

the report then reviews broad reform options and concludes with a comparison of specific proposals that have been offered .

the corporate income tax generally only applies to c corporations ( also known as regular corporations ) .

these corporations — named for subchapter c of the internal revenue code ( irc ) , which details their tax treatment — are generally treated as taxable entities separate from their shareholders .

that is , corporate income is taxed once at the corporate level according to the corporate income tax system .

when corporate dividend payments are made or capital gains are realized income is taxed again at the individual - shareholder level according to the individual tax system .

this treatment leads to the so - called "double taxation" of corporate profits .

in contrast , non - corporate businesses , including s corporations and partnerships , pass their income through to owners who pay taxes .

collectively , these non - corporate business entities are referred to as pass - throughs .

for these types of entities , business income is taxed only once , at individual income tax rates .

the corporate income tax is designed as a tax on corporate profits ( also known as net income ) .

broadly defined , corporate profit is total income minus the cost associated with generating that income .

business expenses that may be deducted from income include employee compensation ; the decline in value of machines , equipment , and structures ( i.e. , deprecation ) ; general supplies and materials ; advertising ; and interest payments .

the corporate income tax also allows for a number of other special deductions , credits , and tax preferences .

oftentimes , these provisions are intended to promote particular policy goals , as deductions reduce taxes paid by corporations .

a corporation's tax liability can be calculated as: taxes = [ ( total income – expenses ) ( 1 – p ) × t ] – tax credits , where t is the statutory tax rate and p is the section 199 production activities deduction .

the section 199 deduction , which is discussed in " corporate tax expenditures " section , effectively lowers the corporate tax rate for those corporations engaged in domestic manufacturing activities .

the corporate tax system becomes increasingly complex as the details of specific provisions are examined .

the following sections discuss some of the more fundamental features of the tax system .

currently , about 6% of businesses are organized as c corporations , and thus subject to the corporate income tax .

as figure 2 shows , this change is a significant decrease from the 17% of businesses that choose the corporate form in 1980 .

some of this shift can be explained by various legislative and regulatory changes over this time period that reduced the top individual tax rate below the top corporate tax rate ( making it more attractive to be a pass - through ) , increases in the shareholder limit for s corporations , and the ability of llcs to elect partnership tax status .

the share of business income generated by c corporations has also changed over time .

in 1980 , for example , corporations were responsible for nearly 80% of total business income .

today , corporations generate less than half of total business income , with the remainder coming from pass - throughs .

c corporations , however , still generate a disproportionate share of all business income .

although c corporations only account for 6% of all businesses , they generate a disproportionate share of business income .

but just as the fraction of businesses choosing the corporate form has decreased over time , so too has the fraction of income they generate .

when looking at an industry level breakdown of what types of firms pay the corporate tax , manufacturing ranks number one ( see figure 3 ) .

in 2008 , manufacturing was responsible for about 32% of corporate taxes paid .

the wholesale and retail trade industry was next , accounting for 17% of corporate taxes paid , followed by the finance and insurance industry , which paid 16% of corporate taxes .

the share paid by all other industries then drops sharply — 8% paid by holding companies and the information industry , 4% by mining firms , and then no industry type accounted for more than 3% of taxes paid .

this distribution of taxes paid is partly explained by the fact that most corporate business activity is conducted by a rather small number of large firms .

this distribution is evident from a comparison of the distribution of taxes paid to the distribution of corporations across industry ( see figure 3 ) .

for example , while manufacturing paid 32.3% of taxes , it only accounted for 6.1% of corporations .

similarly , the finance and insurance industry paid 16.0% of taxes , but contained 4.3% of all corporations .

in total , the five industries that paid the most in taxes ( 80.9% combined ) only accounted for 33% of corporations .

only the wholesale and retail trade industry paid taxes in proportion to their share of corporate firms .

there is also substantial variation in taxes paid by corporations in different industries .

one way to compare the tax burden across industries is to look at various measures of an effective tax rate .

the ratio of taxes paid divided by profits is known simply as the "effective rate. .

the effective rate incorporates various tax benefits and subsidies that reduce the taxable income base relative to financial profits , and hence reduce the tax rate firms actually incur relative to the statutory rate .

the "effective marginal tax rate" is the rate of taxation on a projected investment project: it is an estimate of how much the return on an investment will be paid in taxes .

the effective marginal rate is arguably the most well suited measure for determining the effect of tax rates on investment decisions .

data compiled by aswath damodaran , professor of finance at new york university , have been used to look at effective tax rates for u.s. companies across industrial sectors .

damodaran's data set includes financial information from roughly 6,000 u.s. public companies .

effective tax rates are calculated as taxes paid divided by taxable income ( in the basic calculations , companies reporting losses that pay no taxes are considered to have an effective tax rate of zero ) .

industries with low effective tax rates tend to be those that are more likely to make large investments or expenditures on research and development ( activities that are rewarded in the tax code ) .

examples include the biotechnology and semiconductor industries .

industries that tend to have higher than average effective tax rates include retail , food services , and utilities .

research has also shown that , in recent years , effective tax rates reported to shareholders on earnings statements by the most profitable u.s. companies have declined .

this decline has occurred despite the fact that the statutory corporate tax rate has remained constant at 35% .

the decline in effective tax rates for large u.s. corporations over time can largely be explained by increased international activity , combined with lower foreign tax rates .

tax expenditures have played a limited role in this change .

economists oftentimes use an effective tax rate to evaluate how the tax system affects incentives for capital investment .

the effective marginal tax rate , which measures the impact of the tax system on investment decisions , can be defined as , where is the real before - tax return on the marginal ( or incremental ) investment and is the real return paid to investors .

higher effective marginal tax rates indicate greater potential investment distortions .

negative effective tax rates indicate that the tax code is actually subsidizing investment to the point where taxpayers are willing to accept a before - tax rate of return that is less than the after - tax rate of return for an investment .

there are a number of factors that contribute to differences in effective marginal tax rates .

these factors include the form of business organization , financing method ( eg , debt versus equity ) , whether a particular industry is more capital intensive than others , inflation , etc .

tax expenditure provisions also contribute to variation in effective marginal tax rates .

a 2005 congressional budget office ( cbo ) study calculating effective marginal tax rates for different asset types in the corporate sector found an overall effective marginal tax rate of 26.3% .

gravelle ( 2011 ) also calculates effective tax rates by asset type , finding an average effective tax rate of 30% .

both the 2005 cbo study and gravelle ( 2011 ) identified the computers and peripheral equipment , automobile equipment , and industrial and commercial building sectors as being highly taxed — facing effective marginal tax rates of 30% or above .

assets with the lowest effective marginal tax rates — less than 20% in both studies — were communications equipment , ships and boats , railroad equipment , mining structures , and petroleum and natural gas structures .

corporate tax revenues have been declining over the last six decades .

the corporate tax reached its post - world war ii era peak in 1952 at 5.9% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) ( see figure 4 ) .

in 2013 , the corporate tax generated revenue equal to approximately 1.6% of gdp .

the corporate tax has also decreased in significance relative to other revenue sources .

at its post - wwii peak in 1952 , the corporate tax generated 32.1% of all federal tax revenue .

in that same year the individual tax accounted for 42.2% of federal revenue , and the payroll tax accounted for 9.7% of revenue .

in 2013 , the corporate tax accounted for 9.9% of federal tax revenue , whereas the individual and payroll taxes generated 47.4% and 34.2% , respectively , of federal revenue .

there are several factors that help explain the declining significance of the corporate tax .

first , the average effective corporate tax rate has decreased over time , mostly as a result of reductions in the statutory rate and changes affecting the tax treatment of investment and capital recovery ( depreciation ) .

second , the increasing fraction of business activity that is being carried out by pass - throughs ( particularly partnerships and s corporations ) has led to an erosion of the corporate tax base .

third , corporate - sector profitability has fallen over time , leading to a further erosion of the corporate tax base .

declining corporate sector profitability may be a result of several factors , including a shift within the corporate sector from less volatile to more volatile industries , a shift in the age of corporations from older to younger , and shifting of profits out of the united states and into lower - tax countries .

in recent years , economists , lawmakers , and others have offered a number of business and corporate tax reform proposals .

table 5 summarizes key comprehensive reforms proposed by members of congress and the obama administration .

also included in table 5 are the business and corporate tax reforms from the 2010 fiscal commission report .

in 2013 , senate committee finance chairman max baucus released several tax reform discussion drafts .

the draft on international tax reform proposes taxing passive and highly mobile forms of foreign - earned income , as well as income earned from goods ultimately consumed in the united states , at the full u.s. rate .

two alternatives were put forth for taxing income earned from products and services sold abroad .

"option y" would subject all foreign - earned income to a minimum tax , which the draft sets at 80% of the u.s. statutory rate .

"option z" would tax 60% of foreign active business income at the u.s. rate .

similar to the camp proposal ( discussed below ) , undistributed foreign earnings would be subject to a one - time tax .

the baucus discussion draft sets this rate at 20% .

in other discussion drafts , senator baucus proposed reforms to cost recovery and accounting rules .

specifically , proposed reforms would eliminate the modified accelerated cost recovery system ( macrs ) , enacting instead a system that uses asset pools and longer lives that more closely approximate economic depreciation .

certain intangibles , including research and experimentation as well as advertising expenditures , would be capitalized and amortized .

last - in , first - out ( lifo ) inventory accounting rules would be repealed .

small - business expensing allowances would be increased such that more businesses would be allowed to use cash accounting .

chairman baucus has also released discussion drafts related to tax administration and energy tax policy .

the former includes a number of proposals designed to reduce the tax gap , enacting additional data reporting requirements and anti - fraud provisions .

the energy tax reform proposes to eliminate most existing energy - related tax incentives , creating new "technology neutral" production and investment tax credits .

house ways and means committee chairman dave camp has also released several tax reform discussion drafts .

the first , released in october 2011 , addressed international tax issues .

while the discussion draft did include text that would reduce the corporate tax rate to 25% ( supporting documentation indicated that this rate reduction would be paid for with unspecified base - broadening provisions ) , the focus of the discussion draft was on provisions that would shift the united states to a territorial tax system .

to shift towards a territorial tax , chairman camp's proposal would exempt 95% of certain foreign - source income from u.s. tax — including u.s. dividends paid to corporate shareholders owning at least 10% of shares .

thus , generally , income earned abroad would not be subject to u.s. tax .

the proposal also suggests options for certain provisions designed to prevent erosion of the corporate tax base , including use of subpart f rules for certain passive and highly mobile income and thin capitalization rules to prevent interest deductions for borrowing in the united states that would finance overseas operations .

chairman camp has also released discussion drafts related to the tax treatment of financial products and small businesses .

the primary change proposed in the financial products discussion drafts relates to the tax treatment of financial derivatives .

derivatives would be marked - to - market at year - end , such that taxpayers would recognize income or losses .

transactions treated as hedges for accounting purposes would also be treated as hedges for tax purposes so that businesses using derivatives to hedge business risk would not be required to mark - to - market .

the draft also proposes to repeal rules that allow securities dealers to pay capital gains taxes on 60% of their derivatives income .

the small business discussion draft provides two different reform options .

option one would revise existing rules related to pass - through entities , encouraging more c corporations to be taxed as s corporations , and address partnership tax avoidance .

option two represents a broader reform option , drafting a new set of rules for taxation of non - publicly traded businesses .

other proposals in the small business discussion draft would increase expensing allowances and allow larger - sized firms to use cash accounting .

in february 2012 , the obama administration released "the president's framework for business tax reform. .

the administration's proposal would eliminate a number of corporate tax expenditures , and provides options for other corporate reforms .

the administration claims that eliminating tax expenditures , while adopting other base - broadening reforms , could result in a revenue - neutral reduction in the corporate tax rate to 28% .

the administration's proposal would also provide enhanced tax incentives for manufacturers , small businesses , research activities , and clean energy .

the administration's proposal also seeks to make changes to the current international tax system .

specifically , subsidiaries of u.s. corporations operating abroad would be required to pay a minimum tax on foreign - source income .

the administration's proposal would also deny certain deductions associated with moving business operations abroad , provide tax credits for expenses associated with moving business activities back to the united states , and strengthen international tax rules that may allow firms to shift profits overseas or reduce u.s. taxes by taking deductions associated with overseas investment .

the bipartisan tax fairness and simplification act of 2011 ( s. 727 ) , often referred to as the "wyden - coats proposal," proposes substantial changes to the u.s. corporate tax system .

the wyden - coats proposal would enact a flat corporate tax rate of 24% , while also enhancing expensing allowances for small businesses .

the legislation proposes repealing a number of corporate tax expenditures , including the section 199 production activities deduction , certain incentives for oil and gas , certain inventory accounting methods , and depreciation of equipment in excess of the alternative depreciation system , among others .

the wyden - coats bill also proposes a number of changes to the u.s. international tax system .

specifically , this legislation would increase taxation of foreign source income — eliminating both deferral of active foreign earnings while enacting per country foreign tax credit limits .

thus , the wyden - coats bill would move the united states' international tax system more in the direction of a worldwide system .

in december 2010 , the national commission of fiscal responsibility and reform ( also known as the fiscal commission or simpson - bowles ) released a report outlining a plan for achieving long - run fiscal sustainability .

tax reform was one part of this comprehensive proposal .

this fiscal commission's illustrative plan recommended reducing the corporate tax rate to 28% , eliminating corporate tax expenditures , including the section 199 production activities deduction .

the plan also proposed moving to a territorial tax system , continuing to tax passive foreign source income under subpart f. details on the specific structure of this territorial tax system were not provided .

there are some areas of general consensus with respect to goal of corporate tax reform .

each of the four corporate tax reform proposals summarized in table 5 would reduce statutory corporate tax rates ( currently at 35% ) .

part of the revenue cost of rate reduction would be offset by eliminating corporate tax expenditures ( which corporate tax expenditures should be eliminated is not an area of broad agreement ) .

there is also general agreement that changes should be made to the current treatment of foreign - source income .

there is not , however , a consensus on how a reformed corporate tax system should treat foreign - source income .

one of the most fundamental differences in the corporate tax reform proposals surveyed in table 5 is in the proposed treatment of foreign - source income .

some proposals would move towards a territorial tax system , effectively exempting income earned abroad from u.s. taxation .

the obama administration's and the wyden - coats proposals both contain provisions that would strengthen the current worldwide system of foreign - source income taxation , reducing the ability for u.s. companies to avoid u.s. taxation through overseas operations .

