funding for house committees ( except for the committee on appropriations ) follows a two - step process of authorization and appropriation .

operating budgets for all standing and select committees of the house ( except for the committee on appropriations ) are authorized pursuant to a chamber funding resolution , and funding is provided by annual appropriations in the legislative branch appropriations bill and other appropriations acts .

on march 17 , 2017 , the house adopted h.res .

173 , providing for the expenses of certain committees of the house of representatives in the 115 th congress , by voice vote .

the resolution authorized a total of $266.3 million for committee expenses , $132.7 million for the first session and $133.6 million for the second session .

the use of committee funds is subject to chamber rules , law , and regulations promulgated by the committee on house administration , the commission on congressional mailing standards , and the ethics committee , among other house entities .

these regulations may be found in a wide variety of sources , including statute , house rules , committee resolutions , the committee handbook , the franking manual , the house ethics manual , "dear colleague" letters , and formal and informal guidance .

committee funds may be used only to support the conduct of official committee business .

they may not be used for personal or campaign purposes , or comingled with funds appropriated to any other source of official funds , such as the member representational allowance ( mra ) .

information on individual committee spending is published quarterly in the statements of disbursement of the house .

this report is organized into three sections .

the first provides an overview of the committee funding process in the house and analyzes funding levels since 1996 .

the second reviews house floor and committee action on committee funding in the 115 th congress .

the final section provides illustrations of the rules and regulations that structure the use of committee funds , and analyzes actual committee funding spending patterns during six previous years .

contemporary funding for house committees ( except for the committee on appropriations ) follows a two - step process of authorization and appropriation .

operating budgets for all standing and select committees of the house continued or created at the beginning of a new congress ( except for the committee on appropriations ) are authorized biennially pursuant to an omnibus committee funding resolution , and appropriations are included in the legislative branch appropriations bill .

the committee on house administration held a hearing on committee expense requests on february 15 and 16 , 2017 .

chairs and ranking members from each standing and select committee ( except the committee on appropriations ) testified on their budget requests .

representative gregg harper , chair of the panel , indicated that the committee had "worked to strike the right balance" in providing funds for committees while remaining conscious of costs .

during the hearing , the chairman and the ranking minority member , representative robert brady , reiterated the long - standing expectation that committee resources would reflect a distribution of two - thirds of the committee staff to the majority , and one - third to the minority , and a similar distribution of nonstaff resources .

in their testimony , most committee chairs and ranking minority members explicitly acknowledged mutually satisfactory arrangements had been reached regarding the distribution of committee staff and other resources .

on march 7 , 2017 , h.res .

173 , providing for the expenses of certain committees of the house of representatives in the 115 th congress , was introduced and referred to the committee on house administration .

on march 8 , 2017 , the committee on house administration marked up h.res .

173 , which was reported to the house by voice vote .

in the second session of the 115 th congress , on march 7 and june 26 , 2018 , the committee on house administration considered committee resolutions 115-9 and 115-19 , respectively .

these resolutions allocated funds from the reserve fund for unanticipated expenses , established by h.res .

173 .

in both instances , the committee agreed to the resolution by voice vote and without amendment .

in accordance with the regulations contained in the committee handbook , "committee funds are provided to pay ordinary and necessary expenses incurred by committee members and employees in the united states. .

ordinary and necessary expenses are defined as "reasonable expenditures in support of official committee business that are consistent with all applicable federal laws , rules of the house of representatives , and regulations of the committee on house administration. .

all expenditures of a committee are subject to review by its committee chair .

funding "may not be used to defray any personal , political or campaign - related expenses , or expenses related to a member's personal office. .

committees may employ permanent staff , consultants , detailees , fellows , interns , temporary and shared employees , and volunteers .

the terms and conditions of employment for committee staff are determined by the committee chair .

total staff ceilings for each committee are set by the speaker .

employees of a house committee are covered by the congressional accountability act .

domestic travel including transportation , lodging , and meals ( excluding alcohol ) is reimbursable from committee funds .

travel expenses may not be for personal or political campaign events and may not exceed 60 consecutive days .

foreign travel is coordinated through the state department travel office and is subject to house rule x , clause 8 ( b ) ( 3 ) , whereby each member and employee on foreign travel must submit an itemized report of expenses to the committee chair .

to better understand how committees have used their authorized funds , the following sections provide an analysis of annual committee expenditures during several different legislative years .

specifically , committee expenditures are analyzed to determine ( 1 ) the percentage of each committee's annual authorization that is expended , and ( 2 ) major categories of committee spending .

data on yearly committee expenditures were compiled using the quarterly statement of disbursements of the house , which reports all individual house expenditures disbursed during the previous quarter .

because late - arriving bills for committee expenses may be paid for up to two years following the end of a fiscal year for which funds are appropriated , obligations incurred by a committee during a particular legislative year are often paid over the course of multiple calendar years .

for example , h.r .

244 , the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2017 , provided that appropriations for house committees remain available until december 31 , 2018 .

this would suggest that financial obligations made by committees in 2017 may be paid with remaining fy2017 appropriations through the quarter ending december 31 , 2020 .

consequently , the total expenditures of a committee in any given legislative year are calculated using quarterly statement of disbursements reports from both the year in which the committee operated , as well as subsequent years .

the following analysis calculates total disbursements made for legislative years 2010 through 2015 , years for which house statements of disbursements are available electronically , and the bulk of late - arriving bills as described above have been received .

in addition , data on disbursements from a sample of earlier legislative years — 1997 , 1998 , 2003 , and 2004 — are analyzed in order to detect any longer - term trends in how committee funds have been used .

as shown in figure 3 , the majority of committees between 2010 and 2015 used almost all of the funds authorized to them .

specifically , approximately 55% of committees spent 95% or more of their authorization ; approximately 77% of committees spent 90% or more of their authorization ; and approximately 98% of committees spent 80% or more of their authorization .

house spending is categorized by the standard budget object classes used for the federal government .

these include personnel compensation ; personnel benefits ; travel ; rent , communications , and utilities ; printing and reproduction ; other services ; supplies and materials ; transportation of things ; and equipment .

the disbursement volumes also contain a category for franked mail .

table 1 shows percentages for each object class .

the largest category of spending , accounting for approximately 91% of total committee spending during the years analyzed , was for "personnel compensation. .

beyond these staff expenses , committees spent an aggregate of 3.4% of their expenditures on "equipment," just over 2% on "supplies and materials," and less than 1% on travel .

the use of most committee funds on personnel is consistently true both across time and across individual committees .

