conflict of interest regulations and restrictions on certain private employment opportunities for a federal officer or employee do not necessarily end with the termination of the officer's or employee's federal service .

this report is intended to provide a brief history and description of the provisions of federal law restricting employment opportunities and activities of federal employees after they leave the service of the executive or legislative branches of the federal government .

the conflict of interest provisions applicable after one leaves government service to enter private employment are often referred to as "revolving door" laws .

post - employment , "revolving door" statutes restricting certain subsequent private employment activities of former federal officers and employees were enacted as early as 1872 , and again in 1944 .

a portion of the current statutory provision , at 18 u.s.c .

section 207 , was enacted in 1962 as part of a major revision and recodification of the federal bribery and conflict of interest laws .

that post - employment conflict of interest law was then amended and broadened by the ethics in government act of 1978 , which added certain one - year "cooling - off" periods for high - level executive branch personnel , limiting their post - employment advocacy activities before the federal government for one year after leaving office .

after president reagan vetoed a major congressional revision of the post - employment law which had been passed by congress in 1988 , congress adopted as part of the ethics reform act of 1989 most of the changes in the vetoed legislation .

the statute has been amended several times since 1989 , including extensive technical amendments in 1990 .

in 2007 , as part of legislation dealing with lobbying laws and internal congressional rules on gifts , changes were made to the revolving door statute increasing the one - year "cooling off" period for "very senior" executive officials and for u.s .

senators to two years , and broadening the one - year "cooling off" restrictions for covered senior senate staff .

one of the initial and earliest purposes of enacting the "revolving door" laws was to protect the government against the use of proprietary information by former employees who might use that information on behalf of a private party in an adversarial type of proceeding or matter against the government , to the potential detriment of the public interest .

as noted by the united states court of appeals in upholding the constitutionality of the "switching sides" prohibition of 18 u.s.c .

section 207 ( a ) , "the purpose of protecting the government , which can act only through agents , from the use against it by former agents of information gained in the course of their agency , is clearly a proper one. .

another interest of the government in revolving door restrictions was to limit the potential influence and allure that a lucrative private arrangement , or the prospect of such an arrangement , may have on a current federal official when dealing with prospective private clients or future employers while still with the government , that is , "that the government employee not be influenced in the performance of public duties by the thought of later reaping a benefit from a private individual. .

in a case dealing with another federal statute which relates in part to potential future private employment of a current federal official , the court noted that the statutory scheme was intended to deal with the "nagging and persistent conflicting interests of the government official who has his eye cocked toward subsequent private employment. .

additional interests asserted in the proposed amendments to 18 u.s.c .

section 207 in the 99 th and 100 th congresses were to prevent the corrupting influence on the governmental processes of both legislating and administering the law that may occur , and the appearances of such influences , when a federal official leaves his government post to "cash in" on his "inside" knowledge and personal influence with those persons remaining in the government .

as noted in the post - employment regulations promulgated under the statute by the office of government ethics , the provisions of the law and regulation are directed at prohibiting "certain acts by former government employees which may reasonably give the appearance of making unfair use of prior government employment and affiliations" these purposes in adopting limitations on former employees' private employment opportunities must , however , also be balanced against the deterrent effect that overly restrictive provisions on career movement and advancement will have upon recruiting qualified and competent persons to government service .

furthermore , unduly restrictive provisions on the "revolving door" ( that is , movement of government personnel into the private sector , and private sector employees into the government ) may tend to isolate , or at least insulate government employees from private sector concerns , considerations , and experiences of the general public to a degree not desirable for public policy reasons .

a criminal statute , codified at 18 u.s.c .

section 207 , applies in some respects to all employees in the executive branch after they leave government service .

it restricts or regulates private "representational," lobbying , and other advocacy type activities .

some parts of the statute also apply to legislative branch officials , and those are discussed in more detail later in this report in the part dealing with legislative branch restrictions .

section 207 of title 18 provides a series of post - employment restrictions on "representational" activities for executive branch personnel when they leave government service , including ( 1 ) a lifetime ban on "switching sides" on a matter involving specific parties on which any executive branch employee had worked personally and substantially while with the government ; ( 2 ) a two - year ban on "switching sides" on a somewhat broader range of matters which were under the employee's official responsibility ; ( 3 ) a one - year restriction on assisting others on certain trade or treaty negotiations ; ( 4 ) a one - year "cooling off" period for certain "senior" officials barring representational communications before their former departments or agencies ; ( 5 ) a two - year "cooling" period for "very senior" officials barring representational communications to and attempts to influence certain other high ranking officials in the entire executive branch of government ; and ( 6 ) a one - year ban on certain officials in performing some representational or advisory activities for foreign governments or foreign political parties .

additionally , certain presidential and vice - presidential appointees in the obama administration are required to sign an ethics agreement which will further limit their post - government - employment lobbying and advocacy activities during the entire tenure of the obama administration and , for certain "senior" appointees , for one more year after leaving government service .

under amendments to the federal deposit insurance act , certain officers and employees of a "federal banking agency or a federal reserve bank," who are involved in bank examinations or inspections , are restricted from any compensated employment with those private depository institutions for a period of one year after leaving federal service .

this restriction applies to employees who served for at least two months during their last year of federal service as "the senior examiner ( or a functionally equivalent position ) ," and who exercised "continuing , broad responsibility for the examination ( or inspection ) " of a depository institution or depository institution holding company .

these former employees are barred for one year from receiving any compensation as an "employee , officer , director , or consultant" from the depository institution , the depository institution holding company that controls such depository institution , or any other company that controls the depository institution , or from the depository institution holding company or any depository institution that is controlled by that the depository institution holding company .

further limitations upon the post - government employment activities of certain officials exist under so - called "procurement integrity" provisions of federal law for those former federal officials who had acted as contracting officers or who had other specified contracting or procurement functions for an agency .

these additional restrictions go beyond the prohibitions on merely "representational," lobbying , or advocacy activities on behalf of private entities before the government , and extend also to any compensated activity for or on behalf of certain private contractors for a period of time after a former procurement official had worked on certain contracts for the government .

the current post - employment restrictions within the procurement integrity provisions of federal law are codified at 41 u.s.c .

sections 2103 and 2104 .

under such provisions , former federal officials who were involved in certain contracting and procurement duties for the government concerning contracts in excess of $10 million may generally not receive any compensation from the private contractor involved , as an employee , officer , consultant , or director of that contractor , for one year after performing those procurement duties for the government .

the types of contracting duties and decisions for the government which would trigger coverage under these provisions include acting as the "procuring contracting officer , the source selection authority , a member of the source selection evaluation board , or the chief of a financial or technical evaluation team in a procurement" in excess of $10 million ; serving as the program manager , deputy program manager , or administrative contracting officer for covered contracts ; or being an officer who personally made decisions awarding a contract , subcontract , modification of a contract , or task order or delivery order in excess of $10 million , establishing overhead or other rates valued in excess of $10 million , or approving payments or settlement of claims for a contract in excess of the covered amount .

officials of the department of defense who are involved personally and substantially in procurements of over $10 million , are leaving the department , and know that they will be receiving compensation from a defense contractor within the next two years must request , within 30 days before their departure , an ethics opinion about what they can and cannot do for the defense contractor under current ethics laws and rules .

under legislation adopted in 2012 , all "senior" officers and employees in the federal government will now have to report to their ethics offices negotiations that they are having for subsequent private employment .

the "stock act," enacted in april of 2012 , requires all of those federal officials who are required to file public financial disclosure reports ( that is , generally , those earning a rate of salary equal to or more than 120% of the base salary for a gs - 15 ) to notify their ethics office in writing within three business days of the commencement of such "negotiations," and then to recuse themselves from any governmental matter for which such negotiations may create a conflict of interest .

the ethics reform act of 1989 added post - employment restrictions for members and certain senior congressional staffers , effective january 1 , 1991 , and these were amended by the lobbying and ethics reform legislation , titled the "honest leadership and open government act of 2007. .

under the criminal provisions of this statute , individuals who were members of the house are prohibited from "lobbying" or making advocacy communications on behalf of any other person to current members of either house of congress , or to any legislative branch employee , for one year after the individual leaves congress .

for a period of two years after leaving the senate , senators are prohibited from similar post - employment advocacy .

additionally , senior staff employees are subject to certain one - year "cooling off" periods regarding their advocacy contacts with their former offices ; and both former members and former senior staff are limited in representing official foreign interests before the u.s. government , and in taking part in certain trade and treaty negotiations , for one year after leaving congressional service .

there are now so - called "cooling off" periods of two different durations applicable in the legislative branch that restrict post - employment "lobbying" and advocacy activities .

united states senators are subject to a two - year post - employment advocacy ban , which restricts their lobbying anyone in congress , or any employee of a legislative office , for two years after leaving the senate .

members of the house of representatives , as well as "senior" legislative branch employees , are now subject to a one - year "cooling off" or "no contact" period after they leave congressional office or employment .

members of the house of representatives are prohibited for one year after leaving office from lobbying or making other advocacy contacts with any member , officer , or employee of either house of congress , or to any employee of a legislative office .

"senior" legislative branch employees are subject to the post - employment restrictions if they are compensated at a rate equal to or above 75% of the rate of pay of a member of the house or senate , and are employed for more than 60 days .

"senior" senate staff covered by these statutory provisions are prohibited for one year after leaving senate employment from making advocacy communications to any officer , employee , or member of the entire senate .

"senior" house staff are barred for one year after leaving house employment from making advocacy communications only to their former employing office ; that is , former "senior" employees of a member of the house may not , for one year after they leave congressional employment , make advocacy or representational contacts to that member or any of the member's employees .

house committee staffers covered by these provisions are barred for one year after leaving office from making such advocacy contacts and representations to any member or employee of their former committees , or to any member who was on the committee during the last year of the staffer's employment ; and "senior" employees in house leadership offices are prohibited for one year after leaving employment from making advocacy communications to anyone in that leadership office .

not all contacts or communications by former members or employees with current members or employees within the one - year period are barred , however .

the prohibition goes only to advocacy - type communications , that is , communications "with the intent to influence" a member or officer or employee of the legislative branch concerning "any matter on which such person seeks official action" by that member , officer , or employee , or by either house of congress .

there are also several specific exceptions to the general prohibition , including , for example , exceptions for lobbying and advocacy work for state or local governments , testifying on matters under oath , and generally for representations or communications on behalf of political candidates , parties , and political organizations .

all officers and employees of the government , including members of congress and congressional staff , who worked personally and substantially on a treaty or trade negotiation and who had access to information not subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act , may not use such information for one year after leaving the government for the purpose of aiding , assisting , advising , or representing anyone other than the united states regarding such treaty or trade negotiation .

members of congress , and those "senior" legislative branch employees who are covered by the one - year "cooling off" periods , are also prohibited for a year after leaving office or employment from representing an official foreign entity before the united states , or aiding or advising such entity with intent to influence any decision of an agency or employee of any agency or department of the u.s. government .

all employees of the senate remain subject to the senate rule governing lobbying after they leave senate employment .

senate rule xxxvii , clause 9 , applies to all former staffers who have become registered lobbyists , or are employed by a registered lobbyist or by an entity that retains lobbyists if the former staffer is to influence legislation .

such former staffers are prohibited for one year after leaving the senate from lobbying the senator for whom they used to work or the senator's staff .

former committee staff are prohibited from lobbying the members or the staff of that committee for one year .

if the staffer is a "senior" employee , then the former staffer , in accordance with the statutory restriction , will be barred from lobbying any member , officer , or employee of the entire senate for one year .

under congressional rules and practice , former members are generally granted the privilege of admission to the floor of the senate or house , respectively .

however , under the rules of the house of representatives , former members of the house are not to be entitled to floor privileges if they have any "direct or pecuniary interest in any legislative measure pending before the house or reported by any committee," and are not entitled to admission if they are registered lobbyists or agents of a foreign principal , or employed by or otherwise represent "any party or organization for the purpose of influencing , directly or indirectly , the passage , defeat or amendment of any legislative measure pending before the house , reported by any committee" or under consideration of a committee .

the senate rules have also been changed to withdraw floor privileges from a former member or officer who is a registered lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal , or is in the employ of an organization for the purpose of influencing , directly or indirectly , the passage or defeat of legislation or any legislative proposal .

the house and senate have both limited the access of such former members , if those former members are registered lobbyists or foreign agents , to the athletic and exercise facilities in the house and senate .

a member of congress may not , before the expiration of his or her term , accept a civil office in the u.s. government if that office was created , or the salary for the office had been increased during the member's current term .

this constitutional provision would by its terms prevent a member of congress from retiring from congress before his or her current term has expired , and accepting such a civil position with the federal government .

it may be noted that the disqualification has on many occasions been avoided in regard to an office for which the salary was increased during the member's term , by enacting legislation lowering the salary of that particular office back to its previous level .

