many of the farm commodity programs are set to expire with the extended 2008 farm bill ( the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) in 2013 .

in anticipation , the 113 th congress has been considering an omnibus farm bill that would establish the direction of u.s. agricultural policy for the next five years .

on june 10 , 2013 , the full senate approved its version of the bill ( s. 954 , the agriculture reform , food and jobs act of 2013 ) .

on july 11 , 2013 , the house passed its version of the bill ( h.r .

2642 , the federal agriculture reform and risk management act of 2013 ) .

both bills proposed replacing existing u.s. dairy price and income support programs with a new margin - based income support program .

the senate bill ( but not the house bill ) also includes an accompanying market stabilization program .

during the house agriculture committee's markup of its first version of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r .

1947 ) in may 2013 , an amendment ( h.amdt .

228 to h.r .

1947 ) was introduced by representatives goodlatte and scott that proposed removing the dmsp from h.r .

1947 and making some minor adjustments to dpmpp .

the gsa was defeated by a vote of 28 to 26 .

however , the amendment was reintroduced during the house floor debate of h.r .

1947 and passed by a vote of 291-135 ( may 15 , 2013 ) .

the full house voted to reject the amended bill ( 195-234 ) on june 20 , 2013 .

however , on july 11 , 2013 , the full house passed ( 216-208 ) a second version of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r .

2642 ) that contained the goodlatte - scott amendment .

this report first briefly describes existing u.s. dairy programs .

then the dairy programs proposed in the 113 th congress's senate - and house - passed farm bills are discussed and compared .

several examples of how the proposed dairy programs might operate for an individual dairy operation are provided in the text .

the report also includes congressional budget office ( cbo ) cost projections of historical program outlays compared with the proposed new dairy programs under both bills , and a summary of academic analyses of potential market effects of the proposed dairy policies .

finally , the report includes an appendix that discusses disagreement over the market stabilization component of proposed new dairy policy and compares it with previous forms of supply management intervention in the u.s. dairy sector .

many provisions of the 2008 farm bill were originally set to expire at the end of fy2012 ; however , the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) — signed into law by president obama on january 2 , 2013 — extended the 2008 farm bill for one additional year , through fy2013 , or , in the case of the farm commodity programs that are on a different calendar , through crop year 2013 .

atra's passage avoided what news media and policymakers viewed as a looming "fiscal cliff. .

atra also extended the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program through september 30 , 2013 , and the dairy product price support program ( dppsp ) through december 31 , 2013 .

in addition to avoiding a "fiscal cliff," the atra extension of the 2008 farm bill temporarily avoided a reversion to 1949 permanent law and the so - called "milk cliff. .

under permanent law , usda would be compelled to purchase dairy products ( milk and butterfat products ) so as to support the all - milk price at 75% to 90% of a 1910-1914 parity price index .

according to usda , in may 2013 the all - milk parity price was $51.50 / cwt .

at 75% of parity , the usda milk - equivalent product purchase price of $38.63 / cwt .

would be nearly double the may average all - milk farm price of $19.70 / cwt .

a doubling of farm prices would likely lead to a substantial hike in retail prices , thus engendering the term "milk cliff. .

the potential reversion to permanent law , should current farm law expire without replacement or extension , is seen as an incentive for policymakers to produce new farm legislation , or at a minimum to extend current law .

current federal dairy policy is based on five major programs — the dairy product price support program , the milk income loss contract program , federal milk marketing orders , dairy import tariff rate quotas , and the dairy export incentive program — which together are designed to provide price and income support and market stability for dairy producers .

in addition , several smaller programs aid the u.s. dairy sector with market promotion , research , price reporting , risk management , and disaster assistance .

in the 113 th congress , both the senate - passed ( s. 954 ) and house - passed ( h.r .

2642 ) 2013 farm bills propose restructuring the traditional set of dairy programs by replacing dppsp , milc , and deip with a new margin insurance program — called the dairy production margin protection program ( dpmpp ) under s. 954 , and the dairy producer margin insurance program ( dpmip ) under h.r .

2642 .

the margin insurance program would operate as an income support program based on the monthly difference ( i.e. , the margin ) between the national average farm all - milk price and a formula - derived estimate of feed costs .

the senate - passed s. 954 would link dpmpp with the dairy market stabilization program ( dmsp ) , which , under certain conditions , would reduce payments to participating producers for their milk marketings when the margin falls below proposed statutory thresholds .

early versions of the house 2013 farm bill also included the dmsp as part of new dairy policy .

during the house agriculture committee's markup of its first version of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r .

1947 ) in may 2013 , an amendment ( h.amdt .

228 ) was introduced by representatives goodlatte and scott that proposed removing the dmsp from h.r .

1947 and making some minor adjustments to dpmpp .

the gsa was defeated by a vote of 28 to 26 .

the amendment was reintroduced during the house floor debate of h.r .

1947 and passed by a vote of 291-135 ( may 15 , 2013 ) .

however , the full house voted to reject the amended bill ( 195-234 ) on june 20 , 2013 .

on july 11 , 2013 , the full house passed ( by a vote of 216-208 ) a second version of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r .

2642 ) which included the goodlatte - scott amendment — thus removing dmsp and replacing dpmpp with dpmip .

usda outlays for the major dairy support programs have trended downward since the 1980 farm bill period ( table 7 ) .

an outlook for strong dairy product prices for the next several years in the cbo may 2013 baseline accounts for the relatively small net outlay projections of $161 million over 5 years ( fy2014-fy2018 ) and $250 million over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) for the major dairy programs , assuming an extension of current dairy policy .

cbo also has produced budget scores for different versions of the senate and house 2013 farm bills .

with respect to the house version of the 2013 farm bill , cbo scored dairy policy in the initial h.r .

1947 as reported by the house agriculture committee and a scenario of h.r .

1947 that included the goodlatte - scott amendment ( table 7 ) .

it is assumed that this latter cost estimate is representative of the dairy proposal in the house - passed h.r .

2642 .

according to cbo , replacing current dairy policy with the new dairy proposals of the house and senate would result in projected additional budgetary outlays above baseline over the 5-year ( fy2014-fy2018 ) and 10-year ( fy2014-fy2023 ) periods of: $28 million and $302 million , respectively , under s. 954 , $44 million and $436 million , respectively , under h.r .

1947 ( as reported by the house agriculture committee ) , and $23 million and $421 million , respectively , under a version of h.r .

1947 as amended by the proposed goodlatte - scott amendment ( h.amdt .

228 to h.r .

1947 ) without the supply restrictions proposed under dmsp of s. 954 .

a cbo score of the program details of title i in house - passed h.r .

2642 was not yet available as of the date of this report .

instead , the cbo score of the dairy proposal for h.r .

1947 inclusive of the goodlatte - scott amendment , which eliminates dmsp , is cited above and in table 7 .

appendix a .

debate over the market stabilization proposal what is dmsp's intended purpose ? .

the dmsp market stabilization proposal is being debated by dairy producer groups , which generally support it , and dairy processors and certain consumer groups who oppose it .

the national milk producers federation ( nmpf ) , the largest u.s. dairy producer organization , is a principal proponent of the dairy market stabilization concept .

nmpf describes the purpose and need for dmsp as follows: what is the purpose of the dmsp ? .

the purpose of the dmsp is to reduce margin volatility for dairy producers .

the dmsp acts as an early warning system that sends strong and timely signals to producers participating in the margin protection program that small temporary adjustments in their milk production need to be made to stave off long - term reductions in their overall margins .

the dmsp is designed to act swiftly and infrequently to address brief market imbalances .

why is any type of supply management needed in the u.s. dairy industry ? .

the dmsp does not fit the traditional definition of a supply management program .

however , market stabilization is part of this proposal because there are times when imbalances occur in the marketplace that negatively impact dairy farmer margins .

in 2009 , dairy farmers did not overproduce their way into extremely low margins , but demand , both domestically and internationally , collapsed with the global recession .

the low milk prices combined with high feed costs resulted in the lowest margins most producers have ever experienced .

situations like this ultimately correct themselves , but without timely and effective intervention , they can drag on too long and drag down too many farmers along the way .

alternate viewpoints the international dairy foods association ( idfa ) , representing the nation's dairy manufacturing and marketing industries and their suppliers , is a principal opponent of the dairy market stabilization program .

idfa argues: "a new government "dairy stabilization" program would routinely increase our domestic prices above international prices and make our dairy industry less competitive.... government supply management programs thwart export growth .

that's why no other u.s. commodity has limits on production. .

during the house agriculture committee markup of h.r .

1947 in the 112 th congress , representatives goodlatte and scott first introduced their amendment ( no .

085 ) to remove the market stabilization program from the dairy subtitle d while retaining the dairy producer margin protection program .

in a "dear colleague" letter dated july 10 , 2012 , they argued: a government supply management program arbitrarily penalizes consumers and dairy product manufacturers who respond to consumer demands , by uniformly requiring milk supply contraction and raising milk prices above not [sic] market clearing levels .

the dairy market stabilization program , which our amendment eliminates , is the only u.s. commodity program that would allow this level of government market intervention in domestic commodity supply decisions .

a major concern expressed by urban constituencies in regard to domestic milk supplies is that a "supply management" program would potentially both limit the volume of milk supply available to consumers and raise the price for the milk that is available .

appendix b .

historical dairy supply management programs the goal of dairy supply management programs is generally to enhance and stabilize farm - level milk prices by controlling the amount of milk marketed or to mitigate the increased production that would be stimulated by policy that supports diary product markets at a higher - than - market - equilibrium price .

unlike canada and the european union ( eu ) , the united states has never implemented a mandatory dairy supply management program ; however , the 1990 farm bill had a requirement that usda implement a supply management program if federal dairy product purchases exceeded 7 billion lbs. — this requirement was never implemented .

since the mid - 1980s there have been two government - sponsored and one industry - sponsored major voluntary supply management dairy programs in the united states , all funded in part through dairy farmer assessments .

u.s .

government - sponsored , voluntary supply management programs in the mid - 1980s congress authorized two voluntary dairy supply management programs — the 1984-85 milk diversion program and the 1987 dairy termination program ( whole herd buyout ) .

under the milk diversion program , dairy farmers who reduced milk marketings 5% to 30% from a base level were paid $10 / cwt .

on the reduced marketings .

the milk diversion program cut milk production sharply in 1985 , but had no long - term effect .

under the 1987 dairy termination program , the government accepted bids from dairy farmers who were willing to slaughter all their dairy cattle and remain out of the dairy business for at least five years .

the whole herd buyout program was more successful in moderating milk production trends , but the induced slaughter of dairy cows negatively affected beef markets .

novakovic and stephenson have pointed out that , in contrast to the milk diversion program and dairy termination program , which rewarded farmers for cutting back on milk production , the dmsp program punishes farmers for increasing milk marketings relative to a base .

u.s. industry - sponsored supply management programs an industry - sponsored voluntary supply management program — cooperatives working together ( cwt ) — was initiated in 2003 by the national milk producers federation and remains ongoing .

participating dairy farmers commit 2¢ per cwt .

of milk marketed .

presently , participants in cwt include dairy farmers from every state , producing almost 70% of the nation's milk .

cwt funds have been used for both herd retirement ( the last round was conducted in 2010 ) and export assistance .

foreign government - sponsored mandatory supply management programs canada and the eu have used marketing quotas which explicitly specify the maximum amount of milk that individual dairy farmers can sell and usually apply stiff economic penalties to any sales in excess of the assigned farm quota .

the eu will gradually increase its dairy quotas until an entire phase - out of its milk quota system in april 2015 in accordance with implementation of its 2009 health check .

canada continues to maintain its milk quota system .

potential problems associated with supply management programs potential problems associated with voluntary supply management programs are adequate participation and funding ( which is linked directly to participation ) , free riders ( i.e. , nonparticipants benefit fully from the success of any supply management program but without the supply limits ) , and some export market issues .

since cwt dairy product export support varies with market conditions , exports under this program may not be viewed as a reliable source by less price sensitive markets .

in addition , there is some uncertainty about whether cwt export subsidies are compatible with world trade organization obligations .

