for more than a decade , congress has considered proposals to change the income and rent calculation policies governing the primary federal rental assistance programs .

the current policies base families' eligibility for assistance on their incomes and their contributions toward their rent on a share of their adjusted incomes .

the income - based eligibility system is meant to ensure that limited federal subsidies go to those families that most need them .

the income - based rent structure is intended to ensure that low - income families pay rent that is "affordable" to them , with affordability currently defined as 30% of family income .

the process of calculating families' incomes and , subsequently , their rent contributions , involves a system of inclusions , exclusions , imputations , and deductions .

while the current , rather complicated system is designed to ensure that the most accurate estimate of family income is calculated and that families' financial circumstances are fully captured , it can also lead to confusion among recipients as well as difficulties for local program administrators .

this report provides answers to some of the most common questions about the income and rent policies in federal rental assistance programs , including questions about where these policies came from and how they compare to other federal assistance programs that serve the same or similar purposes or populations .

it is intended to help answer commonly asked questions , as well as provide information to policymakers seeking to understand and evaluate proposed changes to the current system .

the five hud rental assistance programs discussed in this report are the largest , but not the only , rental housing programs administered by the federal government .

hud operates additional housing programs , and the departments of agriculture and the treasury also administer housing programs targeted to low - income families .

these other housing programs serve similar populations as the five hud rental assistance programs , and while there may be some differences in eligibility and benefit structures , they also use many of the same income and rent standards as the five hud programs .

this is important to note because if changes were to be made to the income and rent policies governing hud's rental assistance programs , those changes may also affect other programs .

this section of the report provides brief comparisons of hud's five main rental assistance programs to other federal housing programs as well as other federal benefits programs that serve low - income populations .

hud administers several other programs where funds are distributed to state and local governments or to community providers by formula or competition , and the recipients have the option of using the funds to provide rental assistance to low - income families living in permanent housing .

these programs are the homeless assistance grants , the housing opportunities for persons with aids ( hopwa ) program , and the home investment partnerships program .

these programs differ from the five rental assistance programs already discussed in that they leave a number of decisions about eligibility and subsidy levels to local grantees .

permanent and transitional housing for homeless individuals is funded primarily through the homeless assistance grants .

the homeless assistance grants consist of three separate grant programs: the emergency solutions grant , the continuum of care ( coc ) program , and the rural housing stability assistance program .

unlike the other programs discussed in this report , there is no statutory income requirement for the homeless assistance grants .

the statute provides that eligibility depends on requirements that are specific to the individual programs .

the coc program is the primary source of assistance for permanent and transitional housing .

the program does not have income limitations for determining eligibility .

however , income could be relevant in determining a family's contribution to housing costs .

grant recipients that lease property where homeless clients reside have the option of imposing an "occupancy charge. .

if an occupancy charge is imposed , income is calculated in accordance with the regulations governing income and adjusted income ( 24 c.f.r .

§5.609 and §5.611 ) , and the occupancy charge cannot exceed the greater of 30% of adjusted income , 10% of gross income , or welfare rent .

in cases where homeless clients live in units receiving rental assistance , they must contribute toward rent .

the regulations governing income and adjusted income for the five hud rental assistance programs and discussed in this report apply .

funds through the hopwa program may be used for short - term housing assistance , permanent housing , and supportive services .

hopwa - funded permanent housing may be provided through project - or tenant - based rental assistance as well as in community residences .

residents receiving rental assistance must be low - income , defined as income at or below 80% of area median income , but families or individuals living in community residences need not be low - income .

in each case , the hopwa program requires families to pay rent , and the general regulations governing income and adjusted income apply ( 24 c.f.r .

§5.609 and §5.611 ) .

home program funds can be used for tenant - based rental assistance and to construct , acquire , or rehabilitate properties for rental housing .

families living in home - funded rental housing or receiving rental assistance must be low - income ( at or below 80% of area median income ) ; however , with income targeting , 90% of families must be at or below 60% of area median income .

under home regulations , annual income may be determined in one of three ways: ( 1 ) using the regulations at 24 c.f.r .

section 5.609 , ( 2 ) as reported using the census long form , or ( 3 ) adjusted gross income as reported to the irs .

adjusted income is determined according to the general hud regulations ( 24 c.f.r .

§5.611 ) .

rent for housing that was developed using home funds cannot exceed the lesser of section 8 fair market rents or 30% of the adjusted income of a family whose income is 65% of the area median income .

the home statute and regulations do not set a maximum rent contribution for tenants receiving tenant - based rental assistance , but local jurisdictions must set a minimum rent contribution level .

the u.s. department of agriculture's rural housing service funds the construction of affordable rental housing in rural areas through its section 515 program and ongoing rent subsidies tied to those properties through its section 521 program .

similar to hud rent assistance programs , families are generally eligible to live in section 515 / 521 properties if they have low or very low incomes ( using hud's income limits ) , although , in some cases , moderate - income families may also be eligible .

usda uses the same basic standards as hud for determining family income , adjusted income , and rent .

the u.s. department of the treasury's low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) program does not provide direct rental assistance ; instead , it provides federal tax credits that are used to fund the construction of multifamily properties in which a portion of the units must be offered at below - market rents to lower - income families .

rather than specifying maximum income eligibility for tenants , the lihtc program sets standards that apply at the property level .

in order for a property to receive tax credits under the program and be in compliance with program rules , either 20% of the units must be rented to families with incomes at or below 50% of local area median income , or 40% of units must be rented to families with incomes at or below 60% of median income .

this effectively means that families must have income at either 50% or 60% of ami in order to live in rent - restricted units .

the lihtc program uses the hud definition of income .

low - income families in rent - restricted units pay flat , below - market rents rather than income - based rents .

the below - market rents for lihtc units are set at 30% of either 50% or 60% of ami ( depending on which standard the property meets ) .

the low - income families who receive assistance through the hud rental assistance programs discussed in this report may also qualify for other forms of public assistance .

however , other public assistance programs use different standards for determining family eligibility , family income , and benefit levels .

the policies of the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) assistance program , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) , and the medicaid health insurance program are compared to those of hud housing assistance programs below .

one important difference between these programs and hud's rental assistance programs is that each of these three programs is administered at the state level , whereas the hud rental assistance programs are administered at the local level .

tanf differs significantly from the housing assistance programs in that it provides a block grant to states , and states are left to make most of the decisions about how assistance will be provided within the state .

eligibility for assistance , the type of benefit provided , the amount of assistance , and definitions of income are all set by states , in contrast to hud housing assistance programs , where these aspects of programs are all determined by federal law .

snap ( formerly food stamps ) is more similar to hud rental assistance than tanf , in that eligibility , type of benefit provided , and amount of assistance are all set by federal law .

however , the federal eligibility standards differ substantially from those in hud rental assistance programs .

families are eligible for snap benefits if they meet income eligibility standards based on federal poverty guidelines that generally apply to the entire country , rather than the local area median income limits used in the hud rental assistance programs .

similar to hud rental assistance programs , family income is determined for snap based on federal definitions that include some sources of income , exclude other sources of income , and allow for certain deductions .

however , what counts as income and what is deducted from income in snap is different than in hud rental assistance programs .

additionally , snap law's "categorical eligibility" rules permit some families to qualify for snap benefits based on their participation in other programs .

hud rental assistance programs do not have any "categorical eligibility" provisions .

the income eligibility standards under medicaid are quite different from those of the hud rental assistance programs .

whereas hud programs use federal income and eligibility standards , the medicaid program uses a mix of federal and state standards .

under the affordable care act ( aca ) , as amended , states were required to transition to a new income counting rule based on modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) when determining eligibility for most of medicaid's nonelderly populations .

under the medicaid magi income counting rules , the state will look at the individual's magi , deduct an amount equal to 5% of the federal poverty level , which the law provides as a standard disregard , and compare that income to the new income standards set by each state in coordination with the federal government to determine if the individual meets the program's eligibility requirements .

magi is defined as the internal revenue code's ( irc's ) adjusted gross income ( agi ) plus certain foreign earned income and tax - exempt interest as calculated for tax purposes .

agi reflects a number of deductions , including trade and business deductions , losses from sale of property , and alimony payments , increased by tax - exempt interest and income earned by u.s. citizens or residents living abroad .

from there , various types of income not included in agi are added to calculate magi depending on the particular program ( eg , medicare , medicaid , and aca exchange and premium tax credits ) .

additionally , under medicaid regulations , particular types of income may be subtracted from agi to calculate magi for determining medicaid eligibility .

the inclusions and exclusions under magi differ substantially from the inclusions and exclusions used for determining adjusted gross income under hud's rental assistance programs .

certain groups ( eg , individuals who are eligible for medicaid through another federal or state assistance program such as foster care children and individuals receiving ssi , and the elderly ) are exempt from income eligibility determinations for medicaid based on magi .

prior law's income determination rules under medicaid will continue to be used for determining eligibility for these groups .

federal requirements and options combined with state choices and definitions make generalizations about medicaid eligibility policies for the magi - exempted groups difficult .

