the united states congress has a long history of engagement on u.s. policy toward sudan — since the end of apartheid in south africa , there is no country ( now countries ) in africa on which congress has focused greater attention .

this sustained , bipartisan focus has been driven in part by diverse advocacy groups and public awareness campaigns on issues in sudan ranging from famine to modern - day slavery , religious persecution , genocide , and other violations of human rights and humanitarian law .

terrorism concerns have overlapped with these policy debates .

peace and stability within and between sudan and south sudan remain among the highest u.s. foreign policy priorities in africa , yet these goals remain elusive , even after several years of seemingly positive momentum and multiple peace accords .

in 2005 , sudan's islamist government in khartoum and the southern insurgency known as the sudan people's liberation movement / army ( splm / a ) signed a peace agreement to end africa's longest running civil war .

that deal paved the way for a southern referendum on self - determination , after which south sudan , led by the splm in juba , seceded in july 2011 .

violence and insecurity continue to plague the two countries , however , as evidenced by the presence of roughly one - third of the u.n. peacekeepers deployed worldwide , who are stationed in the two sudans as part of three different operations .

in both countries , overlapping conflicts between security forces and armed groups , among ethnic groups , and between nomadic and farming communities have caused extensive displacement and human suffering .

international actors continue to press the sudans to resolve their outstanding disputes so post - war recovery and reconciliation can proceed .

the 2005 peace agreement did not resolve several significant issues between the governments in khartoum and juba .

they have continued deliberations on once - shared resources , such as oil ; disputed areas along their shared 1,200 mile border ; and other related security issues .

progress in the talks has been halting since separation , with a partial agreement on security and economic cooperation reached on september 27 , 2012 ( see appendix a ) .

the parties have agreed to a demilitarized border zone and a joint border verification and monitoring mission designed to defuse tensions along the border .

the two countries' security forces remained heavily deployed along or beyond their respective sides of their shared border after separation and have clashed on several occasions .

the implementation of agreements previously reached by the parties has not kept pace with international expectations , leading to some skepticism about this latest accord .

the september agreement failed to resolve the status of several contested border areas , including the disputed abyei region .

the deployment of peacekeepers to abyei in mid - 2011 defused a violent stand - off between sudanese and south sudanese forces , but the majority of abyei's residents remain displaced , and a political resolution remains outstanding .

conflict has escalated in the past year in the sudanese border states of southern kordofan and blue nile , between sudan's military and the splm - north , insurgents once formally aligned with south sudan's ruling party .

fighting in these states is driven by local grievances against khartoum and has severely affected more than half a million people .

access by relief agencies is extremely limited .

another 205,000 have fled as refugees to south sudan and ethiopia .

u.n. and independent human rights investigations suggest that the sudanese military may be responsible for war crimes in the two states .

these conflicts and the ongoing hostilities in sudan's western darfur region complicate u.s. relations with both countries and have led the obama administration to defer efforts to begin normalizing relations with sudan .

critics of current mediation efforts suggest that a piecemeal approach to sudan's overlapping conflicts has led to a focus on resolving one conflict at the expense of another , thus prolonging the violence .

some in congress and the administration have called for a comprehensive agreement that promotes democratic reform and "lasting peace throughout all of sudan. .

khartoum has long resisted efforts to combine discussions with various opponents to the regime , preferring to negotiate separately with the splm , the darfur groups , and others .

this approach has yielded some positive outcomes , but it has also resulted in partially implemented agreements that do not fully address regional grievances or resolve disputes that are fundamentally national issues .

in darfur , a 2011 peace agreement supported by the international community has failed to incorporate the region's largest armed groups .

deteriorating security conditions in darfur have prompted the state department to question sudan's commitment to implement the agreement .

independent observers suggest that the conflict "is far from approaching a sustainable resolution," despite a relative reduction in violence from the height of the crisis .

u.s. special envoy for sudan and south sudan princeton lyman outlined his view of the challenge in august 2012: sudan cannot deal with the ongoing troubles in darfur , southern kordofan , blue nile , the east , and elsewhere in the country with a system that does not meet the demands for greater political space , for greater sharing of wealth and opportunity and for greater democracy .

trying to suppress those demands militarily has led to continued conflicts .

and the conflicts have in turn led to new accusations of human rights violations .

this is a vicious circle that keeps sudan from a new dawn .

groups opposed to the ruling party in khartoum have yet to unite behind a clearly articulated common vision for the country's future .

the major armed groups have , however , pledged cooperation toward their near - term goal of regime change in khartoum .

the sudans appeared to engage in what some termed an economic "war of attrition" with each other for much of 2012 , creating mounting hardship and domestic pressure on both sides .

south sudan halted oil production in january 2012 because of unresolved disputes with sudan over export arrangements and revenues from once - shared reserves , leaving both countries facing massive budget shortfalls and inflation .

the two sides reached a preliminary agreement in august 2012 on financial arrangements , including southern oil exports ; the september deal may allow production and exports to resume by mid - 2013 .

given their revenue losses , both governments have pursued austerity budgets in 2012 and prioritized security spending , leaving little for social services or development .

as appendix b indicates , population displacement and food insecurity are significant problems in both countries .

both governments have looked to donors and lenders to make up the near - term fiscal gap created by lost oil revenue , thus pushing the united states and others to make difficult decisions regarding fundamental strategic interests in the region and the relative priority of their objectives .

for more than fifty years , north and south sudan were unified as a country , but divided internally .

together they constituted the largest country in africa , with territory roughly equal in size to the united states east of the mississippi river .

their separation in 2011 followed decades of civil war described broadly as a conflict between the "arab" muslim north and "african" christian and animist south .

ongoing conflict and unrest within and between the now - separate countries is indicative of the complex political and cultural divisions that have plagued sudan for decades .

after sudan gained independence from anglo - egyptian rule in 1956 , successive governments in khartoum perpetuated development disparities between the north and south that were , in part , a legacy of colonial administration .

northern - led regimes espousing islamist ideals have dominated much of sudan's modern political history , often pressing policies aimed at forcing distant provinces to conform to the center — khartoum — rather than working to accommodate the local customs and institutions of the country's diverse population .

instead of forging a common sudanese identity , these policies exacerbated sudan's racial , cultural , and religious differences .

government attempts to arabize and islamize the countryside ( the so - called "periphery" ) met with resistance , not only from southerners , but from various ethnic and regional groups that felt marginalized by central authorities .

dissatisfaction in the south sparked two related insurgencies against khartoum ( 1955-1972 and 1983-2005 ) .

groups in other regions rose up periodically against the government , citing local grievances , and some ultimately joined the southern rebels .

revenues from sudan's oil reserves , which were discovered in 1978 and are largely concentrated in the south , primarily benefitted the north , in particular state elites in khartoum .

oil money also financed the government's countering of domestic insurgencies with force — first in the south , and then also in the west and east .

sudan's counter - insurgency campaigns did not discriminate between fighters and civilians , and the government repeatedly questioned the neutrality of international aid agencies and restricted their access to affected populations .

the rebel groups persisted , and among them the spla was the most successful in gaining ground against the more heavily armed sudanese military .

the spla faced internal divisions in the 1990s , largely along ethnic lines , that khartoum fueled these splits by financing and arming from breakaway factions .

along the north - south border , khartoum also used its oil revenues to finance local arab militias , collectively referred to as the popular defense forces ( pdf ) , as a front line against the south .

civil war took the heaviest toll on the south — more than two million deaths ; massive , long - term displacement ; and decades of suspended development — but it also came at a significant cost to khartoum .

by 2002 , as the government and the splm prepared to sign the first in a series of accords that would end the war three years later , another armed uprising was brewing , in darfur .

in response , as it had done with the pdf , khartoum trained and armed local arab militia , often referred to as the janjaweed , to join with the military to conduct what then - secretary of state colin powell termed in 2004 a "scorched earth policy toward the rebels and the african civilian population. .

secretary powell and president bush declared these actions to constitute genocide .

the conflict triggered a humanitarian emergency in which some two million darfuris were displaced and another 250,000 became refugees in neighboring chad .

as with the north - south war , casualty estimates in the darfur conflict vary extensively .

studies suggest that between 100,000 and 500,000 died in the conflict's early years , some directly in violence and many more from malnutrition and disease .

for international actors pressing for a north - south peace agreement , darfur considerably complicated efforts to engage khartoum .

despite their formal separation , sudan and south sudan remain linked by — and divided over — a range of shared interests and outstanding disputes .

the cpa did not define the relationship between north and south in the event of a southern vote for separation , and arrangements on multiple issues were left unresolved when sudan split .

among the disputed issues are those related to their shared border , citizenship , and financial arrangements , including those pertaining to revenues from the sale of south sudanese oil that transits sudan for export .

other arrangements called for in the cpa , such as resolution of the final status of the contested border region of abyei and the implementation of "popular consultation processes" for the people of southern kordofan ( see below ) , have yet to be fully implemented .

negotiations on these issues began in ethiopia in 2010 , under the auspices of the au high - level implementation panel on sudan ( auhip ) , led by former south african president thabo mbeki .

donors who had played a key role in the peace process , including the united states , offered incentives to encourage khartoum to recognize the result of the south's referendum and ensure a peaceful transition .

sudan's military operations in the borderlands and related human rights violations have discouraged the delivery of support to khartoum .

on both sides , many other potential peace dividends have remained out of reach .

the republic of south sudan emerged in 2011 not only as the world's newest nation , but also as one of its least developed .

after almost 40 years of nearly continuous war , during which more than four million people were displaced , its human development indicators are among the world's lowest , infrastructure is sparse , and literacy rates are extremely low .

almost half the population may face food insecurity in 2012 .

south sudan enjoys a bounty of natural resources and its agricultural potential is enormous .

however , with only one paved highway ( funded by usaid ) , running roughly 120 miles from juba to the ugandan border , accessing regional and world markets will require years of large - scale investment .

the government's decision to halt oil production and consequently cut its 2012 development budget , is expected to significantly delay the pace of post - war recovery , despite considerable international good will and donor resources .

the majority of the population has appeared ready to give the government latitude and support , in spite of rising pessimism about the economy and the government's ability to deliver services .

the republic of sudan faces an array of social , political , and economic challenges that are in many ways as daunting as those confronting its new southern neighbor .

president bashir's national congress party has thus far staved off the large - scale popular protests that several north african and middle eastern counterparts faced during the "arab spring," but economic pressure is mounting .

sudan's intelligence and security forces have been quick to respond to student - led uprisings that gained momentum in mid - 2012 .

the government has reportedly warned against the public use of excessive force against protestors to avoid creating martyrs for the movement .

still , several protesters were killed by police in nyala , in darfur , in late july .

reports of torture and lengthy detention without trial have prompted criticism from the u.s. government and others .

some analysts suggest that rifts within the ncp and the armed services are increasingly apparent , and many contend that decision - making has been consolidated among hardliners in the military .

the united states has found itself pursuing multiple , and at times conflicting , aims in sudan .

balancing these objectives has occasionally placed congress and the executive branch at odds .

ending the human suffering and related human rights violations associated with sudan's distinct but overlapping conflicts has been the overarching goal of u.s. policymakers for more than two decades .

with finite attention and resources , however , u.s. policy toward sudan has at times appeared to many to prioritize resolving one conflict at the expense of another .

the united states played a key role in facilitating the north - south peace process and ensuring that the parties signed the cpa .

critics of u.s. policy during the cpa period suggest , however , that the united states and other influential international actors shifted their focus from monitoring and maintaining progress on cpa implementation to the unfolding disaster in darfur .

in doing so , they failed to sustain pressure on juba and khartoum to meet certain critical benchmarks in the peace process .

when attention shifted back to the south as its 2011 referendum approached , darfur mediation efforts appeared to become a secondary priority .

in late september 2012 , as the united states and others cautiously welcomed the latest agreement between the sudans , the saf reportedly conducted air strikes against civilian targets in southern kordofan and north darfur .

negotiating humanitarian access to afflicted communities during these conflicts has required compromise , and at times has moderated calls for a more confrontational approach toward bashir's regime .

similarly , u.s. pursuit of counterterrorism objectives in the broader region has led successive administrations to seek dialogue and cooperation from khartoum .

u.s. policy toward sudan evolved from one of isolation in the early 1990s under president bill clinton to a policy under president george w. bush that focused on achieving reforms through increased diplomatic engagement with khartoum .

the clinton administration , which named sudan a state sponsor of terrorism in 1993 , identified sudan as a "rogue state" and supported ethiopia , eritrea , and uganda as "frontline states" to contain khartoum , and to provide support to the spla .

in 1996 , under western pressure , sudan expelled osama bin laden from the country .

relations between washington and khartoum deteriorated further in august 1998 , when , in response to the u.s. embassy bombings in east africa , president clinton ordered the bombing of a pharmaceutical factory in khartoum purportedly linked to bin laden .

by 1999 , the u.s. policy approach was shifting , and president clinton appointed former member of congress harry johnston to serve as a special envoy to work with allies in support of a new regional peace process for sudan .

in early 2001 , under president bush , the united states and sudan began talks on terrorism , and the bush administration formed a sudan task force to review and improve coordination of u.s. policy .

president bush appointed another special envoy , former senator john danforth , who took a new approach to the north - south war by proposing four confidence - building measures to the parties: a ceasefire in nuba mountains , days and zones of tranquility for humanitarian access in the south , the formation of a u.s. - led commission to investigate slavery , and the cessation of attacks on civilians .

both parties were receptive , and the peace process moved forward .

throughout the cpa talks , the u.s. government never expressed a preference for unity or separation , although sympathies for the southern cause were apparent .

the u.s. embassy in khartoum , which had suspended operations in 1996 , re - opened in 2002 .

by spring 2004 , attention on darfur was building , coinciding with commemorations of the 10 th anniversary of the rwandan genocide .

in september 2004 , based on an investigation into reported atrocities in darfur , secretary of state colin powell testified before congress that the government of sudan and the janjaweed militias had committed genocide in darfur .

in his testimony , he noted a coordinated , "consistent and widespread pattern of atrocities — killings , rapes , burning of villages — committed by janjaweed and government forces against non - arab villagers. .

powell directly implicated the military in the attacks , and declared there to be evidence of a specific intent to destroy "a group in whole or in part" under the 1948 convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide , to which sudan is party .

meanwhile , an international commission of inquiry on darfur established by the u.n. security council recommended that a list of individuals be investigated for possible crimes against humanity , leading to the security council's first referral to the icc .

the commission of inquiry differed with the u.s. determination that the situation in darfur met the legal standard of genocide .

from 2004 onward , the u.s. media focused substantial attention on darfur , and the coverage , combined with advocacy pressure , led to calls for military intervention .

bush administration officials weighed concerns that action on darfur might undermine the north - south peace process , however , and the international community struggled to get sudan's compliance to deploy a more robust peacekeeping operation to the region .

then - deputy secretary of state robert zoellick was sent to mediate a peace agreement for darfur , but the violence continued .

by late 2006 , bush envoy andrew natsios threatened a "plan b" if attacks on civilians persisted and khartoum continued to oppose the au - u.n. force ; the details of the plan were never made public .

the icc issued its first arrest warrants related to darfur in 2007 , and in 2008 the prosecutor applied to the court for an arrest warrant for bashir .

the bush administration , which had declined to veto the icc referral despite its opposition to the icc , rejected calls by khartoum for the security council to suspend its referral of the icc cases , prompting sudan to deny a visa to then - special envoy rich williamson , who stated in congressional testimony: the government of sudan , the arab militias , and rebel leaders all have blood on their hands .

make no mistake ; this 'genocide in slow motion' continues.... khartoum's policy in darfur has been the same tactic they used in the south , to 'divide and destroy. .

by manipulating tribal divisions , creating militias from arab tribes , forcing people from their homes , and separating them from their tribal leaders , the government has created a lawless environment in darfur that it can no longer control .

the united states faces a complex range of policy options as it considers the way forward for engagement with the two sudans .

members of congress may debate whether they concur with the administration's current approach or wish to guide u.s. policy toward either country in a different direction .

previous congressional action on sudan may provide lessons and examples .

advocates and experts may have new ideas on the merits of various "carrots" and "sticks," or other policy options to promote peace and stability in both countries .

given the complexity of u.s. relations with the sudans , president obama has continued to use a special envoy to coordinate policy toward both countries .

the envoy oversees an expanded team of state department personnel that includes the sudan and south sudan country desks .

the president appointed a u.s .

ambassador to south sudan in 2011 , after independence ; the united states has not had an ambassador to sudan since 1997 .

the embassy in khartoum is led by a chargé d'affaires .

the appointment of an ambassador would likely be viewed by khartoum as a key step toward improving relations , and some contend it would raise the caliber of the bilateral dialogue .

critics contend that such an appointment would signal that the united states accepts engagement with khartoum , in spite of the regime's abuses .

if the president were to appoint an individual for the post , the senate nomination hearing and vote may serve as a venue for congress to reexamine u.s. engagement with sudan .

possible security concerns related to enhancing the u.s. diplomatic presence in khartoum also may factor into executive branch and congressional decisions on this issue .

trust between khartoum and the united states is low .

khartoum seeks to improve the relationship , cognizant that this might bolster its international standing and aid its efforts to reengage with multilateral financial institutions .

in sudan's view , the united states has repeatedly "moved the goalpost" on lifting sanctions .

from the perspective of many u.s. officials , though , sudan continues to commit "violations of human rights and modern rules of war ... so grave as to make it impossible to proceed" with efforts to modify the current sanctions regime .

sudan's history of partially implemented peace accords also remains a prominent consideration for many in congress and the administration .

should the administration decide to ease certain sanctions against sudan , possibly in exchange for concessions from khartoum , changes to some restrictions would require congressional action .

for the administration to remove sudan's state sponsor of terrorism designation , for example , the secretary of state must report to congress that there has been both a change in leadership and in policy in khartoum .

public law requires that certain other restrictions against the government remain in place until khartoum complies with specific conditions outlined in p.l .

108-497 , p.l .

109-344 , and current appropriations legislation .

congress continues to monitor ongoing reports of serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law in parts of sudan .

khartoum's crackdowns on peaceful anti - government protests in 2012 , its ongoing violations of basic rights and freedoms across the country , and its perceived tolerance for violent rhetoric espoused by salafist clerics all complicate the u.s. - sudan relationship , as do its repeated air strikes in south sudanese territory .

khartoum continues to use its sovereignty as a shield — access by aid groups , human rights monitors , and peacekeepers to populations in conflict areas is routinely denied by the government , in contravention of international humanitarian law .

the united states and the united nations have condemned attacks against civilians and stressed the need for improved humanitarian access to southern kordofan and blue nile , but government restrictions on aid to opposition - held areas continue .

the obama administration has called the humanitarian crisis "profoundly unacceptable," and khartoum's "business - as - usual approach .. .

intolerable. .

some in the advocacy community , invoking the "responsibility to protect" concept , contend that the international community should do more to protect civilians — namely increase diplomatic pressure to negotiate immediate humanitarian access .

should khartoum continue to impede access , though , some proponents have urged collective measures such as imposing sanctions , establishing safe zones and / or no - fly zones , or deploying a protection force to the two states .

some have called for international actors to deliver aid across the borders of south sudan and ethiopia into the afflicted areas with or without sudan's permission , as congress first authorized the u.s. government to do in sudan in 1999 .

the u.n. security council remains divided on how to respond to sudan's ongoing violations of human rights and unsc resolutions .

proposals to extend the arms embargo and ban offensive military flights beyond darfur would likely be opposed by some on the council .

similarly , the deployment of a u.n. - mandated force to the two states without khartoum's consent appears improbable , unless a ceasefire is reached .

there appears to be little appetite for foreign military intervention , such as the implementation of a no - fly zone , an option once advocated for darfur by individuals now in the obama administration .

russia and china , which abstained from voting to authorize a no - fly zone for libya in 2011 , now appear adamantly opposed to the concept in other conflict situations , such as syria , viewing it as a potential vehicle to pursue regime change .

should sudan and south sudan fail to make further progress on negotiations , and should khartoum continue to delay implementation of the tripartite proposal for humanitarian access , the security council may be inclined to impose economic sanctions on one or both parties .

some members of the 112 th congress have proposed additional punitive measures on sudan .

the sudan peace , security , and accountability act of 2012 , h.r .

4169 , which has been referred to committee , would direct the president to develop a strategy to end serious human rights abuses and promote peace and democratic reform in sudan .

it would impose sanctions on any person or government found to contribute to sudan's capacity to commit abuses through the transfer of military equipment and on any icc member state that fails to execute an icc arrest warrant .

while the relationship between washington and juba , which has been characterized by president obama and secretary clinton as a "partnership," is markedly warmer than that with khartoum , it too is tempered by concerns about human rights abuses and corruption .

the united states has invested considerable foreign assistance resources to lay the foundation for development of south sudan .

tensions between khartoum and juba threaten that progress .

under austerity measures , juba has allocated more than half its budget to security , much of which goes to salaries for soldiers and maintaining readiness .

some observers view this as emblematic of patronage to a bloated military at the expense of development priorities that are being met in part with u.s. assistance funds .

others , however , express concern that south sudan's internal security situation has appeared increasingly fluid in the past year .

they argue that maintaining the morale and loyalty of the army to the government may be key to ensuring stability and state viability in the near term , and to protecting donor investments in the country's development .

alleged support by south sudan's government for insurgent groups in sudan further complicates u.s. - south sudan relations , and the obama administration maintains its position that the conflicts in southern kordofan , blue nile , and darfur must be resolved peacefully , rather than militarily .

some sudan watchers contend , however , that south sudan's long armed struggle against khartoum , and the pressure it placed on the government , was the only effective tool to ensure that the aspirations of southerners were achieved .

the splm - n leadership argue that they are willing to negotiate with khartoum , but that they , like the spla before them , have been forced to fight against government aggression for peace , democracy , and justice .

the goal of protecting civilians in south sudan raises key questions for congress , given ongoing insecurity in parts of the country .

south sudan's security forces have the primary responsibility for that role , but their capacity is limited .

as congress considers the administration's security assistance requests for these forces , it may seek to assess the extent to which such support might both enhance their capacity and improve their behavior .

human rights groups continue to report abuses by some units , and incidents between various armed actors , including some elements of the spla , and relief agencies — ranging from the commandeering of vehicles and raiding of aid compounds to violence — are also of serious concern .

unmiss , which is charged with advising and assisting the south sudanese forces to fulfill their civilian protection role , also has a mandate to directly protect civilians under imminent threat of violence , "within its capabilities and in its areas of deployment. .

the lack of infrastructure in south sudan and the peripheral areas of sudan significantly complicates these efforts , as does the shortage of helicopters available for u.n. operations .

furthermore , some have questioned unmiss's capacity to protect civilians from harm by the spla , should the need arise .

neither unmiss nor the spla have the capacity to protect civilians from air strikes by sudan — some , including a former u.s. special envoy , have suggested that the united states should provide south sudan with anti - aircraft weapons to deter and defend against future attacks .

should the administration take that step , it would undoubtedly worsen relations with khartoum .

as discussed in this report , the deteriorating relationship between juba and khartoum in the past year led south sudan to cease oil production , thereby cutting its primary source of revenue and further squeezing sudan , which was already struggling under the loss of the south's resources .

after decades of war , distrust between the two governments is high .

the september 2012 agreements reached by the parties are a positive step , but the border remains a tinderbox .

the two have spent more than a decade in negotiations , with some notable successes — namely the peaceful circumstances of their separation in 2011 — but several previously signed agreements remain only partially implemented , thus fueling renewed conflict .

the economic and political pressures on both governments are a reminder that the possibility of state collapse in either country cannot be discounted .

in the near term , although they now exist as separate countries , sudan and south sudan remain bound together in u.s. policy , and executive and congressional decisions that affect u.s. relations with one country may , for better or worse , impact the other .

appendix a .

status of negotiations appendix b .

the humanitarian situation appendix c. u.s. foreign assistance to the sudans appendix d. acronyms acronyms amis: african union mission in sudan auhip: african union high - level implementation panel cpa: comprehensive peace agreement ddpd: doha document for peace in darfur dra: darfur regional authority dup: democratic unionist party ( an opposition party in sudan ) jem: justice and equality movement ( an insurgent group in darfur ) ljm: liberty and justice movement ncf: national consensus forces ( an alliance of opposition parties in sudan ) ncp: national congress party ( sudan's ruling party ) nif: national islamic front pcp: popular congress party ( an opposition party in sudan ) pdf: popular defense forces ( sudanese government - backed militia ) saf: sudan armed forces ( the sudanese military ) sdbz: safe demilitarized border zone slm / a: sudan liberation movement / army ( an insurgent group in darfur ) splm / a: sudan people's liberation movement / army ( south sudan's ruling party and its army , respectively ) splm / a - n: sudan people's liberation movement / army – north ( formerly a recognized opposition party in sudan , became an insurgent group in 2011 ) srf: sudan revolutionary front ( an alliance of insurgent groups in sudan ) unamid: united nations – african union hybrid mission in darfur unisfa: united nations interim security force for abyei unmis: united nations mission in sudan unmiss: united nations mission in south sudan appendix e. peacekeeping operation .

