the prospect of drone use in domestic surveillance operations has engendered considerable debate among americans of various political ideologies .

opponents of drone surveillance have complained that the use of unmanned aircraft on american soil infringes upon fundamental privacy interests and the ability to freely associate with others .

some are specifically concerned about the possibility of turning military technology inward to surveil american citizens .

proponents have responded by emphasizing their potential benefits , which may include protecting public safety , patrolling our nation's borders , and investigating and enforcing environmental and criminal law violations .

the tension between security and privacy interests is not new , but has been heightened by the explosion of surveillance technology in recent decades .

police officers who were once relegated to naked eye observations may soon have , or in some cases already possess , the capability to see through walls or track an individual's movements from the sky .

one might question , then: what is the proper balance between the necessity of the government to keep people safe and the privacy needs of individuals ? .

as some polls suggest , while the public supports drone usage in certain circumstances , they are less enthusiastic about using them as part of routine law enforcement activity .

the fourth amendment to the united states constitution safeguards americans' privacy and prevents excessive government intrusion by prohibiting "unreasonable searches and seizures. .

courts have long grappled with how to apply the text of this 18 th century provision to 20 th century technologies .

although the supreme court has the final say in the interpretation of the fourth amendment and other constitutional safeguards , congress and , in many cases , the president are free to institute more stringent restrictions upon government surveillance operations .

this report first explores the potential uses of drones in the domestic sphere by federal , state , and local governments .

it then surveys current fourth amendment jurisprudence , including cases surrounding privacy in the home , privacy in public spaces , location tracking , manned aerial surveillance , and those involving the national border .

next , it considers how existing jurisprudence may inform current and proposed drone uses .

it then describes the various legislative measures introduced in the 113 th congress to address the legal and policy issues surrounding drones .

finally , it briefly identifies several alternative approaches that may constrain the potential scope of drone surveillance .

the fourth amendment's story is one of continuity and change .

core values such as privacy and protection from excessive and arbitrary government intrusion are always within its sweep .

a continuing question , though , is how the demands of its protection apply to an ever - changing society in which new and pervasive forms of technology are increasingly common .

although there are numerous rules and exceptions throughout the supreme court's fourth amendment jurisprudence , this section will explore those most pertinent to domestic drone use .

in short , the fourth amendment regulates when , where , and how the government may conduct searches and seizures .

the amendment provides , in relevant part: "the right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated[.] .

the fourth amendment does not apply to all government acts , but only to those that constitute a search .

so when does government monitoring constitute a fourth amendment "search" for which a warrant is generally required ? .

initially , courts' assessment focused on the specific area being investigated .

consider the 1928 case olmstead v. united state s .

there , the supreme court held that police wiretaps of the defendant's home telephone did not constitute a fourth amendment search because the police did not trespass onto olmstead's property to intercept his conversation .

the court's thinking at the time was that if the person's home , tangible property , or papers were not physically invaded , then no search in the constitutional sense occurred .

almost 40 years later , the court shifted focus from property to privacy interests .

in katz v. united states , decided in 1967 , the court held that an fbi agent's use of a bug to listen to the private conversations of mr. katz while in a telephone booth violated his fourth amendment rights .

although he was in a public telephone booth and there was no physical invasion , the court noted that what a person "seeks to preserve private , even in an area accessible to the public , may be constitutionally protected. .

one of the modern fourth amendment tests relied upon by courts in assessing whether government monitoring constitutes a "search" derives from justice harlan's concurrence in katz .

it considers whether the person has a subjective expectation of privacy in the area to be searched and whether society is prepared to deem that expectation reasonable .

although the court said in katz that the fourth amendment "protects people not places," justice harlan noted that determining what "protection it affords people ... requires reference to a ' place .' .

and as justice scalia observed when writing for a majority of the court in united states v. jones , a fourth amendment search occurs , "at a minimum," where "the government obtains information by physically intruding on a constitutionally protected area. .

the majority in jones indicated that the reasonable expectation of privacy test was never intended to replace the property - based approach used in earlier cases , but merely augment it .

so where do individuals enjoy the most fourth amendment protection ? .

the least ? .

why does the location dictate the level of protection ? .

and how does technology affect society's expectation of privacy ? .

when analyzing domestic drone use under the fourth amendment , a reviewing court may be informed by cases surrounding privacy in the home , privacy in public spaces , location tracking , manned aerial surveillance , those involving the national border , and warrantless searches under the special needs doctrine .

as evidenced by the foregoing , the constitutionality of domestic drone surveillance may depend upon the context in which such surveillance takes place .

whether a targeted individual is at home , in his backyard , in the public square , or near a national border will play a large role in determining whether he is entitled to privacy .

equally important is the sophistication of the technology used by law enforcement and the duration of the surveillance .

both of these factors will likely inform a reviewing court's reasoning as to whether the government's surveillance constitutes an unreasonable search in violation of the fourth amendment .

although the supreme court is the final arbiter of the constitution , congress and the president can provide for greater regulation of drones than the fourth amendment requires .

congress has taken such steps over the years to address government surveillance of communications in transit ( commonly known as wiretapping ) , communications in storage such as e - mails , bank records , and health records , among a host of other private information .

several measures have been introduced in the 113 th congress that would restrict the domestic use of drones , and establish arguably greater constraints on their usage than the fourth amendment requires .

several bills were prompted by a general concern for potential privacy intrusions by federal and state law enforcement and executive agencies .

the introduction of drones into american airspace raises many legal and policy questions .

for instance , how far can the government go in its attempts to maintain security and ensure that laws are enforced ? .

what level of privacy should americans expect in an age where technology facilitating the acquisition of personal information expands at a phenomenal pace ? .

currently , there is a vast body of fourth amendment law that governs the circumstances in which law enforcement must obtain a warrant before conducting surveillance .

however , the sheer sophistication of drone technology and the sensors they can carry may remove drones from this traditional fourth amendment framework .

beyond the courts and the constitution , what role should congress and the president play in regulating the introduction of drones inside the united states ? .

as the integration of drones for domestic surveillance operations quickly accelerates , these questions and others will be posed to the american people and their political leaders .

