since its inception , the higher education act ( hea ) of 1965 has had a focus on increasing the postsecondary access and achievement of disadvantaged students , including low - income and first - generation college students .

the two major approaches are financial support and supportive services .

the pell grant program is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting primarily low - income postsecondary education students .

the pell grant program is estimated to provide approximately $30.1 billion to approximately 7.6 million undergraduate students in fy2019 .

the trio programs are the primary federal programs providing support services to disadvantaged students to promote achievement in postsecondary education .

the higher education amendments of 1968 ( p.l .

90-575 ) consolidated a "trio" of programs under one overall program .

the number of trio programs has since expanded to six , and they were funded at a total of $950 million in fy2017 .

collectively , the trio programs are designed to identify qualified individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds , prepare them for a program of postsecondary education , provide support services for postsecondary students , motivate and prepare students for doctoral programs , and train individuals serving or preparing for service in the trio programs .

trio services support the federal policy goals of secondary school completion , college preparation , college enrollment , undergraduate completion , and graduate school preparation .

there are six main trio programs ( in descending order of funding levels ) : trio upward bound ( ub ) program , trio student support services ( sss ) program , trio talent search ( ts ) program , trio educational opportunity centers ( eoc ) program , ronald e. mcnair postbaccalaureate achievement ( mcnair ) program , and trio staff development ( training ) program .

the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) of 2008 made several changes most recently to the trio programs to increase accountability , rigor , and uniformity and to ensure that all disadvantaged students had access to the programs .

in 2010 , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) released the final regulations to implement the heoa trio program provisions .

this report serves as an introduction to the trio programs .

the initial section describes the provisions of each of the programs , as reauthorized by heoa .

the subsequent section provides a brief overview of recent funding and participation trends for each of the programs .

this is followed by a description of unique provisions and regulations that are common to the trio programs , highlighting key heoa and regulatory changes .

a concluding section presents the key findings and results of recent program evaluations and assessments .

the federal trio programs provide support services and some financial assistance primarily to low - income , first - generation college students to help them succeed academically and encourage them to advance through much of the educational pipeline .

the trio programs work together to provide a pipeline of support services from secondary school through undergraduate education .

each of the trio programs is designed to serve a different target population of participants through a different level of education .

the following subsections describe the purpose , eligible recipients , program participants , program intensity and activities , and outcome criteria of each of the trio programs and are ordered according to their sequence in the educational pipeline: ub primarily supports the college preparation of secondary students , ts primarily supports the postsecondary enrollment of secondary students , eoc primarily supports the postsecondary enrollment of adult students , sss primarily supports the completion of undergraduate education , mcnair primarily supports graduate school preparation , and training supports trio staff development .

for a comparison of eligible grant recipients , program participant requirements , and required program activities , see table 1 , table 2 , and table 3 , respectively .

the higher education act ( hea ) , as amended , authorized a total of $900 million for fy2009 and such sums as necessary for each of fy2010-fy2014 .

of the trio authorization , mcnair was authorized at least $11 million for each of fy2009-fy2014 .

the authorization of appropriations was intended to provide guidance regarding the appropriate amount of funds to carry out the authorized activities of a program .

the authorization was extended through fy2015 under the general education provisions act ( gepa ) , although the programs have continued to receive appropriations .

the annual discretionary appropriation is a single amount for all of the trio programs .

the appropriation provides budget authority to the u.s. department of education to incur obligations and authorize payments for the specified programs .

an examination of appropriations over the last decade shows that the annual appropriation increased from $828 million in fy2008 to $853 million in fy2010 before declining to $796 million in fy2013 and increasing to $950 million in fy2017 .

with the increased appropriation in fy2017 , the actual fy2017 discretionary appropriation exceeds the fy2008 inflation - adjusted appropriation level of $943 million ( in fy2017 dollars ) .

the secretary allocates the discretionary appropriation to the various trio programs .

table 4 displays appropriations and allocations over the latest 10-year period .

through the college cost reduction and access act ( ccraa ; p.l .

110-84 ) , ed received a mandatory appropriation of $57 million for each of fy2008-fy2011 to make four - year awards to 186 unsuccessful ub applicants from the fy2007 competition that scored above 70 .

the mandatory funding was appropriated , in part , to fund several historically black colleges and universities that lost their awards in the fy2007 competition .

the trio programs served over 820,000 participants in each of fy2008-fy2010 ( table 5 ) .

in each of fy2011-fy2015 , the trio programs served fewer than 790,000 participants primarily as a result of a reduction in the number of ts participants .

the number of ts participants declined , in part , as a result of ed reducing the ts allocation from $142 million in fy2010 to $139 million in fy2011 and establishing $460 as the maximum cost per participant in the fy2011 competition in response to the heoa amendments , which increased the intensity of ts services .

in fy2016 and fy2017 , with the increased appropriations levels , the number of participants also increased to more than 810,000 in each year .

the fy2017 appropriations agreement instructed ed to increase grant amounts for continuation awards ( ts , eoc , and sss ) and increase the number of grantees awarded in the fy2017 competitions ( ub and mcnair ) .

trio participation data reflect the number of participants served by each program .

the intensity of services received and the duration of participation differs for each program and among individuals in the same program .

several statutory provisions common to most of the trio programs were amended or added by the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) of 2008 .

the heoa made several important changes to the grant - making process , which impact the way the department of education administers the programs and the way grantees implement their funds .

through the heoa , congress also attempted to standardize the grant cycle and maximize the numbers of disadvantaged students participating .

statutory provisions require the secretary to report annually to congress on the performance of the trio programs , including performance on the outcome criteria .

in addition , the secretary is expected to make grants to , or enter into contracts with , ihes and other organizations for rigorous evaluations of effective practices of the programs .

the results of such evaluations should be disseminated .

statutory provisions permit the secretary to use no more than 0.5% of the trio appropriation for evaluations , the peer review of applications , grantee oversight , and technical assistance .

this set - aside for evaluation and other activities has contributed to a large body of trio evaluations .

this section will highlight recent independent evaluations , ed analyses of grantee annual performance reports ( aprs ) , and ratings from the now out - of - use program assessment rating tool ( part ) .

between 2002 and 2008 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) assessed the effectiveness of federal programs through the part .

omb reviewed the program's purpose and design , strategic planning , management , and results / accountability .

part was expected to drive program improvement and inform federal appropriations and the legislative process .

through part , omb rated not performing programs as ineffective or results not demonstrated and performing programs as adequate , moderately effective , or effective .

the results of the part reviews are included in this report because they informed some of the heoa amendments , which sought to improve program effectiveness .

also in partial response to the part , ed published data based on aprs for 2013-2014 and earlier .

the data provide grantee - level results for program performance measures such as participant retention , enrollment , and completion .

the data are expected to inform improvements in ed program management and participant educational outcomes .

ed cautions against comparing results between projects since differences in incoming student characteristics are not quantified .

for the same reason , apr data do not allow simple comparisons to outcomes for students who did not participate in a trio program .

as a result of issues with independent , rigorous comparative evaluations , ed has not published such an evaluation since 2010 .

one issue is the difficulty in establishing a comparison or control group and ensuring the control does not limit the applicability of the findings .

for instance , the comparison or control group may not have a similar risk profile to the trio participants , or the comparison or control group receives a treatment that is similar to that of the trio participants .

support services that mimic those provided by trio projects may supplement the trio services provided to trio participants and may be provided to the comparison or control group .

another issue is that the evaluations require many years for data collection─following students through secondary and postsecondary education , analysis , and review .

for example , an sss evaluation initiated in 1991 was published in 2010 .

the evaluation timeframe and legislative cycle are often not in sync .

finally , in general , the evaluation results across a series of studies indicate that the trio programs or similar services have a statistically significant positive effect on various academic outcome measures of subpopulation ( s ) of participants and , in some instances , all participants .

for example , the recent sss evaluation found that receiving supplemental services , including those from an sss project , was associated with higher postsecondary persistence and degree completion .

also , for example , the recent regular ub study found that the rate of postsecondary enrollment and the likelihood of earning a postsecondary credential increased significantly for the subgroup of participants who entered the program with lower educational expectations , although the program "had no detectable effect on the rate of overall postsecondary enrollment" compared to the control group .

ed contracted a six - year longitudinal evaluation of ay1991-1992 freshman sss participants and a matched comparison group .

despite efforts to select a similar comparison group , the comparison group students were less educationally and economically disadvantaged than the sss participants .

the three - year longitudinal interim evaluation , published in 1997 , indicated that "sss showed a small but positive and statistically significant effect on all three measures of student outcomes," grade point averages , retention rates , and college credits earned .

an ed contractor published a study of promising practices in 1997 based on five projects identified in the aforementioned evaluation that had achieved positive , statistically significant results with respect to gpa , retention , or both .

the most common practices at the five exemplary sites were providing a freshman experience , emphasizing academic support for developmental and popular freshman courses , maximizing student contact , recruiting selectively , providing incentives for participation , hiring dedicated staff , and having a prominent role on campus .

in 2010 , the contractor published the final report of the six - year longitudinal evaluation .

the study concluded that postsecondary supplemental services are associated with better student outcomes , generally .

participation in sss as a freshman was associated with receiving more supplemental services from other sources as well and with a "moderate" increase in postsecondary persistence and degree completion .

however , the study found that participation in sss as a freshman was not associated with a change in the rate of transfer from two - year to four - year colleges .

receiving supplemental services from any source over the six - year period , particularly in the later years , was associated with higher postsecondary persistence and degree completion than receiving supplemental services from the sss program during the freshman year only .

models comparing the sss participants to students in the matched comparison group found that supplemental services were associated with a 12-19 percentage point increase in retention or degree completion , an 8-10 percentage point increase in degree attainment , and a 16 percentage point increase in transfers from two - year to four - year institutions .

models based on the number of hours of participation in various services found that supplemental services were associated with a 15-24 percentage point increase in retention or degree completion , an 11-13 percentage point increase in degree attainment , and a 10 percentage point increase in transfers from two - year to four - year institutions .

the specificity of the results to sss is limited because freshman sss participants received supplemental services through sss and other programs ; the intensity and types of sss services varied considerably ; some individuals in the comparison group received supplemental services from non - sss programs ; and students must have persisted to receive supplemental services .

the study also found that a positive effect on student outcomes was associated with certain , specific supplemental services: home - based sss programs , blended sss programs , peer tutoring provided by the sss grantee , services for disabled students provided by the sss grantee , counseling , field trips or cultural enrichment , referrals to outside resources , services for the disabled and for those with limited english ability , college reentrance counseling , and any recent contacts with support services .

home - based sss programs provide a home base on campus at which students may receive a broader range of services .

in contrast to home - based programs , some sss services were blended with other services on campus .

ed initiated another study of sss promising practices in 2006 .

the study did not meet methodological standards and thus will not be released .

in august 2015 , ed released a study of postsecondary persistence and completion rates , comparing students who first participated in the sss program as college freshmen in ay2007-2008 to a sample of students who began college during ay2003-2004 and who were either low - income , first - generation college students , or students with disabilities who also demonstrated some form of academic need .

the sample of ay2003-2004 beginning college students was drawn from ed's 2004 / 09 beginning postsecondary students longitudinal study ( bps:04 / 09 ) .

because of the difference in the timeframe of the students and resulting differences in student and institutional characteristics , the persistence and completion outcomes for the ay2007-2008 sss participants and ay2003-2004 bps:04 / 09 cannot be compared to determine the effectiveness of sss .

overall this study noted that "sss participants appeared to have higher persistence and completion rates in postsecondary education at both two - year [and] four - year institutions. .

for students who first enrolled in two - year institutions , the sss persistence rate ( persistence includes continued enrollment or certificate / degree completion ) to the following year was 86% and the three - year completion rate ( completion includes transfer to a four - year institution or certificate / degree completion ) was 41% .

for sss students who first enrolled in four - year institutions , the persistence rate to the following year was 93% and the six - year bachelor's degree completion rate was 48% .

bps:04 / 09 sample students who first enrolled in two - year institutions had a 65% persistence rate to the following year and a 21% three - year completion rate .

among bps:04 / 09 sample students who first enrolled in four - year institutions , the persistence rate to the following year was 79% and the six - year bachelor's degree completion rate was 40% .

a 2005 omb part review determined that the sss program was moderately effective .

moderately effective programs had ambitious goals and were well - managed but needed to improve their efficiency or address other problems in the programs' design or management in order to achieve better results .

according to the review , ed had not made grantee - level performance data available publicly , had not fully met its performance goals , and had not developed targets for its program efficiency measure .

ed has published apr data on program performance measures and efficiency for 2005-2006 through 2013-2014 .

based on the 2010-2011 through 2013-2014 aprs , approximately 87% of participants who were enrolled in the sss project for the first - time as first - time , full - time freshmen persisted , graduated , or transferred from a two - year to a four - year ihe by the beginning of the next year .

the six - year graduation rate was approximately 50% for participants who were enrolled in the sss project for the first - time as first - time , full - time freshmen at four - year ihes .

the three - year graduation / transfer rate was approximately 40% for participants who were enrolled in the sss project for the first time as first - time , full - time freshmen at two - year ihes .

the most recent evaluation report of regular ub was a nine - year impact study contracted by ed .

the study analyzed randomly assigned treatment and control groups from nationally representative projects from 1992 to 2004 .

the official results determined that regular ub "had no detectable effect on the rate of overall postsecondary enrollment or the type or selectivity of postsecondary institution attended for the average eligible applicant. .

postsecondary enrollment of the treatment group was 81% compared to 79% for the control group .

however , the official results found that there was a five percentage - point increase in regular ub participants earning postsecondary vocational certificates / licenses compared to nonparticipants , that the likelihood of the subgroup of regular ub participants who entered the program with lower educational expectations earning a postsecondary degree / certificate / license increased by 12 percentage points , and that each additional year of participation in a regular ub project resulted in a 5 percentage - point increase in the likelihood of receiving a bachelor's degree .

a separate analysis of the study data was completed by the ed contracting officer's technical representative for the aforementioned study and published by the council for opportunity in education ( coe ) without ed endorsement .

the study was intended to address a number of perceived sampling design and nonsampling error issues in the official analysis .

examples of these issues included allowing one of the 67 projects sampled to represent 26% of the regular ub universe of projects and a considerable proportion of the control group population receiving services similar to those offered through the regular ub program , including participation in a ubms program .

the alternative analysis found a 10.9 percentage - point increase in postsecondary enrollment and a 50% increase in the probability of achieving a bachelor's degree for regular ub and ubms participants compared to the control group .

however , the alternative analysis has its own limitations .

for instance , the results do not represent the regular ub universe since a project representing 26% of the regular ub universe was removed from consideration .

additionally , the treatment and control groups become unequally weighted because individuals were reassigned from the control to the treatment group by the analyst in instances when the individual indicated exposure to ubms .

a component of ed's ub study evaluated a random sample of 1993-1995 ubms participants and a comparison group of students with similar characteristics .

within four to six years of expected high school graduation , the study found that ubms student outcomes were positive , showing an average 0.1 point gpa increase in math courses , higher enrollment in physics and chemistry courses in high school , a 10 percentage - point increase in enrollment in more selective four - year colleges , and a 6% - 12% increase in the completion of math and science bachelor's degrees .

within seven to nine years of expected high school graduation , a second study found that participation in ubms was associated with increased enrollment in selective four - year colleges and increased postsecondary degree completion , particularly in the social sciences .

as part of the fy2007 regular ub competition , ed included an "absolute priority" that would allow it to initiate a random assignment , control group evaluation .

the absolute priority set rules regarding which students would be given priority for participation in the program and called for an evaluation of the program using a control group of students who would not receive ub services .

the evaluation design required all grantees to be prepared to recruit sufficient students for the control and treatment group and ensure the integrity of the control and treatment groups .

some members of congress and stakeholders opposed as unethical the recruiting of a control group of primarily low - income and minority students that would not receive services .

in addition , the selection criteria were vigorously opposed by many grantees who also questioned ed's authority , repudiated the effectiveness of recruiting a greater number of younger students , and argued that serving more students who have a high academic risk for failure would change the program's focus and effectiveness .

the trio ub "absolute priority" also required grantees to begin serving students who had completed the 8 th grade , but not the 9 th grade .

this priority was established in response to the nine - year impact study ( described earlier ) that indicated that postsecondary enrollment rates increased for participants who were served multiple years .

the heoa eliminated the absolute priority for the trio ub program and amended the evaluation requirements to preclude excess recruiting and the denial of services as part of the evaluation methodology .

ed initiated a study of ub promising practices in 2006 .

the study did not meet methodological standards and thus will not be released .

in place of ed's intended evaluation , the heoa required a rigorous evaluation of ub identifying practices that further the achievement of a program's outcome goals to be completed by june 30 , 2010 .

ed initiated a five - year , $3.8 million study entitled "a study of implementation and outcomes in upward bound and other trio programs. .

ed determined that statutory limitations on the study design would make it difficult to meet ed's program evaluation standards and would prevent achieving "reliable results" from a quasiexperimental evaluation of the efficacy of various implementation strategies in ub .

in february 2016 , an ed contractor concluded the study of common ub program and project practices .

the resulting survey report of upward bound directors indicated the types of services that programs provide and when , where , and how the services are delivered .

four of ub's core services had predominant approaches present in projects across the board: for academic instruction requirements , 58% of projects indicated a focus on noncredit courses ; for tutoring requirements , 69% indicated a focus on homework help ; for college exposure requirements , 56% indicated a focus on assistance in researching colleges ; and for college application assistance requirements , 50% indicated a focus on providing guidance to complete applications .

in 2014 , approximately 200 ub projects volunteered to participate in the "study of enhanced college advising in upward bound. .

the study follows 11 th graders who participate in projects using a professional development package to provide semicustomized college advising to students .

the demonstration study is intended to assess "a low - cost , enhanced college advising approach ... designed to improve college fit and , therefore , persistence. .

the evaluation is estimated to cost $6.0 million through september 2018 , with a final report expected in 2020 .

a 2002 omb part review determined that the ub program was ineffective .

according to the part ratings , ineffective programs are not using tax dollars effectively and have been unable to achieve results due to a lack of clarity regarding the program's purpose or goals , poor management , or some other significant weakness .

the review determined that ub projects do not typically target the students , those with lower expectations and at higher risk , for which the program was most effective according to an independent evaluation .

the review also found that ed had not regularly conducted independent program evaluations , that program performance results were not used to manage the program , that the awarding of pe points did not encourage first - time grantees , and that the program had not achieved its performance goals .

ed has published data on regular ub and ubms performance measures for 2004-2005 through 2013-2014 .

the 2009-2010 through 2012-2013 aprs show that the postsecondary enrollment rate of regular ub participants expected to graduate high school in the prior year was approximately 82% , and the rate for ubms was approximately 89% .

in 2013-2014 , ed modified the postsecondary enrollment calculation methodology to report that 85% and 87% of participants in regular ub and ubms , respectively , who graduated from high school in the prior year with a regular diploma enrolled in postsecondary education in 2013-2014 .

in 2008 , an ed contractor published an analysis of 2000-2006 academic progress data from ub and ubms aprs matched with the students' federal financial aid files maintained by ed .

in 2004-2006 , regular ub grantees served seven high schools , on average , and ubms grantees served 17 , on average .

over half ( 59% and 55% , respectively ) of participants stayed in their ub or ubms project until their expected high school graduation date .

of participants expected to graduate in 2004-2005 , 77% of ub participants and 86% of ubms participants enrolled in postsecondary education by 2005-2006 .

postsecondary enrollment increased as the length of project participation increased .

for instance of participants expected to graduate in 2004-2005 , 55% of one - year ub participants enrolled in postsecondary education by 2005-2006 compared to 91% of three - year or longer than three - year ub participants .

for ubms participants expected to graduate in 2004-2005 , 80% of less - than - one - year participants enrolled in postsecondary education by 2005-2006 compared to 87% of one - year or longer than one - year participants .

of the participants who enrolled in postsecondary education , 45% of participants served by two - year ihe grantees enrolled at their grantee institution , 33% served by public four - year ihe grantees enrolled at their grantee institution , and 11% served by private four - year ihe grantees enrolled at their grantee institution .

in 2004 , an ed contractor released the final report from phase i of the national evaluation .

the report primarily described the program's history , grant recipients , program staff , program activities , and program participants through 1999 .

the evaluation also compared project outcomes to the goals established by the individual projects .

in 1998-1999 , the majority ( 87% ) of projects achieved their secondary school graduation goal ; 53% achieved their postsecondary admissions goal ; and 38% achieved their postsecondary reentry goal .

on average , 71% of high school graduates enrolled in postsecondary education compared to the average goal of 75% .

phase ii of the national evaluation culminated in a limited quasiexperimental study of 1995-1996 ninth graders in florida , indiana , and texas .

the study , released in 2006 , found that ts participants applied for financial aid at rates 17 , 14 , and 28 percentage points higher than nonparticipant comparison students in florida , indiana , and texas , respectively .

the study also found that the rate of enrollment of ts participants in public colleges and universities was 14 , 6 , and 18 percentage points higher for florida , indiana , and texas , respectively , than for the nonparticipant comparison groups .

postsecondary enrollment data were only available for public colleges in the states of florida , indiana , and texas .

a 2005 omb part review determined that the ts program was moderately effective .

the review determined that ed still needed to make grantee - level performance data available publicly , meet all of its program performance goals , and develop targets for its program efficiency measure .

ed has published data on program performance measures and efficiency for 2006-2007 through 2013-2014 .

since 2011-2012 , approximately 84% of high school seniors applied for financial aid during their senior year .

also since 2011-2012 , approximately 80% of college - ready participants enrolled in postsecondary education by the fall term following high school graduation or by the next academic term if the institution deferred the participant's enrollment .

college - ready participants are high school seniors who received a regular diploma or alternative award ( eg , certificate of attendance ) .

participants were more likely to enroll in a college of the same level ( two - year or four - year ) as sponsored the ts program .

for example since 2011-2012 , approximately 55% of participants served by two - year ihes enrolled in two - year ihes compared to the 62% of participants served by four - year ihes that enrolled in four - year ihes .

as a comparison since 2011-2012 , approximately 54% of participants served by secondary schools and cbos enrolled in four - year ihes .

the evaluation of ts in 2004 included an appendix describing eoc history , grant recipients , program staff , program activities , and program participants based on a 1999-2000 survey of project directors and 1998-1999 annual performance reports .

few data on student outcomes were available .

of the 16% of eoc projects that reported a goal for secondary school completion , the average goal was 58% , and the average completion rate was 93% .

of the 79% of eoc projects that reported a goal for postsecondary admissions , the average goal was 49% , and the average admissions rate was 51% .

finally , of the 67% of eoc projects that reported a goal for postsecondary reentry , the average goal was 46% , and the average reentry rate was 56% .

crs has not been able to identify any rigorous evaluations of eoc as of the date of this report .

a 2007 omb part review rated the eoc program results not demonstrated .

the score reflected a lack of a recent independent evaluation , missing baseline or targets for measuring and achieving efficiencies and cost effectiveness in program execution , a lack of grantee level performance analyses , and a failure to achieve annual performance goals .

ed has published data on program performance measures for 2006-2007 through 2013-2014 .

since 2011-2012 , 60% of college - ready participants enrolled in postsecondary education , and of those postsecondary enrollees , approximately 68% enrolled in two - year ihes .

college - ready participants are participants who received a high school diploma during the year or already had a high school diploma before receiving program services .

the enrollment rate of college - ready participants was higher ( 63% ) for participants served by two - year ihe grantees than for participants served by four - year ihes ( 56% ) or other organizations ( 59% ) .

in 2008 , an ed contractor released a report of educational and employment outcomes based on a descriptive analysis of prior mcnair participants .

the report found that 73% of mcnair participants enrolled in graduate school within five to seven years of completing a bachelor's degree , compared to 30% of all bachelor's degree recipients .

the report also found that 44% of mcnair participants earned a master's degree , 14.4% earned a doctorate degree , and 12.1% earned a professional degree within 10 years of program participation .

it is important to note that the findings presented in the report were not the result of a random assignment study design ; there may be differences in the propensity to enroll in graduate school between mcnair participants and all bachelor's degree recipients .

a 2006 omb part review determined that the mcnair program was moderately effective .

the program was in the early stages of measuring and achieving efficiencies in program execution , and the program had not made grantee - level performance data available publicly .

ed has published program performance measure data for cohorts of students graduating from college in ay2005-2006 through ay2013-2014 .

on average , since the 2009-2010 cohort , 70% of mcnair participants who received their bachelor's degree enrolled in graduate school within three years .

a major evaluation of the program has not been conducted , and ed does not publish grantee - level performance results .

