china , the only communist party ruled nation in the g - 20 grouping of major economies , is in the midst of a sweeping set of communist party - orchestrated political transitions that began in 2011 and may not conclude until 2014 .

the most consequential political transition involves national communist party leaders , and is to take place at the communist party's 18 th congress , scheduled to open in beijing on november 8 , 2012 , and the first plenary session , or plenum , of the 18 th central committee , which is to be held immediately after the congress closes .

party congresses are held every five years .

by the time the plenum closes , china is to have a new communist party general secretary .

it is to have a new politburo standing committee , whose members , including the party general secretary , would form china's new collective leadership .

it is also expected to have new military leaders , although whether the top military position will turn over this year is unclear .

the second most important transition involves state and national people's congress leaders , and is to take place at the 12 th national people's congress in march 2013 .

china is to anoint a new state president and vice president , a new premier , new vice premiers and state councilors , and new government ministers .

if all goes as planned , the party and state transitions would mark only the third orderly transfer of power from one top leader to another in china since the 1976 death of mao zedong , and only the second institutionalized transfer of power .

the communist party has long sought to depict the political transitions as predictable and uncontroversial , but they have proved to be neither .

for much of 2012 , the transitions have been overshadowed by a spectacular political scandal involving one of china's 25 most powerful officials , bo xilai .

bo championed a different set of priorities from the party leadership in beijing , deployed his public relations savvy to build a national following , and was believed to be angling for a position on china's most elite governing body when he fell from grace , in part because of his wife's alleged involvement in the murder of a british business associate .

lingering support for bo at high levels in the party and the military may have complicated the party's efforts to put the scandal behind it .

adding to the uncertainty surrounding the transition was the fortnight - long disappearance from public view in september 2012 of the man designated to become china's next communist party general secretary , xi jinping .

with the chinese government offering no public statement addressing his absence , chinese social media users speculated that he had suffered a heart attack , been the target of an assassination attempt , lost out in political infighting over the leadership transition , or , more prosaically , injured his back , as a chinese official reportedly told u.s. officials .

xi eventually resurfaced ; chinese authorities have yet to explain what happened to him .

congress and the united states have strong interests in the outcome of china's political transitions .

economically , the united states and china are heavily interdependent .

china is the united states' second largest trading partner and largest supplier of imports , as well as being the largest foreign holder of u.s. debt .

both countries are major players in global efforts to tackle the european debt crisis , rein in the nuclear ambitions of north korea and iran , and manage instability in the middle east in the wake of the arab spring .

china's military modernization is now a factor in u.s. strategic planning .

with such weighty issues at stake , the united states has an interest in the identities of the officials who will make up china's new collective leadership , as well as in their policy portfolios , how they view the u.s. - china relationship and china's role in the world , and how effectively they can work together and with the united states .

the united states has a particular interest in the position that china's new leaders take on three major debates underway in china: as china attempts to transition from its economic model of the last 30 years to a new model focused on higher value manufacturing , an expanded service sector , and greater domestic consumption , what is the right place for the state sector ? .

should china end preferential policies for state - owned industries and look to the private sector to drive growth , or should it continue its "state capitalism" approach ? .

at stake is potentially whether china will continue to be an engine of global economic growth far into the future , or if its economy will stagnate and drag the global economy down with it .

what should be china's role in the world ? .

should it lie low and focus on domestic economic development , as former leader deng xiaoping counseled ? .

or , as a global economic heavyweight , should it take a more proactive and even assertive position on the world stage ? .

if the latter , should china assume the role of a responsible stakeholder or of a revisionist power that wants to set and operate by its own rules ? .

how should the chinese communist party address popular dismay with political corruption and new calls for political reform ? .

will incremental moves toward greater accountability suffice , or should the party heed calls for more substantive changes , such as easing controls on the media and requiring that all laws and party directives comply with china's constitution ? .

finally , congress and the united states also share an interest in understanding the mechanics of the political transitions .

given the frequency of u.s. - china official interactions , for example , it may be helpful for congress to understand that top party officials are scheduled to step down from their party posts in november 2012 , but not from their state posts until march 2013 , meaning that they will continue to represent china on the international stage in the interim .

it is possible that control of the chinese military may not change hands until 2014 .

congress and the united states also have an interest in understanding the mechanics of the transition as a way of evaluating progress , or the lack thereof , toward participatory politics in china .

the u.s. government frequently articulates an interest in china's citizens having "a lawful way to voice legitimate grievances and have a meaningful role in the political development of their own society. .

arrangements for the current political transition suggest that the role of ordinary chinese citizens in their country's political development remains minimal .

for a detailed discussion of the chinese political system , please see crs report r41007 , understanding china's political system , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

for background information about xi jinping , the man expected to be named general secretary of the communist party at the 18 th party congress in november , see crs report r42342 , china's vice president xi jinping visits the united states: what is at stake ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] .

as noted above , the people's republic of china has managed only one previous transfer of power that was both orderly and institutionalized , in 2002-2004 , when jiang zemin yielded to hu jintao first the positions of communist party general secretary and state president , and then the position of central military commission chairman .

the first challenge facing china's designated new leaders now is simply to undertake and consolidate a second such transition .

although the party has worked hard to suggest that an orderly transition is inevitable , in three important respects , the challenge this time is greater than in 2002-2004: in the last transition , hu jintao had been personally selected to be china's next top leader by deng xiaoping , the dominant political figure of the post - mao zedong era .

although deng died in 1997 , five years before the transition , deng's imprimatur insulated hu from all challenges .

this time around , the man designated as hu's successor , xi jinping , enjoys no such insulation from criticism .

in 2002-2004 , hu and his colleagues had to manage just one powerful retired communist party general secretary maneuvering for influence behind the scenes , jiang zemin .

this time , xi jinping and his colleagues will begin their tenures having to manage the influence of two previous party general secretaries , jiang , now 86 , and hu , age 69 , as well as a whole new cohort of retired regular poltiburo standing committee members .

if hu retains the position of central military commission chairman for an additional two years , the new collective leadership will initially have to manage his influence not just behind the scenes , but also on the national stage .

in the 2002-2004 period , china had the internet , but not yet twitter - like micro - blogs .

now , hundreds of millions of chinese are micro - bloggers and political gossip travels on the micro - blogs faster than the party can censor it .

micro - bloggers have reported in real time on industrial accidents and a high - speed train crash , spread word of protests and labor actions , and exposed corrupt officials and human rights violations , forcing on china's new leaders a level of accountability that their predecessors did not face when they took office .

assuming the political transitions unfold in a relatively orderly way , china's new leaders will immediately face the challenge of managing an ambitious shift in china's economic growth model and deciding what place state - owned industry should have in the chinese economy going forward .

china's economy has grown at an average of 10% annually for 30 years on the basis of an economic model that relied on booming exports of low - cost manufactured goods , high savings rates , and heavy investments in infrastructure .

now , with china's traditional export markets continuing to struggle with the effects of the global financial crisis and the european debt crisis , china's working age population predicted to begin shrinking after 2015 , and environmental degradation creating natural resource bottlenecks , that model is increasingly seen to have run its course .

in its 12 th five year plan for economic development , covering the years 2011 to 2015 , china's leadership signaled its intention to adopt a new growth model focused on higher value manufacturing , an expanded service sector , support for green industries , and reliance on domestic consumption to fuel a greater proportion of growth .

the plan did not spell out , however , the mechanics of how china should go about restructuring its economy to achieve those goals .

early in 2012 , an unusual joint report issued by the world bank and the state council research development center ( drc ) , the think tank of china's cabinet , argued that for a successful transition , china must reduce the role of the state in the economy , break up state monopolies , strengthen the private sector , and give all china's citizens equal access to social services and employment opportunities .

those recommendations challenge powerful interest groups , however , to say nothing of current communist doctrine .

state - owned corporations have benefited from their monopolies and oligopolies , while powerful communist party families have amassed personal fortunes from their association with those corporations .

government ministries derive their clout from their control over key levers of the economy .

governments in wealthy parts of the country , for their part , have benefitted from being able to exploit the inexpensive labor offered by rural migrants without having to extend to those migrants the social services and educational and employment opportunities enjoyed by everyone else .

because of resistance to the world bank / drc report from affected interest groups , a chinese - language edition of the report has yet to be released .

chinese critics of the world bank / drc report's recommendations argue that heavy state involvement in the economy — western commentators call the approach "state capitalism" — has served china well .

they point out that state - owned enterprises and their affiliated businesses are responsible for more than half of all chinese economic output and employment .

they also argue that the global financial crisis and continued slow growth in countries like the united states have discredited the sort of private sector - led approach the report is advocating .

the united states , which is looking to china's economy to continue to be an engine of growth for the global economy , has a major stake in what position china's new leaders take in the debate , and in whether they can , in fact , successfully place china on a new path to growth .

for the last two decades , china's foreign policy has been guided by precepts laid down by former leader deng xiaoping , who decreed that china should focus on domestic economic development , keep a low profile in international affairs , and think twice before criticizing or condemning others or getting involved in others' affairs .

deng's approach to foreign policy is often summarized with the phrase , "hide one's capabilities and bide one's time , and endeavor to achieve something. .

as china's economy has expanded and become more embedded in the global economy , and as its military has modernized , however , some groups in china have suggested that the country may have outgrown deng's counsel , and that it may be time for china to adopt a more pro - active , even assertive , foreign policy .

china has already moved some distance away from deng's dictums .

it is an active participant in global efforts to manage the european debt crisis and contain the north korean and iranian nuclear programs , for example , and since 2008 , its military has been participating in anti - piracy missions in the gulf of aden , far from china's shores .

in its disputes with asian neighbors over disputed territory in the south china sea and east china sea , moreover , it has moved from deng's emphasis on shelving sovereignty disputes and engaging in joint development toward more forceful assertions of chinese sovereignty and unilateral moves to exploit resources .

china's new leaders will face decisions about whether to move decisively beyond deng's precepts and if so , whether to do so as a status quo power that seeks to work within the existing rules of the global order , or a revisionist power that seeks to change them .

the united states has a strong interest in the choices the new leadership makes .

a particularly difficult challenge for china's new leaders is how to respond to calls for political reform both from the public and from within the party .

as noted earlier , the drawn - out case of former chongqing party secretary and politburo member bo xilai has shone a spotlight on the unchecked power of senior party officials and fed renewed calls for the party to make its officials more accountable and to strengthen the rule of law .

 ( see " next steps in the bo xilai saga ." ) .

also feeding such calls are other high profile cases , including those of former minister of railways liu zhijun and former shenzhen city mayor xu zongheng .

behind those cases stand hundreds of thousands more .

the party recently acknowledged that it investigated 640,000 corruption cases in the five years from november 2007 to june 2012 .

reflecting the party's aversion to handing over its cadres for criminal prosecution , the party disclosed that it referred only 24,000 of the cases , or fewer than 4% , to judicial authorities for criminal prosecution .

in the recent pew research center poll mentioned earlier , 50% of chinese surveyed said corrupt officials are a "very big problem" for their society , up from 39% in 2008 .

the party is clearly aware of popular dismay over official corruption and unaccountable party cadres .

in a commentary seen as previewing themes to be included in communist party general secretary hu jintao's report to the 18 th party congress , the party's theoretical journal , qiushi ( "seeking truth" ) , opined that , "the issue of the restraint and oversight of power has still not been fundamentally resolved and corrupt phenomena such as abusing power for personal gains and trading power for money are doing serious damage to the body of our party and our state. .

the commentary said that the party needed to place more emphasis on developing mechanisms to check the power of officials , but offered no concrete proposals .

it did , however , explicitly declare that china "must not practice the parliamentarian system and separation of three powers of the west" and "must not weaken and negate leadership by the communist party of china and practice the multi - party system of the west. .

