health insurance provides protection against the financial risks associated with illness or injury .

consumers who enroll in health insurance plans pay premiums for a specified set of benefits .

when insurers set premiums they include the cost of a set package of medical benefits as well as other costs such as overhead .

in broad terms , a medical loss ratio ( mlr ) measures the share of enrollee premiums that health insurance companies spend on medical claims , as opposed to other non - claims expenses such as administration or profits .

many states , as the primary regulators of health insurance , have their own mlr requirements , which they use to evaluate companies and compare health plans .

 ( see appendix b for data on state mlrs. ) .

private entities , such as stock and bond analysts and lenders , also use various mlr data when assessing the financial performance of health insurers .

in general , the higher the mlr , the more value a consumer receives for each dollar of paid premium .

for example , an 85% mlr means that 85% of premium dollars paid into a plan are paid out in the form of benefits .

a 75% mlr means that just 75% of premium dollars are used for benefits .

the mlr is an aggregate measure .

because the ratio is based on a health plan's overall performance , some enrollees may pay more in premiums during the course of a year than they receive in benefits , while others may receive benefits that far exceed their premium payments .

section 1001 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) imposes a federal , minimum mlr requirement on fully funded health plans , which are plans where insurance companies assume the full risk for medical expenses incurred .

beginning with calendar year 2011 , covered insurers have been required to submit reports to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) detailing the share of premium dollars spent for medical benefits ( which may include certain quality improvements ) , and the share allocated to administrative expenses and profits ( minus certain taxes , fees , and other expenses ) .

the mlr requirement is intended to provide "greater transparency and accountability around the expenditures made by health insurers and to help bring down the cost of health care. .

insurance companies must issue rebates to policyholders each year that they do not meet aca mlr standards for individual , small group , and large group policies .

the hhs in july 2014 announced that , based on 2013 performance , insurers would be required to issue $332 million in rebates to 6.8 million consumers .

that compares to $504 million in rebates to 8.5 million individuals for 2012 , and $1.1 billion in rebates to 12.8 million individuals for 2011 plan performance .

this report provides a detailed description of the aca requirements for mlr reporting and rebates as specified in regulations , including mlr reporting requirements under aca , components of the mlr formula , state flexibility and waivers , and the nature of rebates to policyholders .

the report also addresses issues that have been raised about the mlr provisions since the aca was enacted , namely the treatment of insurance commissions paid to brokers and agents .

effective in 2014 , most ma plans , stand - alone medicare part d prescription drug plans , and ma plans that include a part d drug benefit ( ma - pd ) must meet an 85% mlr standard .

in may 2013 , cms issued final rules for calculating the mlr for such plans .

in general , the mlr is based on the percentage of medicare contract revenue spent on clinical services , prescription drugs , quality improvement activities , and direct benefits to beneficiaries in the form of reduced medicare part b premiums .

insurers that cannot meet the 85% threshold must pay hhs an amount equal to the total revenue for the ma or part d contract in question , multiplied by the difference between the target mlr and their actual mlr .

for example , if total contract revenue was $1,000 , and the mlr was 82% , the plan would remit $30 to hhs ( ( 0.85-0.82 )  × $1,000 = $30 ) .

health insurers that fail to meet the minimum mlr requirements must provide rebates to policyholders .

for 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 insurers were required to issue rebates by august 1 each year following the calendar year used in calculating the mlr .

for example , insurers were required to issue rebates for calendar year 2012 by august 1 , 2013 .

beginning with reporting of the 2014 information in 2015 , issuers must provide rebates no later than september 30 of the following year .

policyholders include both employers and individuals , and there are slightly different rebate procedures for employer - sponsored plans and those in the individual market , as discussed below .

hhs in july 2014 announced that , based on 2013 performance , insurers would issue about $332 million in rebates to 6.8 million consumers .

that compares to $504 million in rebates to 8.5 million individuals for the 2012 plan year , and $1.1 billion in rebates to 12.8 million individuals for 2011 plan performance .

average rebates per family were highest in alaska , iowa , minnesota , montana , and wyoming .

 ( see appendix a for a complete table of aggregate rebates by state. ) .

in general , health insurers subject to the aca mlr provisions have reduced the share of premium dollars spent on overhead since the aca provisions took effect .

the overall share of premium revenues dedicated to overhead ( including administration costs and profits ) in the individual market declined to 11.5% in 2013 from 15.3% in 2011 .

in the small group market , overhead costs dipped to 16.4% of premiums in 2013 from 17.4% in 2011 ( though costs rose slightly from 2012 to 2013 ) .

in the large group market , the share of premiums dedicated to overhead declined to 10.7% of premiums in 2013 from 11.2% in 2011 .

health insurance agents and brokers act as middlemen ( known collectively as producers ) , assisting consumers and small employers in choosing and enrolling in health insurance products .

producers may be self - employed , work for an independent agency or brokerage , work as "captive agents" that are direct employees of an insurance carrier , or work for banks and other companies within the financial services industry that have an insurance business segment .

captive agents may also receive a salary , but all producers generally are paid sales commissions by insurers , which are set as a percentage of the premiums paid by the enrollee or policyholder .

insurance companies are not allowed to deduct broker fees and commissions from their administrative expenses when calculating the aca mlr .

during the regulatory process , the national association of health underwriters ( nahu ) , a professional association representing agents and brokers , argued that agent and broker commissions were essentially an add - on to already - set plan premiums , similar to state and federal taxes .

because commissions are a pass - through , rather than a part of an insurance company revenue stream , they should not be counted as an expense , according to the nahu .

consumer organizations argued that congress intended for the commissions to be counted as an administrative cost in the mlr calculation , and not to be excluded from the mlr like taxes and other fees .

the naic in its recommendations to hhs ultimately concluded that the aca does not provide a clear path for waiving inclusion of commissions in the calculation of the mlr , but encouraged "hhs to recognize the essential role served by producers ( i.e. , agents and brokers ) and accommodate producer compensation arrangements in any mlr regulations promulgated. .

the hhs , in its final regulations , noted that the aca allowed state regulators to seek mlr waivers if they were concerned that their state's individual insurance market could be destabilized by implementation of the aca , which would include any potentially adverse effects from the calculation of brokers' and agents' commissions .

a july 2014 government accountability office report found that if broker commissions and fees were excluded from the mlr calculation , aca mlr rebates to consumers would have been 75% lower on average for the 2011 and 2012 plan years .

during the 112 th congress , the house energy and commerce subcommittee on health approved by voice vote h.r .

1206 , which would exclude brokers' commissions , fees , or rebates from the mlr formula .

similar legislation was introduced during the 113 th congress .

appendix a .

rebates by state appendix b .

state mlrs state governments are the primary regulators of health insurance .

many states have their own mlr requirements , which they use for a variety of purposes including evaluating corporate performance and insurance company requests for an increase in premium rates .

the naic in 1980 developed mlr guidelines for state regulators to use in determining whether benefits paid under individual medical policies were reasonable in relation to premiums charged .

a number of states also set separate mlr standards for other insurance products .

when the aca was passed in 2010 , 34 states had established some type of mlr guidelines ; required the filing or reporting of mlr information ; set limits on administrative expenses for comprehensive major medical insurance ; or enacted a combination of such policies .

of the total , six states required insurers that did not meet mlr standards to provide premium refunds or credits .

 ( see table b - 1 . ) .

states developed a range of mlr targets .

for example , state mlr requirements for insurers selling products in the individual market ranged from 55% to 80% .

mlrs in the group market ranged from 60% to 85% .

the federal aca provisions are now the national , minimum requirement that insurers must meet in terms of calculating potential consumer rebates .

states were allowed to apply for limited waivers of the federal mlr standards for their individual insurance markets , however , if they had evidence that the aca requirements could disrupt the state market for such policies .

since the aca was enacted , several states have passed additional mlr laws including some that require insurers participating in medicaid to meet specific mlrs or to publish their premium and profit information .

state policies can range widely depending on differences between rural and urban areas and markets that have a number of insurance options , as opposed to those where business is more concentrated in a few companies .

one key difference between many state mlr calculations and the federal mlr standards enacted under aca is that the federal standards allow for adjustments based on quality improvements , taxes and fees , credibility adjustments , and other factors .

according to a 2011 gao analysis , the combined effect of the federal allowances has been to raise federal mlrs above mlrs that are based only on medical claims compared to premium revenue .

analyzing 2010 data , the gao said that average mlrs calculated under the aca formula were 7.5 percentage points higher than traditional mlrs in the individual market , 6.5 points higher in the small group market , and 4.8 points higher in the large group market .

appendix c. mini - med plans final hhs rules allow separate adjustments in the mlr formula for a less commonly used type of health insurance: mini - medical ( mini - med ) policies .

mini - medical or limited - benefit health plans subject to different mlr standards are defined by cms as policies with annual benefit limits of $250,000 or less .

while there is substantial variability in the marketplace , mini - med plans generally have higher copayments and deductibles and provide a lower dollar - value level of benefits than comprehensive health plans .

in some cases , the plans impose limits on specific types of services such as hospitalization and physician care .

in its december 2011 final rules , hhs noted concerns from mini - medical insurers about their ability to meet the aca mlr .

companies issuing the policies noted that mini - medical plans were apt to have higher administrative costs , relative to benefits paid , than comprehensive health insurance ; higher enrollee turnover ; shorter enrollment periods ; and lower incurred claims ( due to higher deductibles and limited coverage ) .

consumer , healthcare , and labor organizations opposed efforts to relax mlr requirements for mini - medical plans .

consumer groups have said that such policies expose beneficiaries to unacceptably high costs and that insurers should be required to become more efficient .

in its interim final rule , hhs included a special allowance for mini - med plans ( which it defines as plans with total annual benefit limits of $250,000 or less ) .

for calendar 2011 , hhs allowed insurers offering such policies to multiply incurred claims and activities ( the mlr numerator ) that improve health care quality by 2.00 .

after reviewing comments , the hhs in its interim final rule on december 7 , 2011 , extended and modified the special treatment of mini - medical plans .

hhs set a multiplier of 1.75 in 2012 , 1.50 in 2013 , and 1.25 in 2014 .

 ( starting in 2014 , the aca bars the sale of health plans that impose annual limits on essential health benefits , other than grandfathered plans in the individual market .

the aca provisions are expected to eliminate most mini - med plans. ) .

the hhs based its final rule on data from insurers selling limited benefit plans .

according to the data , 7 of the 12 issuers in the individual market and 6 of the 15 firms in the large group market would not meet the standard mlr targets .

with the 2.00 multiplier in place , only 3 of the 12 companies in the individual market would not meet the mlr requirements , while all issuers in the small and large group market would meet the standard .

appendix d. medicare credibility adjustments cms set separate credibility adjustments for ma and part d plans .

