on june 25 , 2012 , the supreme court issued its much - anticipated decision in arizona v. united states , ruling that some aspects of an arizona statute intended to deter unlawfully present aliens from remaining in the state were preempted by federal law , but also holding that arizona police were not facially preempted from running immigration status checks on persons stopped for state or local offenses .

in reaching these conclusions , the supreme court made clear that opportunities for states to take independent action in the field of immigration enforcement are more constrained than some had previously believed .

in recent years , several state and local governments have adopted measures intended to deter the presence of unauthorized aliens within their jurisdiction .

the nature of these measures has varied considerably .

in some instances , jurisdictions have sought to enter cooperative agreements with federal immigration authorities , under which state or local officers are delegated authority to perform specific immigration enforcement functions .

in other instances , state and local governments have acted independently to deter unauthorized immigration .

some states and localities , for example , have sought to limit unlawfully present aliens' access to housing and municipal services .

some have authorized or required the suspension or termination of the licenses of businesses that knowingly or intentionally hire unauthorized aliens , and have also required that employers within their jurisdiction use the federal government's e - verify database to check certain employees' work authorization .

others have imposed criminal sanctions , separate and apart from any imposed under federal law , for activities believed to promote unauthorized immigration .

still others have adopted laws or policies intended to facilitate the identification and apprehension of unlawfully present aliens by state and local law enforcement — even in the absence of a cooperative agreement with federal authorities — so that they may be transferred to the custody of federal immigration officers .

an arizona measure enacted in 2010 , commonly referred to as s.b .

1070 , arguably represents the vanguard of recent attempts to test the legal limits of greater state involvement in immigration enforcement .

potentially sweeping in effect , s.b .

1070 declared arizona's intent to establish a state - wide policy of "attrition through enforcement. .

among other things , s.b .

1070 required state and local law enforcement to facilitate the detection of unauthorized aliens in their daily enforcement activities .

the measure also established criminal penalties under state law , in addition to those already imposed under federal law , for alien smuggling offenses and failure to carry or complete federal alien registration documents .

further , it made it a crime under arizona law for an unauthorized alien to apply for or perform work in the state , either as an employee or an independent contractor .

before s.b .

1070 , as amended , was scheduled to go into effect , the department of justice ( doj ) brought suit in federal district court seeking to preliminarily enjoin many ( but not all ) of the provisions of the arizona measure , arguing that they were likely preempted by federal immigration law and therefore unenforceable under the supremacy clause .

the district court granted the doj's motion to preliminarily enjoin four of the arizona law's provisions ( though it did not enjoin all the provisions of s.b .

1070 that had been challenged by the doj , including a provision modifying a preexisting arizona statute which penalizes alien smuggling ) .

a three - judge panel of the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( "ninth circuit" ) upheld the injunction , unanimously with respect to certain provisions , but splitting 2-1 on others .

arizona petitioned the supreme court to hear an appeal of the panel's decision and , on december 12 , 2011 , the court granted certiorari .

this report discusses the supreme court's ruling in arizona v. united states , and considers the implications that the decision may have for immigration enforcement activity by states and localities .

the arizona ruling and its implications are also discussed , in a more truncated form , in a series of posts of the crs legal sidebar .

for discussion of lower court litigation on s.b .

1070 , see crs report r41221 , state efforts to deter unauthorized aliens: legal analysis of arizona's s.b .

1070 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

arguments at the supreme court centered on four major provisions of the arizona statute , which can be divided into two categories: ( 1 ) those provisions seeking to bolster direct enforcement of federal immigration law by arizona law enforcement , including through the identification and apprehension of unlawfully present aliens ; and ( 2 ) those provisions that criminalize conduct which may facilitate the presence of unauthorized aliens within the state .

the eight justices who decided the case ( justice kagan had recused herself ) were asked only to consider whether the four enjoined provisions of s.b .

1070 were facially preempted by federal law ( that is , whether the provisions necessarily conflicted with or frustrated federal immigration policy ) .

the court did not consider whether specific interpretations or applications could be preempted once in place .

the court also did not consider the validity of other provisions of s.b .

1070 that were not preliminarily enjoined as a result of the doj's preemption challenge ( though some of these provisions are the subject of ongoing litigation ) .

nor did it consider other constitutional challenges to the validity of the arizona law , including claims that enforcement of s.b .

1070 would lead to impermissible racial profiling .

justice kennedy wrote the majority opinion ( joined by chief justice roberts and justices breyer , ginsburg , and sotomayor ) for the court , finding that three of the four provisions at issue were facially preempted .

justice alito dissented in part , agreeing that s.b .

1070's alien registration provision was facially preempted , but not the other challenged provisions .

in separate opinions , justices scalia and thomas would have upheld all of the challenged provisions of the arizona law .

both viewed the states as having broad sovereign authority to act against unauthorized immigration , and claimed that this authority ( at least as exercised under s.b .

1070 ) had not been encumbered by federal law .

while the full implications of the supreme court's decision in arizona v. united states are yet to be determined , it seems clear that the ruling will have profound implications for state activity in the field of immigration .

in recent years , several states and localities have attempted to play a greater role in the area of immigration enforcement , in many cases due to perceptions that the federal government had not taken adequate steps to deter the presence of unauthorized immigrants within their jurisdiction .

in ruling that three provisions of arizona's s.b .

1070 were facially preempted by federal immigration law , and suggesting that a fourth provision could be susceptible to as - applied challenges , the supreme court clarified that the opportunities for states to take independent action in the field of immigration enforcement are more constrained than some had previously believed .

in particular , the court suggested that some types of state action to deter unauthorized immigration may be impliedly preempted by federal law , even though the state sanctions target conduct already proscribed by federal statute .

further , while the court found that measures requiring or authorizing immigration status checks by state and local police are not facially preempted , the court's decision suggests that such measures could be vulnerable to as - applied challenges , particularly if these status checks unreasonably prolong the detention of persons in state or local custody .

the arizona decision specially addresses only particular types of state and local action to deter unauthorized immigration .

some measures that have recently been adopted by states — such as requirements that schools determine whether enrolling students are either unlawfully present themselves or the children of unauthorized aliens , or measures barring unlawfully present aliens from entering into certain transactions with government agencies — were not directly at issue in the arizona decision , and may not raise identical legal issues .

for example , a key question that courts reviewing these measures have been asked to consider is whether they violate affected persons' constitutional guarantee of equal protection , an issue which the supreme court did not assess in its review of s.b .

1070 .

moreover , reviewing courts have had to consider whether these state measures are compatible with federal laws that were not at issue in the arizona case .

accordingly , the arizona ruling may not provide definitive guidance to courts considering the permissibility of state immigration laws which differ significantly from s.b .

1070 .

on the other hand , it is possible that certain aspects of the arizona ruling may , at least indirectly , inform subsequent litigation concerning a broad range of immigration - related measures by the states .

the arizona court's discussion of federal supremacy in establishing immigration policy , and its recognition that congress has afforded the executive branch a good deal of discretion in its implementation of federal immigration law , may be pertinent whenever a court reviews state measures that are not wholly consistent with federal immigration enforcement priorities .

while the full implications of the supreme court's decision in arizona v. united states are yet to be determined , it seems clear that the ruling will have profound implications for state activity in the field of immigration .

in recent years , several states and localities have attempted to play a greater role in the area of immigration enforcement , in many cases due to perceptions that the federal government had not taken adequate steps to deter the presence of unauthorized immigrants within their jurisdictions .

in ruling that three provisions of arizona's s.b .

1070 were facially preempted by federal immigration law ( while leaving the door open to future challenges to the sole provision that was upheld ) , the supreme court made clear that the opportunities for states to take independent action in the field of immigration enforcement are more constrained than some had earlier believed .

the court's consideration of s.b .

1070 turned almost entirely upon its relationship to federal law .

it did not find that arizona was per se precluded from engaging in the activities authorized under s.b .

1070 ; rather , the court's analysis turned on whether such activities conflicted with or otherwise impeded the objectives of federal immigration law .

if congress disagrees with the court's decision , it may amend federal law to reflect its preferences regarding the role that states and localities may play in immigration enforcement , including by expressly authorizing ( or barring ) state laws like s.b .

1070 .

