interest in the fuel efficiency of automobiles and trucks has waxed and waned over more than three decades as oil and gasoline prices have risen and fallen .

however , in recent years , as oil prices have spiked to historic levels , and concerns over greenhouse gas emissions and climate change have grown , there has been a resurgence in interest in the fuel economy and emissions of motor vehicles in the united states .

proponents of higher vehicle fuel efficiency standards argue that they create incentives for the development of new technologies that will help reduce dependence on imported oil and better enable the united states to use scarce resources and limit greenhouse gas emissions — technologies that would not be developed in the absence of that "technology push. .

critics argue that efficiency standards distort the market for new vehicles , compromising consumer choice , and that other policy mechanisms ( eg , higher fuel taxes ) would be more effective at reducing petroleum consumption and emissions .

the most recent federal legislation on fuel efficiency was the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) , which requires the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) to increase combined passenger car and light truck fuel economy standards to at least 35 miles per gallon ( mpg ) by 2020 , up from roughly 26.6 mpg in 2007 .

along with requiring higher passenger vehicle standards , eisa dramatically changed the structure of the passenger vehicle fuel economy program .

it also directed dot to study improvements in heavy - duty vehicles and , if feasible , issue standards for those vehicles as well .

in the same year , the supreme court found that the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has the authority to regulate vehicle greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions under the clean air act .

these two actions at the federal level have significantly changed how motor vehicles are regulated at the federal level .

fuel consumption and greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from motor vehicles are closely linked .

the vast majority of vehicle ghg emissions result from the burning of petroleum products , so reducing vehicle fuel consumption is the most direct means of reducing emissions .

for these reasons , the obama administration has issued joint rules on vehicle fuel economy and ghg emissions for model year ( my ) 2012-2016 passenger cars and light trucks , my2014-my2018 medium - and heavy - duty trucks , and my2017-my2025 passenger cars and light trucks .

the administration intends the passenger vehicle standards to be harmonized with standards issued by the state of california under the clean air act .

on august 28 , 2012 , the obama administration issued final rules to tighten passenger vehicle fuel economy and greenhouse gas ( ghg ) standards for my2017-2025 .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

in a similar process to the landmark agreement that led to new fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards for my2012-my2016 , the administration has secured commitment letters from the state of california and from 13 automakers .

many stakeholders were concerned about a potential "patchwork" of different federal and state standards if epa , nhtsa , and california were to establish different standards at the intersection of fuel economy and ghg emissions .

 ( see discussion below on " different statutes govern fuel efficiency ." ) .

two key parts of the agreement are that california will treat any vehicle meeting the new federal ghg standards as meeting california standards , and that the automakers agree to not challenge the new standards in court .

the administration expects that consumers' fuel savings from the new standards will more than offset the additional cost of the new technology for these vehicles , which could be thousands of dollars per vehicle .

epa and nhtsa expect that the new standards will save roughly 4 billion barrels of oil and 2 billion metric tons of greenhouse gases over the life of the vehicles covered under the new standards .

critics have challenged the administration's assumptions , countering that the costs will be higher and could lead to a drop in new vehicle sales .

in addition to requiring an increase in light - duty vehicle cafe standards , eisa also required nhtsa to study the potential for fuel efficiency gains , and , if feasible , implement fuel efficiency standards for medium - and heavy - duty trucks and engines .

after the completion of studies by the national academy of sciences and nhtsa , epa and nhtsa proposed a joint rulemaking for my2014-my2018 .

on august 9 , 2011 , the agencies announced final rules .

because of the inherent differences between commercial and passenger vehicles , the standards are based on multiple attributes , including the weight class , physical size , and the presence of a sleeping area in the driver's cab .

further , because the same heavy - duty engine may be used in various vehicles , and similar vehicles are often configured in different ways , the standards are based on fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions per tons of payload miles , as opposed to the miles - per - gallon standards for passenger vehicles .

epa and nhtsa estimate that the rules will raise the average cost of new heavy - duty my2018 combination tractors ( i.e. , the tractor portion of a tractor - trailer ) by about $6,200 .

for heavy - duty pickup trucks and vans , the agencies estimate the average increased my2018 cost at around $1,000 , and around $400 for vocational vehicles ( a wide range of vehicles including utility trucks , refuse trucks , and dump trucks ) .

depending on the vehicle and the annual number of miles traveled , the agencies estimate that the increased costs would be made up within a few years in fuel savings resulting from the rules .

the agencies estimate that the rules will save 530 million barrels of oil and 270 million metric tons of greenhouse gases over the life of the vehicles sold in my2014-my2018 .

they estimate total program costs of $8.1 billion ( present value ) , offset by $50 billion in fuel savings and $7.3 billion in other net benefits ( eg , reduced emissions of greenhouse gases and other pollutants , more miles driven from lower fuel costs , minus the increased congestion and fatalities from that increase in miles ) , for a net benefit estimate of $49 billion over the life of the vehicles covered by the rules .

some critics have questioned the administration's methodology in determining costs and benefits .

they argue that the net benefits could be considerably lower than epa and nhtsa have projected .

