in 1937 , the united states was recovering from the great depression .

as part of the recovery effort , president franklin d. roosevelt endorsed a series of economic programs , known as the new deal , to help stimulate and rebuild the u.s. economy .

the national industrial recovery act ( nira ) was the major statute enacted to help achieve these goals .

although the nira was eventually found unconstitutional , many of its provisions appeared in later new deal statutes , including in the fair labor standards act of 1938 ( flsa ) .

the flsa provides for a federal minimum wage , overtime pay , and child labor protections .

congress endorsed the act because its provisions were meant to both protect workers and stimulate the economy .

the flsa also created the wage and hour division ( whd ) within the department of labor ( dol ) to administer and enforce the act .

at the time of the act's passage , congress found that a few employers who paid substandard wages caused a decrease in wages within their respective industries , because other employers sought to compete in the marketplace with lower priced goods .

congress also found that these decreased wages caused one - third of the u.s. population to be "ill - nourished , ill - clad , and ill - housed. .

to counter these conditions , in 1938 congress established a minimum wage of $0.25 an hour , gradually increasing to $0.40 an hour in 1945 .

congress has since legislated several increases in the minimum wage .

it now stands at $7.25 an hour .

the flsa also mandates a pay rate of one - and - one - half times an employee's hourly wage for every hour the employee works beyond a standard work week .

when enacted , the flsa required employers to pay overtime for hours worked in excess of 44 hours in a week .

the 44-hour threshold was lowered to 40 hours in 1940 .

the purpose of the overtime provision is to reduce unemployment by encouraging employers to hire more workers , rather than requiring current employees to work more than 40 hours per week and pay the premium overtime rate .

finally , under the flsa congress set certain conditions under which children could work .

not only was oppressive child labor considered immoral , as children often worked at the cost of their own health and education , but congress also believed that the lower wages generally earned by children drove down the wages of adult workers .

the flsa extends minimum wage , overtime pay , and child labor protections to individuals "employed by an employer. .

congress has also "exempted" certain employers and employees from all or parts of the flsa .

for example , exemptions were provided to executive , administrative , or professional ( eap ) employees ; individuals employed at retail stores that did not have interstate operations ; and agricultural employees .

additionally , the child labor provisions did not apply to children employed in the motion picture or theater industries .

the flsa covers employees and enterprises engaged in interstate commerce .

an enterprise is covered if it has annual sales or business done of at least $500,000 .

regardless of the dollar volume of business , the act applies to hospitals ; institutions primarily engaged in the care of the sick , aged , mentally ill , or disabled who reside on the premises ; schools for children who are mentally or physically disabled or gifted ; federal , state , and local governments ; and preschools , elementary and secondary schools , and institutions of higher education .

although enterprises that have less than $500,000 in annual sales or business done are not covered by the flsa , employees of these enterprises may be covered if they are individually engaged in interstate commerce .

these employees may travel to other states for work , make phone calls or send emails to persons in other states , or handle records that are involved in interstate transactions .

the $500,000 enterprise threshold has not been raised since it was enacted in 1989 .

employers are required to administer dual enterprise and individual tests to determine if individual employees are covered by the act .

that is , although an enterprise may not be covered if it has less than $500,000 in annual sales or business done , employees of the enterprise may be covered if they are individually engaged in interstate commerce .

the flsa covers most , but not all , private and public sector employees .

persons who are not covered by the flsa include individuals who are elected to state or local government offices and members of their staffs , policymaking appointees of elected officeholders of state or local governments , employees of legislative bodies of state or local governments , immediate family members of an employer engaged in agriculture , persons who volunteer their services to a state or local government ( if the person is not employed by the government agency to perform the same services ) , and persons who volunteer their services to a private , nonprofit food bank and who receive groceries from the food bank .

the flsa exempts certain employers and employees from the minimum wage , overtime , or child labor standards of the act .

for example , bona fide executive , administrative , and professional employees are exempt from both the minimum wage and overtime requirements of the act if they meet both a salary test and a job duties test .

certain employees in computer - related occupations are also exempt from both the minimum wage and overtime if they meet an hourly wage or weekly salary test and a job duties test .

domestic service workers who provide companionship services in private homes are exempt from both the minimum wage and overtime if they are employed directly by an individual or family .

under section 18 of the flsa , if states enact minimum wage , overtime , or child labor laws that are more protective of employees than what is provided by the flsa , the state law applies .

the flsa defines a state as "any state of the united states or the district of columbia or any territory or possession of the united states. .

because states may enact laws that are more protective of employees than what is provided by the flsa , there are multiple minimum wage , overtime , and child labor standards nationwide .

under section 6 of the flsa , employers must pay covered , nonexempt employees at least $7.25 an hour .

however , the flsa includes several subminimum wage rates .

employers may pay lower minimum wage rates to tipped employees ; workers with disabilities ; new hires under the age of 20 ; full - time students who work in retail or service establishments , agriculture , or institutions of higher education ; and high school students who are at least 16 years of age and enrolled in a vocational education program .

under section 7 , employers must pay covered workers at least one - and - a - half times their regular hourly wage for hours worked over 40 hours a week at a given job .

employers may choose to pay more than time - and - a - half for overtime or to pay overtime to employees who are exempt from overtime under the flsa .

under the flsa , overtime pay applies to hours worked in excess of 40 in a workweek .

thus , the law allows some flexibility in work hours .

for example , an employer could schedule four 10-hour workdays in a workweek without asking employees to work overtime .

similarly , an employee who works a five - day workweek could work four hours one day and nine hours the other four days and not work overtime .

most wage and salary workers are covered by the flsa .

however , under section 13 of the act certain employers and employees are exempt from coverage .

they may be exempt from either the minimum wage or overtime standards of the act , or both .

this section considers some , but not all , of the current exemptions in section 13 .

the focus is on those exemptions that have been the subject of recent legislation , hearings , or oversight .

the flsa sets minimum age requirements for youth employed outside of school hours in agricultural and nonagricultural occupations .

in nonagricultural occupations , the act sets a general minimum age for employment of 16 .

in agricultural occupations , the general minimum age to work is 14 .

the flsa includes a number of exceptions to the general minimum age requirements of the act .

under a parental exemption , a child of any age may be employed by his or her parent ( or person standing in the place of a parent ) in any occupation in a business , including a farm , owned or operated by the parent .

but , youth under 18 cannot be employed in mining or manufacturing , including in a business owned or operated by a parent .

youth under a certain age cannot work in occupations determined by the secretary of labor to be hazardous to minors .

the minimum age to work in hazardous occupations in nonagricultural occupations is 18 .

in agricultural occupations , the minimum age is 16 .

the flsa also provides exemptions from the limits on employment in hazardous occupations .

in agriculture , youth between the ages of 14 and 15 may work in certain hazardous occupations if they are student learners .

minors ages 14 and 15 can operate tractors or other machinery if they hold a certificate of training from a 4-h or vocational agriculture training program .

the restrictions on employment in hazardous occupations in agriculture do not apply to youth employed on farms owned or operated by a parent .

youth ages 12 and 13 can work in agriculture with the written consent of their parents on a farm where a parent ( or person standing in the place of a parent ) is also employed .

youth who are covered by the flsa and are not exempt must be paid at least the applicable federal or state minimum wage .

however , employees in agriculture are exempt from the overtime requirements of the flsa .

on september 2 , 2011 , dol issued a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) to change the regulations that implement the child labor provisions in agriculture .

in the proposed rule , dol said that "none of the revisions proposed in this nprm in any way change or diminish the statutory child labor parental exemption in agricultural employment" in the flsa .

nevertheless , in response to concerns about the potential effects of the proposed rule on the parental exemption , dol announced , on february 1 , 2012 , that it was going to reconsider the part of the rule dealing with the interpretation of the parental exemption .

dol said that instead of applying the parental exemption to farms that are "wholly" owned by the parent ( or person standing in place of a parent ) the exemption would apply to farms that are "substantially" owned by the parent .

thus , the parental exemption would apply to farms where the parent is a part owner of the farm , a partner in a partnership , or an officer of a corporation that owns the farm if the parent holds a substantial ownership interest in the partnership or corporation .

on april 26 , 2012 , dol announced that it was withdrawing the proposed rule .

dol stated that "the decision to withdraw this rule — including provisions to define the 'parental exemption' — was made in response to thousands of comments expressing concerns about the effect of the proposed rules on small family - owned farms. .

dol also stated that the regulation will not be pursued for the duration of the obama administration .

this appendix briefly describes major amendments to the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) .

table a - 1 shows the history of legislated changes in the basic federal minimum wage .

table a - 2 shows the minimum wage rates in the states and other jurisdictions as of january 1 , 2012 .

table a - 3 provides a list of acronyms used in the report .

major amendments to the flsa the flsa has been amended several times since 1938 .

the amendments generally expanded coverage of the act , created subminimum wage rates , and increased the basic minimum wage .

1947 amendments in 1947 , congress passed the portal - to - portal act .

the act addressed issues arising out of several court cases .

first , congress addressed the practical definition of hours worked , for which an employee must be paid .

congress excluded from hours worked time spent traveling to and from work .

congress also stated that some "preliminary" and "postliminary" activities performed before or after the workday are not hours worked .

however , workers could be compensated for such activities if the worker and employer agreed to such employment terms or if compensation for the activities was customary in the place of employment .

the 1947 amendments also allow parties to settle a worker's minimum wage or overtime claim if "there exists a bona fide dispute as to the amount payable. .

however , parties cannot agree to a settlement that would result in a wage less than the minimum wage or payment of less than time - and - a - half for overtime .

additionally , in the 1947 amendments congress prohibited class action suits under the statute , unless the secretary of labor filed the suit as the representative of workers .

it also limited the availability of compensation recovered in a class action suit only to those employees who affirmatively agreed to be a part of the suit .

finally , the amendments set a two - year statute of limitation ( time limit ) in which a worker could file a claim .

1961 and 1966 amendments in 1961 , congress amended flsa exemptions such that employers of retail workers in enterprises with annual sales in excess of $1 million were required to pay minimum wage and overtime rates .

in 1966 , congress expanded coverage of the flsa to include workers employed in any enterprise with annual sales of at least $250,000 and employees of all businesses engaged in construction , repair , laundering , and cleaning services .

additionally , for the first time , flsa coverage was extended to employees of hospitals , elementary and secondary schools , and institutions of higher education .

the 1966 amendments also added a "tip credit," which allowed employers to include a portion of an employee's tips as part of the minimum wage .

finally , the 1966 amendments restricted the employment of youth under the age of 16 in agriculture in occupations found by the secretary of labor to be particularly hazardous , except when the employee is employed by a parent on a farm owned or operated by the parent .

1974 amendments the 1974 flsa amendments extended coverage to most federal , state , and local government employees .

however , fire protection and law enforcement employees ( including security personnel in correctional institutions ) of public agencies were given special treatment , such as a complete exemption from overtime for agencies that employ fewer than five employees in fire protection or law enforcement and a partial exemption from overtime for fire protection and law enforcement employees whose work period extends from 7 to 28 consecutive days .

1985 amendments in 1985 , congress amended the flsa to allow state and local governments to offer their workers compensatory time off from work in lieu of overtime pay .

1989 amendments in 1989 , flsa coverage was extended to enterprises with annual sales of at least $500,000 .

the amendments also repealed the retail exemption , under which employees of almost all small retail enterprises were exempt from the minimum wage and overtime rates .

the 1996 small business job protection act in 1996 , congress exempted certain computer professionals from minimum wage and overtime regulations .

the 1996 amendments also brought within the flsa's minimum wage coverage all government employees employed as of april 1 , 1996 .

the 2007 increases in the basic minimum wage on may 25 , 2007 , president george w. bush signed into law a supplemental appropriations bill titled the "u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007" ( p.l .

110-28 ) .

title viii of the act , "fair minimum wage and tax relief," increased the basic federal minimum wage from $5.15 to $5.85 an hour effective july 2007 , from $5.85 to $6.55 an hour effective july 2008 , and from $6.55 to $7.25 an hour effective july 2009 .

the equal pay act the equal pay act ( epa ) , although commonly referred to on its own , was an amendment to the flsa .

the epa was enacted in 1963 and prohibits gender - based pay discrimination .

break time for nursing mothers the 2010 patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) amended the flsa to require covered employers to provide reasonable break time to nonexempt employees to express breast milk for a nursing child .

