the fy2013 budget deficit is projected to be $845 billion , or 5.3% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

from 2009 through 2012 , the federal budget has exceeded $1 trillion annually .

while budget deficits have begun to decline , current fiscal policies remain unsustainable , and budget deficits are projected to continue .

under cbo's alternative fiscal scenario , which assumes continuation of many current policies , the deficit as a percentage of gdp is projected to decline to 3.7% by 2016 , before again increasing to exceed 5% by 2022 .

over time , unsustainable deficits can have negative macroeconomic consequences , including reduced savings for investment , higher interest rates , and higher levels of inflation .

restoring fiscal balance will require spending reductions , revenue increases , or some combination of the two .

policymakers have considered a number of options for raising additional federal revenues ( see the text box below ) .

one potential option is a carbon tax .

several economists and policy analysts from across the political spectrum have expressed interest in a carbon tax mechanism in recent years .

other stakeholders have expressed strong opposition to carbon tax proposals .

in the 113 th congress , senators sanders and boxer have introduced legislation ( s. 332 ) that would apply carbon tax ( a "carbon pollution fee" ) on fossil fuels and other materials , starting at $20 per ton of co 2 emissions , rising 5.6% per year over a 10-year period .

in addition , representative waxman and senator whitehouse , among others , released a carbon tax discussion draft .

their proposal would also impose a carbon pollution fee , requiring certain carbon emitters to purchase "carbon pollution permits" from the department of the treasury .

the discussion draft requests comment on the level of the tax and on how the revenues should be used .

in addition , members proposed several carbon price systems in previous congresses — as identified in appendix c — most frequently as an efficient means to stimulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission reductions .

in addition , some countries have levied carbon taxes ( or something similar ) for over 20 years .

several members of the 113 th congress have expressed opposition to a carbon tax .

two concurrent resolutions introduced in the house ( h.con.res .

8 and h.con.res .

24 ) propose to express the opposition of congress to a federal carbon tax , citing concerns about the potential negative economic impact .

a similar concurrent resolution has been introduced in the senate ( s.con.res .

4 ) .

other policy considerations , including environmental concerns , may also lead to consideration of a carbon tax .

ghg in the atmosphere trap radiation as heat , warming the earth's surface and oceans .

the key human - related ghg is carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , primarily generated through the combustion of fossil fuels: coal , oil , and natural gas .

although fossil fuels have facilitated economic growth in the united states and around the world , fossil fuel combustion has inadvertently raised the atmospheric concentration of co 2 by about 40% over the past 150 years .

almost all climate scientists agree that these co 2 increases have contributed to a warmer climate today , and that , if they continue , will contribute to future climate change .

many economists have argued that current fossil fuel prices reflect a market failure , because ghg emissions from fossil fuels contribute to current and future climate change , yet fossil fuel prices do not reflect climate change - related costs .

market failures distort economic efficiency by affecting consumer behavior .

for example , energy consumers may make choices that are not in society's best interest , consuming more than the optimal amount of ghg emitting fuels , if prices do not reflect climate change - related costs .

carbon taxes , or ghg fees , have been proposed as one means to correct such a market failure .

another option is a cap - and - trade program , which would attach a price to ghg emissions by limiting their generation .

to some extent , a carbon tax and cap - and - trade program would produce similar effects: both would place a price on carbon , and both are estimated to increase the price of fossil fuels .

preference between the two approaches ultimately depends on which variable one prefers to control — ghg emissions or costs .

a tax based on carbon content of fuels is different from a tax based on energy content , such as a btu tax ( see the text box below ) .

placing an emissions fee on co 2 ( and possibly other ghg emissions ) could stimulate lower emissions and spur innovation in new lower - emitting technologies .

a tax or fee based approach would allow markets to determine the level of investment in lower - emissions technologies .

in addition , carbon tax revenues could be used to support multiple objectives , such as deficit reduction , or to replace existing taxes ( eg , payroll , income ) .

the first section of this report examines carbon tax design and implementation issues , including the point of taxation , the rate of taxation , and the distribution of tax revenue .

the second section discusses several carbon tax policy considerations: revenue potential , economic efficiency , equity , and operability .

the final section highlights key issues related to the use of carbon tax revenues .

specifically , how might addressing the regressivity of a carbon tax diminish its revenue - raising potential , and what is the potential for a carbon tax to contribute to deficit reduction goals ? .

when establishing a carbon tax , there are several implementation decisions to be considered .

key considerations include ( 1 ) the point of taxation — where to impose the tax and what to tax ; and ( 2 ) the rate of taxation .

information on how a carbon tax might affect fossil fuel prices is also provided .

policymakers may consider a carbon tax based on a number of policy motivations and potential benefits , including increased federal revenues , reduced federal budget deficits , reduced ghg emissions , climate change , and ocean acidification , enhanced energy security , improved economic efficiency , and / or reduced tax rates from other revenue sources .

in recent years in the united states , most carbon tax proposals have aimed primarily to discourage ghg emissions .

in these proposals , a tax or fee would be levied on ghg emissions or the inputs ( i.e. , fossil fuels ) that lead to emissions .

the tax or fee raises the price of the emission - generating products , and therefore can , on the one hand , motivate suppliers to reduce the emissions involved in making the product and , on the other hand , encourage consumers to buy less of the product .

this policy instrument sets the tax ( cost ) per unit of emissions and relies on private decision - makers to find the most efficient means to reduce the emissions .

a carbon tax is one of several "market mechanisms" that relies on the efficiencies of markets to maximize cost - effectiveness .

though this policy instrument is commonly called a "carbon tax," its application could be broader than this term suggests .

first , the policy may apply not just to co 2 emissions , but also to multiple ghgs ( eg , methane or sulfur hexafluoride ) , including some that may have no molecular carbon .

second , if the levy's primary purpose were to charge those who use the atmosphere to absorb the full cost of their ghg emissions , the levy might instead be considered a "user fee. .

regardless , this report uses the term "carbon tax," because this report focuses on the policy instrument's potential to raise revenues and reduce the federal budget deficit .

there are a number of issues to be considered when evaluating tax policy proposals .

the following sections analyze a generic carbon tax option using the criteria listed below: adequacy — the ability to generate a desired amount of revenues ; economic efficiency — the potential to enhance or diminish the productivity of the u.s. economy ; equity — the subjective determination of a proposal's fairness ; o perability — the combination of multiple factors , including administrative ease , transparency , avoidance of perverse outcomes , and consistency with federal and international norms and standards ; and political feasibility — the likelihood of enactment given a tax's visibility to the public and public opinion , differential regional implications , contribution to deficit reduction or other objectives , pledges made by some lawmakers not to raise taxes , etc .

the possible contribution of a carbon tax to deficit reduction would depend on the magnitude and scope of the carbon tax , various market factors ( discussed above ) , and assumptions about the size of the deficit .

in february 2013 , cbo released budget projections for fiscal years 2013 to 2023 .

under current law , cbo estimated the 10-year budget deficit at $6.8 trillion , or 3.4% of gdp .

however , using an alternative fiscal scenario , cbo projected a larger deficit — $9.1 trillion , or 4.5% of gdp .

enacting the carbon tax options discussed in the previous section could reduce future budget deficits .

as illustrated in figure 4 , a $20 / mtco 2 price on carbon ( increasing by 5.6% annually ) would have a considerable impact on budget deficits using cbo's february 2013 baseline projection .

the 10-year budget deficit could be reduced from $6.8 trillion to $5.6 trillion , or from 3.4% to 2.8% of gdp .

overall , a $20 / mtco 2 price on carbon would reduce the 10-year budget deficit by more than 17% .

under cbo's alternative fiscal scenario , the same carbon tax would have a smaller impact on budget deficits .

the deficit would be reduced from $9.1 trillion to $7.9 trillion , or from 4.5% to 3.9% of gdp .

overall , a $20 / mtco 2 price on carbon would reduce the 10-year budget deficit by about 13% .

the analysis above assumes that 100% of carbon tax revenue would be applied toward deficit reduction .

the following section explores possible alternative uses for carbon tax revenues .

carbon tax revenues may be used to achieve a variety of policy goals .

however , one revenue use necessarily forgoes the opportunity to apply that level of revenue to support other objectives , like deficit reduction .

therefore , in deciding how to allocate carbon tax revenues , policymakers would encounter trade - offs among objectives .

such trade - offs include 1. minimizing economy - wide costs resulting from a carbon tax ; 2. alleviating the costs borne by subgroups in the u.s. population , regions , economic sectors , and generations ; and 3. supporting specific policy objectives , such as deficit reduction , climate change mitigation , energy efficiency , technological advances , domestic employment , or energy diversity .

a comprehensive discussion of alternative uses of carbon tax revenues and the involved trade - offs is beyond the scope of this report .

three possible options , which have received some attention in recent years , are discussed below .

carbon taxes , or fees on emissions of some or all ghg emissions , have been proposed for many years by economists and some members of congress .

a new carbon price would help reduce ghg emissions contributing to climate change and ocean acidification , and tax revenues could support a range of policy objectives , including deficit reduction .

carbon tax revenues would depend strongly on the scope and rate of the tax and multiple market factors , which instill uncertainty in revenue projections .

a $20 / mtco 2 carbon tax on u.s. co 2 emissions would generate approximately $90 billion in its first year .

if applied toward deficit reduction , carbon tax revenue ( of this magnitude ) could have some impact on projected budget deficits , but impacts vary considerably depending on which budgetary baseline is assumed .

regardless , if policymakers established a carbon tax , they would likely face pressure from multiple stakeholders seeking a portion of the carbon tax revenues .

households would be expected to bear a large portion of the burden imposed by a carbon tax .

lower - income households , in particular , would face a disproportionate impact if revenues were not recycled back to them in some fashion .

in addition , specific industries may experience disproportionate impacts .

carbon tax revenues that are used to offset the burden imposed on various sectors or specific population groups would not be available to support other objectives , like deficit reduction .

appendix a .

potential applications of a carbon tax table a - 1 below identifies sources of ghg emissions that account for 0.5% or more of total u.s. ghg emissions .

the sources are listed in descending order by their percentage contribution .

carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion , which accounts for almost 79% of total u.s. ghg emissions , are broken down by fossil fuel type: petroleum , coal , and natural gas .

the right side of the table identifies potential points in the economy at which a carbon tax could be applied .

the table lists the number of entities that would be involved with different tax applications .

for some emission sources the number of "entities" may be relatively large .

however , in some of these cases , the number of companies that operate these entities is considerably smaller .

for example , natural gas wells involve a large universe of entities ( over 500,000 ) , but the 500 largest natural gas producers accounted for approximately 94% of total u.s. production in 2007 .

the right - hand column of the table provides an estimate of the percentage of total u.s. ghg emissions that would be subject to a carbon price with a given tax application .

for example , a carbon tax applied at natural gas wells ( based on a well's gross production ) could attach a price to all co 2 emissions that would result from domestic natural gas combustion .

in addition , this application could attach a price to non - combustion related emissions , such as ch 4 emissions that occur during production and transportation .

the potential for additional coverage explains why the percentage in the right - hand column may be larger than the percentage in the left - side column ( "percentage of total u.s. ghg emissions" ) .

appendix b .

illustration of natural gas sector appendix c. carbon pricing proposals in the 111 th  and 112 th congresses members introduced two carbon tax bills in the 112 th congress: h.r .

3242 ( stark ) , introduced october 24 , 2011: would have established a carbon tax on domestic and imported fossil fuels , as well as the carbon content of biomass , municipal solid waste , and any organic material used as fuel .

the bill states that it would reduce the federal budget deficit by $480 billion over 10 years , with remaining revenues paid as dividends to individuals .

h.r .

6338 ( mcdermott ) , introduced august 2 , 2012: would have required carbon emitters to purchase non - transferrable emissions permits from the u.s. treasury .

the treasury would have used emissions targets to determine the price of these permits .

revenues would have been used both for deficit reduction and to provide dividends to individuals .

in the 111 th congress , policymakers introduced at least nine stand - alone , market - based proposals that sought to reduce ghg emissions .

these bills included carbon tax , cap - and - trade , and hybrid approaches .

of the bills that specified a distribution formula for carbon tax revenue or emission allowance value , only three ( and one draft bill ) would have allotted allowance value or tax revenue that would explicitly support deficit reduction ( listed in order of proposed date ) : h.r .

2454 ( waxman - markey ) , introduced may 15 , 2009: 0.2% of emission allowance value in 2016-2026 , zero in subsequent years .

s. 1733 ( kerry - boxer ) , introduced september 30 , 2009: 10.3% of emission allowance value in 2016 , increasing to 30% in 2030 .

s. 2877 ( cantwell ) , introduced december 11 , 2009: 25% of emission allowance value ( subject to the appropriations process ) to a fund , which could be used to support a myriad of policy objectives , including deficit reduction .

kerry - lieberman draft legislation , released may 12 , 2010: 6.8% of emission allowance value in 2016 and 2030 .

