why does iranian acquisition of ballistic missiles or iran's pursuit of a space launch capability matter , especially to the congress ? .

for decades , most in congress have viewed iran with concern because of its nuclear program and its support of anti - u.s. and anti - israel militant movements in the region .

congress has held numerous hearings on iran , passed various resolutions regarding iran and approved a range of sanctions against iran over the past several decades .

congress has established a broad number of reporting requirements of the executive branch that encompass the range of its concerns regarding iranian wmd and ballistic missile programs .

these reporting requirements are detailed in appendix b , "reporting requirements relevant to iranian ballistic missile programs. .

congress has also supported funding bmd programs aimed at countering ballistic missiles especially those from iran , including cooperative programs with friendly and allied nations such as israel .

iran's current and prospective capabilities challenge u.s. national security interests in many ways and are raised briefly below .

in response to the iranian ballistic missile and space program , congress is considering the deployment of an ballistic missile defense site on the east coast to defend against possible iranian icbms .

the house included a provision in the fy2013 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

4310 ) providing $103 million to begin developing a plan and a supporting environmental impact statement to establish by the end of 2015 such a missile defense site on the east coast to defend against a possible iranian icbm attack .

that plan would evaluate the effectiveness , from an east coast site , of various long - range bmd interceptor missiles .

the senate version of the authorization bill does not include such a provision .

the house fy2013 defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

5856 ) did not include any such provision .

neither did the senate defense appropriations bill .

this report is limited to analyzing iran's efforts to develop , test and field ballistic missiles and to develop a space launch capability .

iran has pursued these efforts with the assistance of other countries and entities operating in those countries with and without direct or indirect official government sanction .

assessing iran's progress and capabilities in this area are challenging given the general difficulty in evaluating ballistic missile capabilities and projections in general , especially from the vagueness of official assessments and the numerous , but specific and conflicting analyses by experts and others in the public domain .

although iran is transparent in many ways , it remains secretive and attempts to obfuscate intent and capabilities in others .

the latter tendency frequently extends to matters related to advancing its military technologies .

all these things contribute significantly to the difficulty inherent in such a report as this .

these issues are addressed below .

iran has been acquiring , developing and testing its ballistic missile capabilities for decades .

this section examines the long - term investment iran has made in developing ballistic missiles and in building an extensive network of facilities .

it further examines iran's interest in and capabilities for a space launch capacity as well .

what is striking is the degree to which there is an overwhelming amount of information written about iran's ballistic missile capabilities , performance parameters , testing results , infrastructure and iran's cooperation with others compared to the paucity of public detail about how many missiles iran actually has .

since the early 1980s , many thousands of articles and news stories have been written about iran's efforts to procure ballistic missiles , components and materials , and to develop an indigenous missile and space launch infrastructure .

a considerable number of these items provide details of interest .

although many of those articles are likely accurate , it is not entirely possible to sort them all out from those accounts that are not entirely accurate .

on the other hand , official public u.s. and other government sources generally do not provide such specificity , but instead are very useful to track broader trends over time .

this section is included to provide an overview from such public official assessments because no such overview is found elsewhere probing the extent of foreign cooperation with iran's ballistic missile and space launch programs .

furthermore , this section describes not only the degree to which iran developed close working relationships with others on the way to developing its own indigenous capabilities , but also demonstrates that these relationships largely continue out of necessity for iran .

around 1982 , iran began to focus on developing an indigenous solid - propellant rocket industry , but turned subsequently to other countries in varying degrees to acquire whole systems , components and training to build up its own ballistic missile force and develop its own production capabilities .

iran's efforts in this regard evolved and perhaps even diminished over time with respect to specific countries .

as a result of this decades long effort , iran is now considered to have become self - sufficient in major parts of its own ballistic missile programs , yet it is still apparently reliant on outside sources for some key missile components , especially for further development of its longer range ballistic missile program .

iran has demonstrated its willingness over decades to pursue the development , testing , acquisition and deployment of ballistic missiles as an essential part of its regional war fighting , deterrent and retaliatory capability .

a determined adversary such as iran has not shown that it is deterred or dissuaded by u.s. conventional military superiority , or by u.s. and international sanctions , or by the deployment of u.s. bmd capabilities .

iran has similarly demonstrated resolve and commitment to a genuine space launch program as a matter of national pride and self - sufficiency in space in the face of widespread international condemnation .

just as every other space faring nation , however , iran too will use space for a range of military purposes , such as for reconnaissance and communications .

is slowing down iran's ballistic missile and space launch programs , making them more difficult and expensive , and forcing iran to find less reliable and capable alternatives an adequate solution for dealing with iran ? .

on this point there are significant disagreements and no consensus on how to proceed .

at the same time , is it realistic to believe that ending iranian interest in acquiring ballistic missiles or pursuing a space launch capability is even possible ? .

some point out that other countries have given up their missile programs entirely , or forsworn ballistic missiles while developing an effective space launch program alone .

but would iran change its pattern of behavior short of a change in regime ? .

most are skeptical .

so this seemingly leaves the united states and its allies , many might reluctantly agree , with few better choices than the current apparent path .

on the other hand , there are perhaps early indicators that congress' attitudes regarding the reliability of the "assured destruction" deterrence policy of the cold war era may be changing under the circumstance of both nuclear and missile delivery system proliferation .

among the pieces of evidence suggesting this change in attitude is declaration 2 in the resolution of ratification accompanying new start .

such a change in attitude might imply that defensive options will no longer be seen as 'destabilizing' , as was the dominant view during the cold war .

although the behavior of rogue states such as iran may be catalyzing this change in attitude , the language of declaration 2 also carries the strong implication that in the future congress will gauge the missile threat more broadly than just focusing on the activities and progress of ballistic missile and nuclear programs in such rogue states .

this is because declaration 2 challenges even a mature missile power such as russia to adopt a more defensive strategic posture in order to provide a political and policy basis for devaluing offensive missile and nuclear weapon programs in a broader grouping of threatening and potentially threatening states .

in this case , the focus on assessing the progress of ballistic missile and nuclear weapons programs of rogue states might become less intense in congress because responsive u.s. policies will become more broadly based .

in short , specific actions by iran may become a less powerful driver of u.s. strategic deterrence policy than is the case today .

for the time being , however , congress will likely continue to take a focused interest in iran's role in the region and in its missile programs .

beyond efforts to impose increasingly stringent sanctions , it is unclear whether there is more congress itself can do to affect iran's commitment to its ballistic missile and space launch programs .

but continuing to work with the administration through cooperation and oversight , to stay prepared to take additional action as needed is a process many decision makers appear prepared to be committed to .

appendix a .

the "great prophet" exercises ( 2006-2012 ) since 2006 , iran has conducted various military exercises that included some number of ballistic missile tests .

these are called "great prophet" exercises by iran and sometimes "noble prophet" or "holy prophet" by others .

iran tests missiles at other times as well , but these particular missile tests are held in conjunction with other conventional land , sea , and air military exercises .

from open sources it is neither possible to identify with precision the number and type of all missiles launched during these exercises , nor to identify all other test launches by iran at other times .

nevertheless , these ballistic missile exercises provide considerable information to u.s. and other intelligence communities that assess iran's ballistic missile programs .

additionally , these exercises serve several purposes for iran , including testing and evaluating weapon system performance , providing operational training and evaluation of military personnel , broadcasting iran's capabilities to the united states and others throughout the middle east , and showcasing military prowess to iran's own populace .

many of these missile launches are shown in photos and video on iranian television and other media and can be found on such places as youtube .

there does not appear to be any single source that tracks or details the missile launch components of all these exercises .

therefore this appendix is added to this report .

this appendix will be updated for future "great prophet" exercises .

great prophet 1 ( march - april 2006 ) iran conducted military exercises in the straits of hormuz from march 31 to april 6 , 2006 .

most reports at the time were vague or conflicting about precisely what missile launches were involved .

various iranian media reported launches of a medium - range radar - evading anti - ship missile , a different multi - warhead missile and a very fast torpedo .

most media reports at the time , however , reported these simply as missile launches .

various observers outside iran greeted iranian technical claims with some skepticism or believed that these were not iranian weapons , but more likely russian and chinese in origin .

a pentagon spokesman responded to the launches saying while it is "possible they are increasing their capability.... iranians have also been known to boast and exaggerate their statements about greater technical and tactical capabilities. .

in one account , iran reportedly claimed to have launched an improved "intermediate - range ballistic missile likely a shahab - 3 missile," but in another report a pentagon official said iran tested a shahab - 2 srbm .

great prophet 2 ( november 2006 ) iran conducted military exercises throughout the country november 2-9 , 2006 .

according to iranian military leaders , "the first and main goal of this exercise is to demonstrate power and national determination to defend the country against any possible threat. .

iran military officials added that other objectives included enhancing and testing the irgc's deterrence capability and effectiveness ; testing sophisticated and advanced weapons , conducting operational tactics involving distances of more than 1,400 kilometers ; and , finally , coordinating land , naval , and air operations and logistics forces covering an area of 1,730 kilometers .

the commander of the irgc added that iran was ready to share its missile systems with political allies and neighboring countries .

iran claimed to have test - fired "dozens of shahab - 2 and - 3 , zolfaghar - 73 [unknown what this referred to] , scud b , fateh - 110 and zelzal" missiles in a central area of iran .

it was the first time iran claimed to have launched an enhanced range shahab - 3 mrbm during military maneuvers and said that it was fired with cluster warheads ; it was also reported to have an extended range of about 1,900 kilometers .

iran further claimed to have launched three new types of tactical naval warfare missiles named noor , kowsar and nasr , "suitable for covering all the strait of hormuz , the persian gulf and the sea of oman. .

vice admiral walsh , commander of u.s. naval forces in the region , expressed "particular concern over the threat the missiles pose to vessels traveling through the sea of oman and the strait of hormuz. .

great prophet 3 ( july 2008 ) iran conducted a series of missile tests during military exercises in the strait of hormuz and in the desert from july 8-10 , 2008 .

the missiles were launched from the semnan missile test range with warheads impacting within iran or its coastal waters .

although there was some confusion over what precisely occurred , u.s. officials and others determined that no new capabilities were demonstrated .

iran reportedly launched some number of shahab - 1 and shahab - 2 srbms , a shahab - 3 mrbm , and fateh , zelzal , nazeat , fajr - 3 and oghab tactical missiles , but there is uncertainty over exactly how many .

iran and most early media accounts said nine missiles of varying ranges were launched .

but another report said that u.s. tracking systems detected only seven missile launches .

television footage showed at least six missiles firing simultaneously , including the shahab - 3 .

the following day , u.s. officials reported that one of the missiles had apparently failed the day before and that although iran reported a second round of missile launches it appeared there was only one missile launched and it was unclear whether it was the one that had failed the day before .

adding to the confusion were various reports concluding iran had doctored or "photo - shopped" one of the photographs to make it appear that one of the missiles fired simultaneously with the others had launched successfully , instead of actually failing .

and a u.s. intelligence official was quoted as saying "while i cannot comment one way or another on these particular photos , it would be wrong to assume that the u.s. intelligence community accepts at face value what the iranians disclose about their missile tests. .

the state department responded to the debate over how many launches actually occurred by noting that it did not matter precisely how many , but rather that iran was testing increasingly longer and more capable missiles in the region .

great prophet 4 ( september 2009 ) iran conducted military and missile exercises from september 27 - 28 , 2009 in which it reportedly launched the shahab - 3 mrbm and the new solid - fueled sejil - 2 mrbm .

an iranian military official , abdullah araqi , was quoted as saying "iranian missiles are able to target any place that threatens iran. .

another source said the "optimized shahab - 3" missile has a range of 1,300 – 2,000 kilometers and that the sejil was launched for the first time in military maneuvers from the central province of semnan where iran's space program is located .

the irgc's air force commander said the main aim of the exercise was to evaluate the "technical developments recently achieved in surface - to - surface missiles ... including simultaneous ... and successive" missile launches .

also reported were launches specifically of shahab - 1 and 2 srbms , and fateh , tondar , zelzal , and various other tactical ballistic missiles .

iran claimed to have also tested a "multiple missile launcher for the first time. .

great prophet 5 ( april 2010 ) iran conducted war games on april 22 – 25 , 2010 , reportedly firing five tactical sea - to - sea and shore - to - sea missiles at a single target simultaneously from different locations .

the deputy head of iran's armed forces headquarters , bg massoud jazayeri , said iran "is designing defense operations to strengthen deterrent power of its forces and give a crushing response to any aggression. .

but it does not appear that any short or medium - range ballistic missiles were launched in this exercise .

great prophet 6 ( june 2011 ) iran conducted military exercises june 27-july 6 , 2011 and reportedly launched 14 ballistic missiles , including shahab - 1 and shahab - 2 srbms and zelzal and fateh - 110 tactical ballistic missiles .

at least one qiam srbm , or an upgraded shahab - 3 or ghadr ( or kadr ) , or a sejil mrbm was reportedly launched , depending on which source is cited .

reports said some missiles were aimed at targets at sea and perhaps as many as nine of the missiles were fired simultaneously .

the department of defense subsequently confirmed that this exercise included a multiple missile salvo of some unspecified number .

iran also unveiled the existence of a network of underground missile silos for the first time , which irgc spokesman asghar qelich - khani said were "part of the swift reaction unit of [iran's] missile brigade ; missiles are stored vertically. .

the new york times added that iranian officials showed an underground launching pad or silo for what they called the shahab - 3 mrbm .

the televised reports also showed a large metal roof opening atop the silo to allow the firing of the missile .

iran claimed the silos were built indigenously , but israel was reported as saying the silos were built with dprk assistance .

one account of a tour of the silo complex also showed reported footage of a missile launch from a silo , which at least one analyst said looked like the launch of a dprk missile from its silo .

although iran kept the location of the silos a secret , others , such as jane's defence weekly , said iran's hidden silos were near tabriz and khorramabad .

irgc deputy commander bg hossein salami further added "our missiles have aggressive , tactical , strategically deterrent and defensive features , of course we will not initiate any operation but our responses will be purely aggressive. .

the washington post reported a shahab - 3 was fired at targets at sea and added that iranian television quoted iranian military officials saying that iran "began building a network of such silos across the nation 15 years ago. .

great prophet 7 ( july 2012 ) iran held military exercises and missile launches july 1-3 , 2012 .

iran reported that it fired from different locations tens of shahab - 1 and shahab - 2 srbms , shahab - 3 mrbms and fateh , qiam , persian gulf , and zelzal tactical ballistic missiles simultaneously at a mock air base in iran's lut desert in southeastern iran .

irgc aerospace force commander bg amir ali hajizadeh said "these maneuvers send a message to the adventurous nations that the irgc is standing up to bullies alongside the determined and unified iranian nation , and will decisively respond to any trouble they cause. .

iran's fars news agency further said these exercises "underline tehran's threat to strike u.s. military bases in the neighboring countries — in afghanistan , bahrain , kuwait and saudi arabia — if it comes under attack by israel or the united states. .

the associated press ( ap ) reported from iranian sources that the missile tests demonstrated improved accuracy where 90% of the missiles hit their targets .

additionally , ap reported that iran said it fired a considerable number of missiles against a single target ( mock air base ) making it "impossible for anti - missile systems to intercept and destroy them. .

iran warned that 35 u.s. military bases in the middle east are within iran's missile range and would "be destroyed within seconds after any attack on iran. .

another source said iran claimed it had launched a missile capable of reaching targets 2,000 km away , but only fired to a range of 1,300 km .

and repeated many of the things said here of july 2012 test launches .

there was no reported official u.s. response as to the accuracy of the claims made by iran about their great prophet 7 exercises .

appendix b .

reporting requirements relevant to iranian ballistic missile programs appendix c. other estimates of iran's ballistic missile .

