omb circulars operationalize implementation for agencies .

frequently , if legislation gives omb discretion over administrative concerns , omb details the legislation's procedural requirements and may impose its own additional requirements , provided that these do not contravene the enacted legislation .

ipera requires omb to issue implementation guidance to agencies .

this government - wide guidance was issued april 11 , 2011 , through the revision of appendix c of omb circular a - 123 ( hereinafter , a - 123 ) , management's responsibility for internal control .

agencies were required to begin using the revised guidance for their fy2011 reporting .

agencies have had 10 years to implement improper payment legislation , beginning with the enactment of ipia in 2002 , which established the core requirements of improper payments reduction .

ipera , while enacted more recently , reinforced ipia's core requirements and expanded agencies' responsibilities to prevent and recover improper payments .

therefore , it is possible to evaluate agency efforts in reducing payment error rates over several years , and to make an initial assessment of recovery audit programs .

in an attempt to expand the scope of data used to verify that payments are being made to eligible recipients and for the correct amount , congress passed the improper payments elimination and recovery audit improvement act of 2012 ( iperia ; p.l .

112-248 ) .

iperia is in the early stages of implementation — president obama signed it into law on january 10 , 2013 — so there is no evidence yet as to the law's effectiveness in reducing improper payments and increasing the amounts recovered .

the following section describes key provisions and provides a brief analysis of the potential benefits of the law .

on may 8 , 2013 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs held a hearing on eliminating improper payments to people who have already died .

iperia included provisions that were intended to address this problem — the law requires agencies to check ssa's death master file ( dmf ) to ensure intended recipients are still alive before issuing payments .

a report by the government accountability office ( gao ) , however , determined that dmf data were flawed and that many improper payments to decedents were going undetected .

senator carper , committee chairman , called the problem "frustrating but solvable" and stated that he wanted the hearing to result in steps that the government could take to ensure agencies receive the most accurate information from the dmf .

according to daniel burtoni , gao director of education , workforce , and income security issues , who testified at the hearing , the accuracy of the dmf is uncertain because ssa does not verify all of the death reports it receives .

multiple sources report deaths to ssa , some of which ssa considers "highly accurate" and others that ssa considers "less accurate. .

ssa reviews each file submitted from a "less accurate" source before recording an individual as deceased in the dmf .

the "less accurate" sources include post offices , financial institutions , the department of veterans affairs , and the centers for medicare and medicaid services .

ssa does not verify death reports from "highly accurate" sources before recording an individual as deceased in the dmf .

the "highly accurate" sources include data from states reported through the electronic death registration system ( edrs ) , family members , and funeral directors .

regardless of the source , ssa does not verify deaths reported for non - beneficiaries .

if a post office submitted a death report to ssa , for example , the death would be recorded in the dmf without verification if the decedent was not receiving ssa benefits .

burtoni did not provide an estimate of how many dmf files are inaccurate .

burtoni also discussed the degree to which agencies utilize the dmf .

as noted , ssa receives death data from state governments .

the social security act , however , prohibits ssa from sharing state data with federal agencies that do not pay benefits .

ssa , therefore , must determine whether an agency is eligible for access to the full dmf on a case - by - case basis .

as of may 8 , 2013 , ssa had granted full access to only six federal agencies , all of which make benefit payments: centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) department of defense ( dod ) department of veterans affairs ( va ) internal revenue service ( irs ) office of personnel management ( opm ) railroad retirement board ( rrb ) agencies are generally required to reimburse ssa for the "reasonable cost of sharing the [dmf] data. .

despite this , burtoni noted that ssa is not reimbursed by all agencies for access to the full dmf .

the va is statutorily exempt from paying ssa , so it does not reimburse ssa at all .

neither does opm , which has an arrangement with ssa under which the agencies exchange information at no cost to either party .

cms and dod do reimburse ssa , but at different amounts .

other federal agencies — including some that pay benefits — purchase only the partial dmf .

these agencies include the departments of labor , agriculture , and justice .

the partial dmf excludes data provided by states — estimated at about 11 million death reports .

the agencies that pay benefits may be eligible for access to the full dmf , but they have not requested access .

burtoni did not explain why some benefit - paying agencies had not requested access to the full dmf .

in response to issues raised at the may 8 , 2013 , hearing , chairman carper introduced s. 1360 , the improper payments agency cooperation enhancement act of 2013 .

the bill's provisions , discussed below , are directed at improving the accuracy of , and increasing access to , dmf data .

s. 1360 would require the ssa commissioner ( commissioner ) to establish a national deaths registry ( registry ) that must include information agencies need to fully implement iperia .

the commissioner would also be required to enter into agreements with federal agencies that would enable them to have full access to all of the death data in the registry .

agencies would be required to reimburse the commissioner for the reasonable cost of carrying out the agreement .

the commissioner would also be required to enter into similar agreements with state , local , and tribal governments , "to the extent feasible. .

the agreements would help them prevent , identify , and recover improper payments made under federally funded programs .

these agreements , like those made with federal agencies , would require state , local , or tribal governments to reimburse the commissioner for access to the registry .

the bill would also require the commissioner to implement procedures for identifying and correcting errors , including those identified by members of the public ; determining the accuracy of death records in the registry ; ensuring that the registry is operated and maintained according to best practices for privacy , security , and disclosure ; and providing data to contractors that have been certified by a federal agency , or state , local , or tribal government , as being compliant with applicable privacy and security protocols .

the commissioner would be given the specific authority to share all of the information in the registry with any federal agency , including data received from states .

this provision would supersede the language in the social security act that prohibits the commissioner from sharing state data with federal agencies that do not provide benefits .

s. 1360 would require the director of the office of management and budget ( director ) to identify agencies that have data which might be used for matching data in the registry .

if an agency has data on annuity recipients , for example , the director must establish a method for comparing the data the agency has with the data in the registry .

the commissioner would then use the comparison to confirm the accuracy and completeness of the registry data , and to identify conflicting data that needs to be further researched .

each agency identified by the director would be required to submit to the commissioner , on a regular basis , data relating to the death of a federal beneficiary , federal annuitant recipient , or other individual that might be in the registry .

the director would be required to submit a plan to congress that explains how state , local , and tribal governments will use data matching to improve the accuracy of data in the registry and in their own databases .

s. 1360 would require the u.s .

postal service to provide agencies access to delivery addresses , including a list of known locations of commercial mailboxes .

the postal service has the authority to request reimbursement from agencies that use this data .

in addition , federal agencies with data that pertain to federal beneficiaries or annuitants must share that data with other agencies .

s. 1360 would require the secretary of the treasury , within 180 days of enactment , to submit a report to congress which includes a description of any analysis or investigation of data used to implement the "do not pay initiative. .

examples include matching data in the registry to state beneficiary enrollment lists , and comparing program data from multiple agencies to identify payment duplication .

the secretary of the treasury would also be required to describe the metrics used to determine whether data analytics reduced improper payments .

s. 1360 would require the omb director to assemble a task force of agencies to reduce payments to deceased federal annuitants .

to that end , the task force would be a forum to share best practices for identifying deceased annuitants and to improve data - sharing among agencies .

the task force must include representatives from four agencies: dod , ssa , va , and opm .

in addition , the task force must include any other agency that provides or conducts oversight of annuities .

s. 1360 includes provisions that , if fully implemented , may improve the accuracy of death data , which in turn may reduce improper payments to deceased individuals .

expanding data matching with state , local , and tribal governments , for example , would provide new sources of information against which the data in the registry could be compared .

participation in data sharing , however , comes with a cost .

the department of defense , for example , pays $40,000 a year for access to the registry .

it is not known how many state , local , and tribal governments would be able to obtain the funds needed to reimburse ssa for access to the registry .

as noted , the electronic death registration system ( edrs ) is considered a "highly accurate" source of data for the registry .

as of march 2013 , however , only 35 states submitted their death reports using edrs .

ssa estimates that with the necessary funding , edrs could be implemented in the remaining states within four years .

one option for improving the quality and quantity of death data in the registry would be to consider funding the implementation of edrs nation - wide .

among the questions that might be asked to assist congress in this decision are do the states without edrs have the capacity to implement it without a major technology upgrade ? .

would states contribute to the cost of implementing edrs ? .

how long would it take for the government to recover its investment in edrs expansion through the prevention and recovery of improper payments ? .

s. 1360 includes language that would permit ssa to share state death data with federal agencies that do not issue benefit payments — agencies that are currently prohibited from accessing state death data by the social security act .

agencies may discover similar statutory obstacles as they try to formalize data sharing agreements , as required by s. 1360 .

one option for identifying these statutory obstacles and making them known to congress would be to require the secretary of the treasury to include them in its report on data analytics .

s. 1360 requires the secretary to submit a report within 180 days of enactment that includes a description of "multiple agencies and programs for which comparison of data could show payment duplication. .

as part of that review , the secretary could be required to work with agencies to determine whether any statutory barriers to sharing that data exist .

another option would be to require the omb director to include statutory barriers in its annual report on the implementation of s. 1360 .

the first such annual report would be required not more than one year after the enactment of s. 1360 .

