the federal communications commission ( fcc ) regulates a number of disability - related telecommunications services , including video relay service ( vrs ) .

vrs is a form of telecommunications relay service ( trs ) .

the service allows persons with hearing disabilities , using american sign language ( asl ) , to communicate with voice telephone users through video equipment rather than through typed text .

video equipment links the vrs user with a "communications assistant" ( ca ) so that the vrs user and the ca can see and communicate with each other in signed conversation ( see figure 1 ) .

vrs has quickly become a very popular service .

it offers several features not available with the text - based trs: people with hearing disabilities can communicate using asl rather than typing what they want to say .

this allows them to incorporate facial expressions and body language into their conversations , which cannot be done using text .

a vrs call is more like a telephone conversation between two hearing persons .

for example , the parties can interrupt each other .

the parties cannot interrupt each other during a traditional trs call because the parties have to take turns communicating with the ca .

conversation flows more naturally between the parties , so the conversation may take place more quickly than with trs .

vrs calls may be made between asl users and hearing persons speaking either english or spanish .

vrs is different from other forms of trs in two important ways: ( 1 ) the conversation between the vrs user and the ca is made through a video link and sign language rather than typed text ; and ( 2 ) the service relies on the internet , rather than the public telephone system , for the connection between the vrs user and the ca .

also , unlike some other forms of trs , vrs is not mandatory .

vrs is free to the caller , and vrs providers are reimbursed for their costs from the trs fund .

the fcc has implemented changes to the vrs program to reduce fraud and abuse , better manage the amount of money that is collected to fund the program , and take advantage of technological advancements .

the primary concern of the deaf and hard - of - hearing community appears to be that cuts to the fund may result in fewer and less - qualified asl interpreters , which would decrease the functional equivalency of the service .

additionally , it is concerned that changes in technology — even "better" technology — will decrease competition among service providers , possibly decreasing innovation .

moreover , the community believes that changes in the technology could pose challenges to some users and make placing and receiving calls more difficult .

the deaf and hard - of - hearing community will likely continue to contact congress whenever changes are proposed for the vrs program .

the community relies heavily on the program , so it is understandable that they might view any proposed changes with concern .

however , the fcc also has a responsibility to make sure that the fund remains solvent and to take advantage of advances in technology that it has determined will improve the system .

congress may wish to monitor the current proposed changes to the system to ensure that the fcc , while working to modernize trs technology and minimize financial abuse , also gives full consideration to the concerns of the deaf and hard - of - hearing community .

