from the inception of the american federal government , congress has required executive branch agencies to make certain information and records publicly available to make the actions and information of the government transparent to the public .

some scholars and statesmen , including james madison , described information access as an essential cornerstone of democratic governance .

in an august 4 , 1822 , letter to william t. barry , madison wrote , a popular government without popular information , or the means of acquiring it , is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy ; or perhaps both .

knowledge will forever govern ignorance: and a people who mean to be their own governors , must arm themselves with the power which knowledge gives .

at the same time , congress has protected other information from public release .

access to government actions and information is often in tension with information protection .

certain government actions and records are protected from public release for , among other reasons , national security and personal privacy reasons .

president george washington , in a march 1796 speech in the house of representatives , for example , refused to provide the house with a copy of the instructions to the minister of the united states in the treaty with the king of great britain , sending the chamber a message that read as follows: [t]he nature of foreign negotiations requires caution ; and their success might often depend on secrecy ; and even , when brought to a conclusion , a full disclosure of all the measures , demands , or eventual concessions which may have been proposed or contemplated would be extremely impolitic: for this might have a pernicious influence on future negotiations ; or produce immediate inconveniences , perhaps danger and mischief , in relation to other powers .

among the congressional powers available to enforce federal transparency and to protect certain other materials from public release are the powers to legislate , hold hearings , issue subpoenas , and control the federal budget .

congress has , from time to time , used its legislative powers to create and amend laws that affect the public's access to government operations and records .

among these laws are the federal register act , the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , the freedom of information act ( foia ) , the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) , the government in the sunshine act , and the privacy act .

although there are laws that affect access to government information , there is no single definition for what constitutes transparency — nor is there an agreed upon way to measure it .

social scientists and practitioners have offered a variety of definitions for transparency ; among them are "active disclosure" and "the publicizing of incumbent policy choices. .

these two definitions convey that transparency is linked to the release of information to an interested public .

transparency , however , may be defined as not only the disclosure of government information , but the access , comprehension , and use of it by the public .

scholars and private organizations have attempted to measure transparency by surveying citizens and journalists on their perceptions of government openness as well as by examining executive branch implementation of foia .

these measures have sometimes relied on public perceptions of transparency or journalists' accounts of information access .

each definition and measurement of transparency has strengths and weaknesses .

attempts to make the executive branch more transparent require congress , the public , and the executive branch itself to ensure that appropriate information is released and that the information can be used and analyzed .

users of such released information , therefore , must have the time and the tools to interpret and understand the data in order to hold government accountable .

congress plays an active role in defining the balance between transparency and secrecy in american democratic society .

while openness in government is considered essential to democratic operations and deliberations , secrecy can protect americans from security threats , privacy invasion , and economic harm .

as agencies increasingly use new technologies to collect , maintain , and release federal records and data , congress may have an interest in ensuring that the public has the ability to find and use the data properly .

additionally , congress may choose to determine whether agencies are inappropriately withholding documents or improperly releasing sensitive materials .

accordingly , this report assesses scholarly and practical definitions of transparency and provides an analysis of the concept of transparency , with a focus on transparency in the executive branch of the federal government .

it also examines how the release of large amounts of public data may make the operations of government more or , counter - intuitively , less transparent .

releasing vast amounts of raw data , for example , could make it difficult for the public to find the information they seek or to understand how to analyze data they find .

this report examines statutes , initiatives , and other items that seek to make information more available to the public as well as those that seek to protect certain information from release to the public .

this report examines transparency and secrecy from the standpoint of how the public historically has and can currently access government information .

it also explores the statutes and policies in place to ensure the protection of certain information from public release .

the report then describes existing powers , authorities , and initiatives that promote transparency or protect federal records from public release .

finally , this report analyzes whether existing transparency initiatives are effective in reaching their stated goals .

as already noted , there is no single definition of what constitutes transparency or method for measuring it .

for the purposes of this report , transparency comprises not only the disclosure of government information , but also the access , comprehension , and use of this information by the public .

transparency , as such , requires a public that can acquire , understand , and use the information that it receives from the federal government .

this concept of transparency , however , is not the only possible designation of the term .

an accessible and transparent government is one goal of a functioning democracy , but access to government information may not always be warranted or safe .

certain records may need to be kept secret by the federal government to protect national security , personal privacy , or economic security .

oftentimes , transparency and secrecy — both of which are inherent values of the american republic — are in tension with one another .

for example , james madison , one of the founding fathers and a primary contributor to the american constitution , wrote in the federalist papers about the need for government that could be controlled by the people .

if men were angels , no government would be necessary .

if angels were to govern men , neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary .

in framing a government which is to be administered by men over men , the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed ; and in the next place oblige it to control itself .

a dependence on the people is , no doubt , the primary control on the government ; but experience has taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary options .

madison argued that government needed to be controlled , and the people were the most powerful tool to do so .

control over the government would come in the form of an informed citizenry .

like mr. madison , thomas jefferson noted the importance of a vigilant citizenry in a january 16 , 1787 , letter to edward carrington .

we have the greatest opportunity the world has ever seen , as long as we remain honest — which will be as long as we can keep the attention of our people alive .

if they once become inattentive to public affairs , you and i , and congress and assemblies , judges and governors would all become wolves .

although access to executive branch information has been of interest to america's leaders from the founding fathers to the present day , certain records may require protection from public release .

the meetings in philadelphia at which the founding fathers drafted the constitution , for example , were held in secret .

in t he federalist papers , john jay wrote of times when secrecy can convince participants in a negotiation to be more open and frank in their discussion .

it seldom happens in the negotiation of treaties of whatever nature , but that perfect secrecy and immediate dispatch are sometimes requisite .

there are cases where the most useful intelligence may be obtained , if the persons possessing it can be relieved from apprehensions of discovery .

in 2007 , then - u.s. comptroller general david m. walker , for example , called transparency a "key to our nation's governing processes. .

on january 21 , 2009 — his first full day in office — president obama issued an executive order that said he would commit his administration to "an unprecedented level of openness" and to the establishment of "a system of transparency , public participation , and collaboration. .

private watchdog organizations have had mixed reviews of this initiative .

the tension between access and secrecy was typified after the public release of diplomatic cables to the wikileaks.org website .

diplomats who fear the information they write in such cables may be released to the public may be "more cautious" about the contents .

such caution could lead to less candid transfers of information between government officials .

secretary of state hillary r. clinton called the wikileaks.org release "not just an attack on america's foreign policy interests .

it is an attack on the international community — the alliances and partnerships , the conversations and negotiations , that safeguard global security and advance economic prosperity. .

the wikileaks.org release may have made foreign diplomacy more visible in this case .

the release of documents may or and may not affect how foreign officials communicate with american officials .

in the future , however , diplomatic negotiations may be pushed further from public access because of the leak .

diplomats may also struggle to conduct more candid conversations with world leaders who are concerned that their conversations may be released to the public .

then - secretary of defense robert m. gates , however , reportedly said that the leak would not greatly affect american diplomacy .

at a november 30 , 2010 , press conference , mr. gates is reported as saying the following: now , i've heard the impact of these releases on our foreign policy described as a meltdown , as a game - changer , and so on .

i think those descriptions are fairly significantly overwrought .

the fact is , governments deal with the united states because it's in their interest , not because they like us , not because they trust us , and not because they believe we can keep secrets .

many governments — some governments deal with us because they fear us , some because they respect us , most because they need us .

we are still essentially , as has been said before , the indispensable nation .

the federal government may claim , for example , that the release of certain information will endanger national security , violate the privacy of an individual , or affect an ongoing criminal investigation .

mr. madison , in federalist 10 , had foreseen the need for certain records protections , writing that "[d]emocracies have been found incompatible with personal security or the rights of property ; and have in general been as short in their lives as they have been violent in their death. .

the american republic , therefore , has to balance access to government information with protection of personal and national security interests .

max weber , a sociologist who studied bureaucracy in the late 1800s and early 1900s , wrote extensively on public administration — with some focus on the role of public employees' expertise .

according to weber , keeping employees' expertise within the bureaucracy ( as opposed to sharing expertise with outside government officials or the public ) gives an agency greater autonomy and control of its mission .

federal employees may withhold information to ensure that their agency maintains control and can avoid outside , sometimes political , influence .

mr. weber , for example , wrote the following: bureaucratic administration always tends to exclude the public , to hide its knowledge and action from criticism as well as it can.… in facing a parliament , the bureaucracy fights , out of a sure power instinct , every one of that institution's attempts to gain through its own means … expert knowledge from the interested parties .

bureaucracy naturally prefers a poorly informed , and hence powerless , parliament — at least insofar as this ignorance is compatible with the bureaucracy's own interests.… the absolute monarch too , is powerless in the face of the superior knowledge of the bureaucratic expert — in a certain sense more so than any other political head .

throughout american history , public access to information has ebbed and flowed .

sometimes that access has been based on the legal interpretations of individual presidential administrations .

other times , historical context modified how the federal government maintained , protected , and released records .

for instance , one scholar argued that the importance of federal government transparency grew after world war ii because of unprecedented growth in the size of the bureaucracy and the emergence of the cold war , which created a "highly secretive national security complex. .

today , technology affects how the public interacts with the federal government as well as what information people expect from it .

increasing ubiquity of the internet and the rise of e - government have given the public 24-hour access to certain government information and changed some public perceptions and expectations about government operations .

some scholars have found that e - government has increased the public's trust in government by increasing access to and dissemination of records and information .

the constitution imbues congress with an array of formal powers — for example , lawmaking and impeachment — to hold the president and the administration accountable for their actions or inactions .

congress also has the power of the purse , which gives it the power to supply or withhold appropriations to initiatives that would affect access to government information .

in addition to explicit constitutional powers , implicit congressional responsibilities and powers may be found in the constitution .

oversight , for example , is an implicit constitutional power and obligation of congress .

according to historian arthur schlesinger jr. , "it was not considered necessary to make an explicit grant of such [oversight] authority .

the power to make laws implied the power to see whether they were faithfully executed. .

congress , therefore , can hold hearings at which representatives from executive branch agencies describe and defend their information access practices .

constitutional oversight and statutes are not the only mechanisms that have shaped executive branch transparency .

executive branch orders and initiatives as well as case law also have affected access to federal operations and records .

although not an exhaustive examination of the universe of authorities that affect access to government information , this report reviews and analyzes significant government actions — including statutes , executive branch memoranda and initiatives , and procurement policies — that scholars and practitioners commonly cite as providing a foundation for public access to executive branch operations and records .

the statutes and initiatives are presented in three broad categories , and are not presented in chronological order .

each category builds on some of the ideas introduced in the one before it .

the first category introduces statutes that provide the public presumed access to certain executive branch records and meetings .

the second category includes authorities that provide the public access to and participation in certain parts of the regulatory process .

the third category includes authorities or initiatives in which transparency may not be the primary focus , but a component or byproduct of is effects .

public access to government information and operations has changed over time .

information access is only a part of what may be referred to as transparency .

as federal statutes and initiatives have been implemented over time — from the federal register act of 1935 to the obama administration's open government initiative of 2009 — the tools and skills needed for the public to not only access , but also understand and use federal information and data have evolved .

access to and use of government information may permit the public to make more informed decisions about factors that could affect their lives .

for example , parents may make more informed decisions on which child safety seat to purchase using data from the national traffic highway safety administration .

in another example , residents may learn more about the air and water quality in their neighborhoods using the environmental protection agency's my environment website .

this acquired knowledge can further be used to help shape and form policy debates , such as through participation in civic organizations or voting .

although access can contribute to a more informed citizenry , the constitutionally - established structure of the u.s. government authorizes federal officials , not the public , to determine and execute federal policy .

america's federal government is a representative democracy , which means that the people elect officials who are then authorized ( by virtue of being elected ) to enact laws and make policy choices .

james madison , in federalist 10 , describes the differences between a republic , or representative democracy , and a "direct democracy": the two great points of difference between a democracy and a republic are: first , the delegation of the government , in the latter , to a small number of citizens elected by the rest ; secondly , the greater number of citizens , and greater sphere of country , over which the latter may be extended .

the effect of the first difference is , on the one hand , to refine and enlarge the public views , by passing them through the medium of a chosen body of citizens , whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of their country , and whose patriotism and love of justice will be least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial considerations .

under such a regulation , it may well happen that the public voice , pronounced by the representatives of the people , will be more consonant to the public good than if pronounced by the people themselves , convened for the purpose .

in a representative democracy , elected officials are to collect the preferences of their constituents as a basis for lawmaking , oversight , and policymaking .

these preferences may contribute to or determine the decisions of a federal official .

transparency laws may allow the public to access and better understand the decisions made by elected officials and federal employees .

certain other transparency - related laws formalize methods for the public to participate in the policymaking process .

but in a representative democracy , federal officials must perform the functions of government .

transparency allows the public to better determine whether elected officials are properly and appropriately performing their elected or appointed tasks .

transparency does not replace the duties and functions of federal officials or federal employees .

instead , transparency , if operationalized effectively , may aid interested publics to hold the federal government more accountable for its actions or inactions .

the federal register act ( fra ) and the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , for example , give the public an opportunity to follow and participate in the regulatory process .

the apa formalized the public's authority to comment on and legally challenge federal regulations .

the fra and the apa each provide formal mechanisms for the public to access the daily operations of federal government , to participate in certain policymaking procedures , and to challenge any policy choices in court .

to become a participant , however , one needs to know how and where to access the federal register , the code of federal regulations , federalregister.gov , or regulations.gov .

although these acts provide the public greater access to government information and operations , the federal government retains considerable control over what information becomes publicly available , when information becomes available , and at what point the public can participate in the policymaking process .

the public , for example , generally may be unable to formally participate in the policymaking process prior to an agency first publishing a proposed rule in the federal register .

like the fra and the apa , foia provides access to information only after a record of activity is created .

foia does not allow the public to participate — in real time — in the policymaking process .

instead , it provides individuals with post - hoc access to information by allowing the public to retrace policymaking histories .

for foia to be an effective tool of transparency , foia requesters must know how to properly write and direct a foia request to the appropriate agency .

requesters who do not receive their requested materials may choose to challenge an agency's withholding administratively or in court .

if so , the requester may need additional knowledge about foia's exemptions and case law that may support or oppose the withholding .

faca offers the public a direct avenue for participation in the formulation of public policy .

private citizens and representatives of particular interests can serve on advisory committees , provided the committee is required to adhere to faca's requirements .

the public is provided access to faca committee meetings and records .

faca prohibits committees from performing any function outside of advising — faca committees may not implement any of their recommendations and they cannot require the federal government to implement the recommendations .

in all cases , a federal officer must determine whether to implement faca recommendations .

although faca allows public participation in the policymaking process , it still requires the public to attend meetings , which may be difficult or impossible for those who do not live in the area where a committee meeting is held .

faca also provides post - hoc access to government information , because a member of the public who is unable to attend the meeting can access meeting records after it takes place .

in some cases , federal agencies may be using new technology to make meetings and records more accessible .

for example , some agencies place committee records online and make audio or video recordings of the meetings available online .

additionally some departments or agencies , including health and human services , webcast meetings and permit online audience members to submit questions to committees in real time .

more recent government actions have adopted a more proactive form of transparency .

as noted above , the open government directive requires agencies to release a variety of new datasets to the public before they are requested .

with a multitude of new datasets and other information available to the public , the obama administration has stated it will be the duty of the public to keep agency performance in check .

this "crowdsourcing," or using the collective opinions of a mass , online audience , may improve the quality of data that are released to the public by allowing more people to search through datasets .

on data.gov , for example , users can rate datasets using a five - star scale .

moreover , users can click a link to "contact dataset owner" and send the administrator of the data an e - mail with thoughts or comments on the data .

the public can also "flag" the dataset for one of five reasons: copyright violation , offensive content , spam or junk , personal information , or other .

individuals who contact agencies are asked to provide their e - mail so they may receive a response from the contact point .

it is unclear whether agencies are required to respond to comments .

crowdsourcing may improve data and operations , but only for agencies that read and respond to comments and suggestions .

additionally , agencies need to make clear whether the data that are made available are complete and list their limitations .

the federal datasets may also provide opportunity for nonpartisan scholars to access and analyze datasets and create new tools to help the public better understand how government operates and provide oversight of federal data creation .

crowdsourcing , however , may give those members of the public with more time and resources more opportunity to review and analyze federal data .

releasing these datasets to the public also assumes that the public will have the knowledge , capacity , and resources to evaluate the data , offer valid insights , and reach replicable results and verifiable conclusions .

inadvertent or purposeful manipulation of the datasets may allow certain groups or individuals to present unclear or skewed interpretations of government datasets , or reach questionable conclusions .

as agencies release hundreds or thousands of datasets , users may need specialized knowledge to identify appropriate datasets to meet their needs .

counterintuitively , this releasing of datasets may decrease executive branch transparency .

for example , users may have to sift through thousands of datasets to determine which ones include the information they seek .

it may be difficult for a researcher to pinpoint the dataset he or she needs in a collection of similarly titled datasets .

other data may be made available in a format with which a researcher is unfamiliar .

making the data public without explicit user guidance does not necessarily make the data more accessible .

the administration's focus on so - called "smart disclosure" may allow a greater proportion of the public to both access and use federal data and information .

the guidance does not require agencies to employ smart disclosure strategies , but may encourage agencies to identify and consider methods of releasing data and records in ways that are timely and comprehensible .

congress may consider whether agencies should be required to implement certain smart disclosure strategies .

oversight of the implementation of smart disclosure strategies , however , could be difficult .

members of congress may not be familiar with each of the vast amount of datasets held by each agency , nor may they be aware of unique sensitivities of these data .

additionally , there may be significant costs associated with adapting certain datasets and vernacular to more standardized and accessible formats .

congress or the public may also have concerns about both the abilities and the affiliations of those who access government data , comment on federal regulations , or participate in federal government meetings .

most public participation may come from special interest groups that have the time , resources , and knowledge to engage with federal agencies .

using websites and other technology to solicit public opinion may , therefore , strengthen relationships between certain individuals or organizations and federal agencies — granting certain participants greater and faster access to policymakers .

congress may believe that executive branch policymakers should be more insulated from organized , sometimes partisan interests .

scholars have found that lawmakers play a significant role in creating or limiting the opportunities that private organizations have in accessing administrative agencies .

yet other scholars have found that attempts to insulate policymakers may result in restricted access for less - organized , smaller private organizations , while the wealthier , larger groups maintain access .

collaboration with the public may generate new ideas that could promote cost savings , assist in the distribution of benefits , or make the federal government more effective .

scholars have noted that public access to federal records and meetings may also provide oversight of the administrative process and increase "bureaucratic accountability. .

congress may decide that the federal government already provides the proper amount of formalized access to administrative agencies , and that private organizations are provided the proper amount of access to policymakers .

as noted throughout this report , the public has opportunities to participate in the regulatory process , to access certain federal records , and to attend certain public meetings .

many times , however , these opportunities come only after the federal government makes a formal proposal or takes formal action .

additionally , these opportunities require the public to have the time and resources to ask for records or attend meetings .

limiting public access to public records or agency meetings during the policymaking process could increase the influence of groups that have the greatest resources while alienating groups that may have interesting policy ideas but few resources .

conversely , limiting access could provide policymakers the opportunity to work more efficiently and without as much partisan influence .

as noted above , however , limiting access would not provide all opinions equal access to the policymaking process and could curtail public oversight of the administrative processes of the federal government .

increasing access to various aspects of the policymaking process could lengthen certain administrative processes , like the regulatory process , the operations of advisory committees , or federal contracting .

increasing access could also distort the design of a representative democracy by diminishing the role of the elected official "to refine and enlarge the public views. .

