in 1996 , congress passed the defense of marriage act ( doma , p.l .

104-199 ) "[t]o define and protect the institution of marriage. .

doma ( 1 ) allows states to refuse to recognize same - sex marriages or partnerships and ( 2 ) limits the recognition of these same - sex partnerships for purposes of any act of congress or by any federal bureau or agency .

as codified , doma has three sections .

the first provides the bill's name , the second section allows states to determine whether to recognize same - sex marriage , and the third defines the terms marriage and spouse for the purposes of federal enactments .

specifically , section 3 of doma says the following: in determining the meaning of any act of congress , or of any ruling , regulation , or interpretation of the various administrative bureaus and agencies of the united states , the word "marriage" means only a legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife , and the word "spouse" refers only to a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife .

the federal government provides a variety of benefits to its workforce , including health care , life insurance , pensions , and paid time off for vacation and sick leave .

federal employees are permitted by law to extend certain health , long - term care , and other benefits to their spouses .

doma prohibits the distribution of these spousal benefits to same - sex partners .

the federal government , however , provides other benefits to federal employees that may be extended to those who are associated with a federal employee , but who are not necessarily the employee's spouse .

in some cases , these benefits have been extended to the partners of federal employees who are in same - sex relationships .

on june 17 , 2009 , president obama issued a memorandum directing executive agencies to examine ways to extend benefits to federal employees in same - sex domestic partnerships or same - sex marriages within the authority of existing law .

on july 10 , 2009 , office of personnel management ( opm ) director john berry issued a memorandum directing all executive - branch agencies to review and report on the benefits offered to opposite - sex partners — whether married or not — of federal employees .

opm and the department of justice ( doj ) reviewed these reports and suggested to president obama actions that would extend some benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees .

on june 2 , 2010 , president obama released a second memorandum that extended specific benefits and perquisites to the same - sex partners of federal employees .

for certain benefits , the term spouse is either not found in the benefit's authorizing language or the authorizing language widens the scope of eligibility .

the benefits that were extended by the memorandum are those whose authorizing statutes do not use the term spouse to define or limit potential recipients of the benefit .

the administration argues that its actions comply with all federal laws , including doma .

among other benefits , the memorandum extended certain childcare and sick leave benefits that had previously only been available to opposite - sex spouses — including the authority to take up to 24 hours of unpaid leave when a same - sex partner or a partner's child is ill .

the newly extended benefits were made available upon the second memorandum's release .

in the 112 th congress , two bills were introduced that , if enacted , would have permitted a federal employee to provide insurance , travel , and other benefits to his or her same - sex partner .

on november 18 , 2011 , senator joseph lieberman introduced s. 1910 , the domestic partnership benefits and obligations act of 2011 , and representative tammy baldwin introduced a companion bill , h.r .

3485 .

on may 16 , 2012 , s. 1910 was ordered to be reported favorably from the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

h.r .

3485 was referred to the house oversight and government reform committee's subcommittee on workforce protections , the house education and the workforce's subcommittee on workforce protections , the house judiciary's subcommittee on courts , commercial and administrative law , and the committee on house administration .

no further action was taken on the bill .

congress may elect to examine , prohibit , or enact into law administration initiatives that made some benefits available to same - sex partners .

congress has the authority to determine if some , all , or none of the benefits that are available to the opposite - sex spouses of federal employees should be made available to the same - sex partners of federal employees .

the federal government provides a variety of benefits to federal civilian and military employees and retirees .

among these benefits are health insurance ; enhanced dental and vision benefits ; retirement and disability benefits and plans ; survivor benefits ; family , medical , and emergency leave ; and reimbursement of relocation costs .

various federal laws and regulations determine who is eligible to receive these benefits .

a federal employee who is married to someone of the opposite gender can , pursuant to federal law , extend many of these benefits to his or her spouse .

doma affects the application of benefits to the spouses and partners of federal employees .

doma defines marriage explicitly as "only a legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife. .

doma defines spouse as "a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife. .

pursuant to doma , these definitions are to be used when "determining the meaning of any act of congress. .

as such , doma prohibits the extension of any federal spousal benefit to the same - sex partners of federal employees .

in addition , specific laws or regulations , like the regulations for the family medical leave act , explicitly define spouse as a member of the opposite sex .

report language from the house committee on the judiciary in support of h.r .

3396 ( 104 th congress ; later enacted as doma ) stated in its introduction that doma sought to protect states' rights to determine whether same - sex couples could marry and be eligible for benefits .

doma , the report argued , anticipated certain legal questions that could arise from this arrangement .

the report said the following: with regard to federal law , a decision by one state to authorize same - sex "marriage" would raise the issue of whether such couples are entitled to federal benefits that depend on marital status .

h.r .

3396 anticipates these complicated questions by laying down clear rules to guide their resolution , and it does so in a manner that preserves each state's ability to decide the underlying policy issue however it chooses .

according to report language , the federal government had four specific interests in mind when drafting doma: defending and nurturing the institution of traditional , heterosexual marriage ; defending traditional notions of morality ; protecting state sovereignty and democratic self - governance ; and preserving scarce government resources .

the latter governmental interest was described in greater detail later in the report: government currently provides an array of material and other benefits to married couples in an effort to promote , protect , and prefer the institution of marriage .

while the committee has not undertaken an exhaustive examination of those benefits , it is clear that they do impose certain fiscal obligations on the federal government .

for example , survivorship benefits paid to the surviving spouse of a veteran of the armed services plainly cost the federal government money .

if hawaii ( or some other state ) were to permit homosexuals to "marry," these marital benefits would , absent some legislative response , presumably have to be made available to homosexual couples and surviving spouses of homosexual "marriages" on the same terms as they are now available to opposite - sex married couples and spouses .

to deny federal recognition to same - sex "marriages" will thus preserve scarce government resources , surely a legitimate government purpose .

some benefits to federal employees are extended specifically to the spouse of the federal employee , while the laws and regulations governing other benefits may not explicitly use the term spouse .

the obama administration has extended to the same - sex partners of federal employees some benefits that do not have the term spouse in their governing authorities .

the administration has argued that they have done so within the parameters of doma .

some organizations , however , including the non - profit family research council , have argued that the extension of these benefits is both costly and could undermine the federal definition of marriage .

president obama has issued two memoranda that address the eligibility of same - sex domestic partners for federal employee benefits .

the first memorandum directed agencies to determine which benefits could be offered within the parameters of existing law .

the second memorandum required agencies to extend specific benefits to the domestic partners of federal employees .

both federal employees and federal annuitants have access to certain benefits .

some of these benefits can be transferred to spouses or other designated persons .

in some cases , a federal employee's spouse may be explicitly authorized to receive a federal benefit .

in other cases , a federal employee may designate a particular person to receive a federal benefit .

this section reviews benefits that cannot be extended to same - sex partners , others that are available to same - sex partners , and still others that have been made available to same - sex partners by the obama administration .

these benefits have been mentioned in both current and previous legislation and executive - branch memoranda .

table 1 summarizes some of the benefits provided to federal employees and their spouses .

it also provides information on whether these benefits are available to the same - sex partners of federal employees .

this section provides analysis of some potential policy considerations congress may consider that are related to federal employees and the extension of health and other benefits to same - sex partners of federal employees .

congress may choose to examine or modify existing policies related to the extension of benefits to the partners of federal employees in same - sex relationships , or maintain existing policies .

currently benefits like health care , dental care and eye care are not available to the same - sex partner of a federal employee .

other benefits , like fmla and life insurance , however , are .

the obama administration has pledged its support for extending federal benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees .

the administration has extended some benefits to same - sex partners and has argued that its actions are within the parameters of existing laws .

doma , which was enacted by congress and signed into law by president william j. clinton , requires agencies to define spouse as a person of the opposite - sex , for the purpose of distributing federal benefits .

in november 2012 , cbo released its score of s. 1910 , which , as described above , sought to extend certain benefits and responsibilities to the same - sex partners of federal employees and annuitants .

the score projected that the extension of benefits from fy2013 through fy2022 would cost the federal government $144 million in discretionary dollars over those 10 years .

this estimate was $159 million and $211 million less than cbo's score of two similar bills from the 111 th congress ( h.r .

2517 and s. 1102 , respectively ) .

cbo's score of s. 1910 assumed less than 1% of the federal employee and annuitant population would have opted to enroll a same - sex partner in federal benefits programs .

the score also estimated that federal government premiums for federal health care would have been reduced by $13 million over ten years if same - sex partners had been eligible to enroll .

the savings would have emerged , according to cbo , because the law would have required health care providers to "recover payments when a third party is liable for the health care costs of a covered enrollee" and such recoveries would reduce government premiums .

the cbo estimates of h.r .

2517 and s. 1102 from the 111 th congress did not include recovery payment collections in their analyses .

a 2008 academic study estimated the cost of extending same - sex partner benefits to federal employees and annuitants at $41 million in the first year and $675 million over 10 years .

in testimony before the house oversight and government reform committee's subcommittee on the federal workforce , postal service , and district of columbia on july 8 , 2009 , office of personnel management director berry estimated that extending benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees and annuitants would have cost the government $56 million in 2010 .

current budgetary circumstances may discourage congress from extending benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees and annuitants .

as noted earlier in this report , when doma was enacted , the house report that accompanied the legislation stated that a primary goal of the law was to "preserve scarce government resources. .

congress often considers more than the cost or cost savings of a policy when choosing whether to act on it .

extending benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees is controversial , and may prompt moral or ethical concerns for members on all sides of the issue .

some members , for example , may believe that extending benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees violates a law enacted to require that marriage , for purposes of federal benefit programs , be defined as the union of one man and one woman .

other members , however , may believe that prohibiting the extension of benefits to same - sex partners results in unequal treatment of federal employees in same - sex relationships .

still other members may argue that extending benefits to federal employees in same - sex domestic partnerships is unfair to employees in opposite - sex partnerships .

for example , at a house committee on oversight and government reform hearing in july 2009 , representative chaffetz said the following: whether or not a heterosexual couple is dating and living together can meet all other standards except for the portion ... regarding ... same - sex status is of concern to me .

if they ... are not afforded the same rights , this bill is directly discriminatory against heterosexual couples , and that , to me , is one of the unintended consequences that i have a serious concern [about] and question... .

this report , however , does not address the ethical and legal debates surrounding doma and same - sex marriage .

as discussed earlier in this report , president obama's june 2 , 2010 , memorandum to the heads of executive branch departments and agencies requires opm to create and present to the president an annual report on agency progress toward the extension of certain benefits to same - sex domestic partners .

congress may choose to stop the extension of these benefits by enacting legislation explicitly prohibiting their extension .

no legislation has been introduced that would scale back the same - sex partner benefits extended by the obama administration .

conversely , congress has the authority to enact into law some , all , or none of the memorandum .

congress may choose to hold hearings to examine the implementation of the memorandum .

the definition of "domestic partner" is in dispute .

doma defines marriage , for purposes of federal benefit programs , as the union of one man and one woman .

for the purposes of distributing federal benefits to the partners of opposite - sex couples , the federal government recognizes a spouse from the date of legal marriage to either divorce or death .

state and local governments or companies that wish to provide domestic partner benefits need to define "domestic partner" for the purpose of the benefits .

some state and local governments and companies that operate in jurisdictions that recognize same - sex marriage or domestic partnerships have required that same - sex partners be married in order to receive domestic partner benefits .

employees in states that do not recognize same - sex marriage would be required to meet the definition required by the entity that is providing the benefits .

it may be difficult to define the start and end of a same - sex partnership and because many same - sex partnerships are recognized in limited circumstances or not at all , the start and dissolution of such unions may vary based on jurisdiction .

this could be problematic for the federal government as an employer because the federal government has employees in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories ( as well as international employees ) — some of which recognize same - sex marriages , some of which recognize domestic partnerships , and some of which do not recognize any same - sex partnership .

if congress chose to enact a law to extend same - sex partner benefits , it would have to define same - sex partnership to incorporate the various terms states use for such unions as well as capture such unions that exist in states that do not acknowledge same - sex relationships .

in addition , congress would have to specify what would constitute the start of such a partnership and what would qualify as its end .

married couples can use a marriage license to verify their committed relationship for legal purposes .

same - sex couples , however , have no license or other type of document to verify their relationship for federal legal purposes .

if congress were to provide benefits to the same - sex partners of federal employees , congress may also decide that the federal government must verify that benefit applicants are in a committed , same - sex domestic partnership .

congress may determine that each agency should be given authority to verify whether an employee is in a same - sex relationship or if verification of a committed same - sex relationship would be more effective if it were centralized within opm .

congress may choose to enact legislation that would make opm the central clearinghouse for affidavits required to qualify for same - sex partner benefits .

designating opm as the only agency with the authority to maintain those records could increase employee privacy , making it less likely that federal employees' private information is made public .

giving each individual agency the authority to maintain the affidavits could make the documents more susceptible to information leaks , as each agency could have a different system of recordkeeping .

in addition , giving individual agencies the authority to file the affidavits makes it more likely that federal employees applying for the benefits may know the person with whom they must file the record , making the process less anonymous .

some federal employees may be less likely to enroll in the program if they must identify themselves as gay or lesbian in front of a co - worker .

moreover , many federal employees may leave one agency to take a temporary or permanent position in another .

opm may provide the most logical clearinghouse for benefits processing because it could remove the need for employees who move from one agency to another to reapply for the same benefits .

on the other hand , congress may determine that opm's mission does not include this type of government - wide recordkeeping role related to federal benefits .

giving individual agencies the authority to certify employee affidavits would not task opm with a responsibility it may not have the capacity to undertake .

some have expressed the concerns about the potential for abuse and that some employees may claim to be in a partnership solely for the purpose of receiving benefits .

this could be the case if the requirements for obtaining recognition of a domestic partnership were less stringent than the requirements for opposite sex couples to obtain a marriage license .

some federal employees may not be married to their domestic partners , whether that partner is of the same or a different gender .

as noted above , the domestic partners of these employees are not eligible to receive many federal benefits because they do not qualify as a "spouse," pursuant to federal law .

in a house oversight and government reform committee report that accompanied a bill in the 111 th congress that sought to extend same - sex partner benefits , the committee wrote the following: federal employees living with opposite sex domestic partners have the option of marriage , which would entitle the employee and his or her spouse to the receipt of these benefits .

same sex partners may only get married in a handful of states .

even in these cases , the federal government does not recognize the marriage because of the defense of marriage act ( doma ) .

h.r .

2517 does not affect doma .

therefore , under current opm guidelines , same sex partners , even where married , are ineligible to receive these benefits as spousal benefits .

congress may choose to extend benefits only to those in legally recognized same - sex domestic partnerships .

this limitation would control the costs associated with extending partner benefits by restricting the number of possible beneficiaries .

congress , however , may also consider extending benefits to the domestic partner of any federal employee , regardless of that partner's gender .

such action may attract more candidates to federal jobs .

such action also would permit an employee to qualify for federal benefits without having to identify the gender of his or her domestic - partner .

some employees may be hesitant to identify the gender of their domestic partner , even if the affidavit is confidential .

the extension of benefits to such partners regardless of gender , however , could increase the costs of the fehbp .

doma precludes same - sex partners from being recognized as a married couple under the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

a complete overview and analysis of the tax implications of same - sex marriage is beyond the scope of this report .

however , the tax treatment of health benefits may be relevant to federal employees who are in same - sex relationships , particularly when one member of the couple works in the private sector .

same - sex couples have a larger tax liability when one partner's health insurance benefits are extended to the other partner .

while a federal employee's health plan cannot cover a same - sex partner , certain employers in the private sector choose to extend health insurance coverage to same - sex partners .

the extension of this benefit often increases the tax liability of a same - sex couple .

under current law , opposite - sex spouses can exclude from gross income employer contributions to their health insurance plans .

as a result of doma , same - sex couples must pay taxes on the employer contributions that cover a same - sex partner , sometimes referred to as "imputed income. .

for example , if an employer contributed $80 per paycheck to the cost of an employee's health insurance plan that covered a same sex partner , the employee would have to include some portion of the $80 in their gross income , increasing their taxable income ( including payroll taxes ) and ultimately their tax liability .

in addition , if federal health benefits were extended to same - sex couples , but doma was not repealed , federal employees who extended their health coverage to their same - sex partner would also be subject to additional taxation from the "imputed income," as defined above .

