more than half the states require a voter to provide a specified identification document ( id ) to cast a ballot at the polling place , and a few extend the requirement to absentee or mail - in voting .

many states require an id with a photograph of the voter ( photo id ) .

some require a document that does not need to include such a photograph ( nonphoto id ) .

others do not require any type of id to vote , but a voter may be asked to provide certain information to verify what is contained in the registration record or otherwise confirm his or her identity , such as stating an address or birth date or providing a signature .

voter identification requirements across the states vary in flexibility , in the types of documents allowed , in exceptions made to the requirements , and in the recourse available to a voter who cannot comply with the id requirement at the polls .

photo id requirements in particular have been a major issue of policy debate in recent years , but for both photo and nonphoto id , the range of ids accepted and how strictly the state enforces the requirement have also been sources of controversy .

debates over such requirements are typically complex and can be contentious .

this report provides an updated overview of state requirements for voters to present some form of id before casting a ballot in a federal election .

the report also discusses the origins of voter id , relevant federal legislative action in the 114 th congress , and selected legal and policy issues related to state voter id laws .

the scope is limited to identification requirements for voting ; the report does not address voter registration requirements .

several bills introduced in the 114 th congress contain provisions pertaining to voter id .

some of those bills contain provisions would promote or protect voter id requirements , while provisions in others would modify , restrict , or eliminate the use of such requirements .

h.r .

885 would shield voter id requirements from some challenges .

it would amend section 2 of the voting rights act ( vra ) relating to the requirement for federal courts to block procedures that deny or abridge voting rights .

it would expand the kinds of violations that would trigger such actions by the courts , but it would exclude voter photo id requirements from the list of violations under the section .

h.r .

2867 and s. 1659 would restrict the use of voter id .

it would amend the vra to require preclearance under section 4 of state changes to voter id requirements that would make them more stringent than either those required of first - time voters under hava or , for voter registration , those in effect in the state at the time of enactment of the bill .

h.r .

3277 would eliminate voter id requirements .

it would amend hava to prohibit election officials from requiring photo id for registering to vote or for voting .

h.r .

3364 would not directly prohibit voter id requirements but would require states to provide an alternative .

it would amend hava to permit a voter — other than a first - time voter who registered by mail — to meet an identification requirement for voting by signing a sworn statement attesting to his or her identity .

the bill would require states to make preprinted statements available to absentee voters and at the polls , and it would prohibit a state from requiring a voter who presents the form to be required to vote a provisional ballot .

similar proposals for first - time voters were debated in congress when hava was being considered .

several states that do not require voter id currently require an affidavit or signature by a voter before the voter can cast a ballot .

h.r .

5557 would restrict voter id requirements .

it would amend hava and nvra to prohibit requiring a voter id that has an associated cost .

s. 1912 would modify state voter id requirements .

the bill stipulates that states or jurisdictions with such requirements shall accept a tribal identification card as valid for that purpose .

as of june 2016 , none of those bills had received further consideration by the committees to which they were referred .

a discharge petition was filed that month for h.r .

2867 .

as with many aspects of election administration , states vary widely with respect to verifying voter identity .

some require photo id , others nonphoto id , and yet others nondocument identification .

some states with id requirements accept a broad range of documents , while others permit only a narrow range .

some states permit voters without id to confirm their identity through another means , while others do not .

as shown in figure 1 and the two tables in the appendix , 32 states require a voter to show id before voting at a polling place .

the other 18 states and the district of columbia do not require a voter to provide any id to vote — they have a range of nondocument requirements instead .

figure 1 depicts state id requirements as organized into five categories , based on whether the state requires a document id , whether an id must have the voter's photograph , and whether the id requirement is strictly enforced .

table a - 1 describes the specific requirements for photo id states , and table a - 2 for states requiring an id that need not be photographic .

the differences among requirements in the states are sufficiently nuanced that observers may reasonably differ in characterizing a state's requirements as strictly enforced or not .

for purposes of this report , whether an id requirement is considered strictly enforced is based on interpretation of the requirement as described in state law or available guidance .

in a state with a strictly enforced requirement , a voter who does not present the required id at the polling place — with certain exceptions that vary among the states — either cannot cast a ballot at all or must cast a provisional ballot and take action after leaving the polling place to verify his or her identity in order for the ballot to be counted .

by those criteria , 9 states have a strictly enforced photo id requirement ( alabama , georgia , indiana , kansas , mississippi , north dakota , tennessee , virginia , and wisconsin ) , and 4 states have a strictly enforced nonphoto id requirement ( arizona , missouri , texas , and utah ) .

a voter without an id is permitted other means of identification in 9 other states requiring photo id ( florida , idaho , louisiana , michigan , new hampshire , rhode island , south carolina , south dakota , and washington ) , and the 10 others requiring nonphoto id ( alaska , arkansas , colorado , connecticut , delaware , hawaii , kentucky , montana , ohio , and oklahoma ) .

examples of such alternative means of identification include signing an affidavit or providing a nonphoto id .

in some states voters may cast a provisional ballot , and the election office will attempt to confirm identity subsequently by matching information or a signature that is provided by the voter against the information that the office has on file .

georgia and indiana were the first states to enact strictly enforced photo id requirements , in 2003 and 2005 , respectively .

the most recent such requirement is that of north dakota , enacted in 2015 .

oregon and washington conduct elections entirely by mail .

in these two states , election officials mail ballots to all registered voters , who are not required to provide ids when submitting those ballots .

both states also permit voters to cast a ballot in person during a designated voting period that ends on election day .

washington requires either a photo id or signature declaration for in - person voting .

oregon uses signature verification for both mail - in and in - person ballots .

some states in the "strictly enforced" category also provide exceptions or other recourse to a restricted group of voters .

for example , kansas permits voters with religious objection against being photographed to sign a form declaring the objection either in advance or at the polling place .

alabama and missouri permit voters without ids to cast regular ballots if two election officials at the polling place sign an affidavit attesting to the voter's identity and eligibility .

the 19 states with id requirements not categorized as strictly enforced permit ballots to be counted for most or all voters who do not have id without the need for them to take action after leaving the polling place .

for example , in florida , a voter without an id must cast a provisional ballot , but it will be counted if the signature on the ballot matches that in the registration record .

in south carolina , a voter without a photo id must cast a provisional ballot along with a declaration of a "reasonable impediment" to obtaining such an id .

the ballot will be counted unless someone presents proof to the election commission that the voter is lying about his or her identity or the impediment .

sixteen states with photo id requirements had them in effect for the federal election in november 2014 .

among the other states that had enacted such requirements before the 2014 election , wisconsin's went into effect in 2015 .

because north dakota enacted its requirement in 2015 , the 2016 federal election will be the first for which it will be in effect .

the requirements enacted in arkansas and pennsylvania were rejected by state courts .

see also the section on " legal and constitutional issues regarding voter photo id laws . .

in the appendix , table a - 1 describes the photo id requirements for the 19 states with such a requirement .

table a - 2 describes requirements for the 14 states in which a voter is to provide some form of identification document that may be a photo or a nonphoto id .

about 60% of voters live in states with voter id requirements — 30% in photo id states and 20% in nonphoto id states — and about 30% live in the 13 states with strictly enforced voter id requirements .

some patterns can be discerned from the tables , such as on the kinds of ids accepted , application to mail - in and absentee voting , and the recourse voters have if they do not have an accepted id .

the discussion below illustrates both commonalities and the complexity of variation among state requirements .

state voter photo id laws have been the subject of litigation .

 ( while nonphoto id laws have also been challenged , this section focuses on legal issues relating to the generally stricter voter photo id laws. ) .

these laws have been challenged under the fourteenth amendment to the u.s. constitution , section 2 of the voting rights act ( vra ) , and state constitutional provisions .

such challenges have drawn attention in view of a 2008 u.s. supreme court ruling , discussed below , that upheld the constitutionality of an indiana voter photo id law .

challenges under section 2 of the vra are also notable because in the past , section 2 has generally been invoked in the context of redistricting .

section 2 of the vra provides a right of action for private citizens or the government to challenge discriminatory voting practices or procedures .

the law prohibits any voting qualification or practice by any state or political subdivision that results in the denial or abridgement of the right to vote based on race , color , or membership in a language minority .

the statute further provides that a violation is established if , based on the totality of circumstances , electoral processes are not equally open to participation by members of a racial or language minority group in that its members have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to elect representatives of their choice .

until the final weeks and months preceding the november 2014 election , due to ongoing appeals , the question of whether some state voter id laws would be in effect was unknown .

likewise , leading up to the november 8 , 2016 , presidential election , there has been ongoing litigation challenging certain state laws .

this section of the report analyzes challenges to voter photo id laws under the fourteenth amendment and section 2 of the vra , specifically addressing , by way of example , recent court rulings in north carolina and texas ; provides an overview of a challenge to a voter photo id law under a state constitutional provision ; and finally , discusses some potential implications of these challenges .

several issues may arise in the application of voter id requirements .

among them are these: implementation problems , especially for new or modified requirements voter difficulties in obtaining ids issues with recourse for voters with no id effects on turnout and risk of frau .

given recent state legislative activity on photo id , and identification requirements generally , it is likely that legislators in the states will continue to consider similar legislation in the future .

according to the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) , more than 200 voter id bills were considered in the states during legislative sessions in both the current ( 2015-2016 ) , and previous ( 2013-2014 ) federal election cycles , although that is a significant decrease from the more than 300 bills considered in the preceding cycle ( 2011-2012 ) .

further action in the courts and the department of justice should be expected as well on voter id in response to the several new laws that have recently gone into effect .

the 2016 election may provide useful data on the implementation and performance of voter id laws , data that congress may choose to examine .

as more experience is obtained with the impacts of the range of voter id requirements in different states on both individual voters and elections , a consensus may emerge about the benefits and disadvantages of those requirements , including answers to questions such as the following: does attempted voter fraud occur frequently enough that it poses significant risk to the validity of the outcome of elections ? .

is there a significant difference in that risk for polling place versus absentee or mail - in voting ? .

do voter id requirements significantly reduce or eliminate the chances of voter fraud ? .

do voter id requirements in any states prevent a large enough number of legitimate voters from casting ballots to pose significant risk to the validity of the outcome of elections ? .

do those risks vary significantly depending on the type and stringency of the requirements ? .

in any case , voter id is likely to continue to be a topic of significant interest well beyond the november 2016 election .

this appendix contains two tables describing id requirements for in - person voting in the states that have voter id requirements .

table a - 1 covers states that require a voter to present a photo id ; table a - 2 covers states that require an id that need not include a photograph .

the tables briefly summarize the major requirements for each state , describing the types of ids accepted , whether the requirements apply to absentee and mail - in voting as well as in - person balloting , exceptions to the id requirements for specified classes of voters , the recourse available to voters who do not present an accepted id , year of enactment of the requirement ( for photo id states ) and additional information such as whether an expired id will be accepted and whether the state makes an id available without charge to qualified voters .

specific types of accepted ids ( eg , passport ) are listed in the tables if they are specified in state law or guidance .

a glossary of summary terms and abbreviations in the table ( in addition to postal abbreviations , used for all states except idaho ) is below: in both tables , states with names in italics ( eg , alabama ) are categorized in this report as having a strictly enforced voter id requirement .

the states with names not in italics ( eg , florida ) are categorized as not having a strictly enforced requirement .

