amtrak — officially , the national railroad passenger corporation — is the nation's primary provider of intercity passenger rail service .

amtrak is structured as a private company , but virtually all its shares are held by the united states department of transportation ( dot ) .

amtrak was created by congress in 1970 to preserve a basic level of intercity passenger rail service , while relieving private railroad companies of the obligation to provide money - losing passenger service .

although created as a for - profit corporation , amtrak has never made a profit ; in this it resembles both the experience of the private - sector companies that preceded it and of intercity passenger rail operators in many other countries .

during the 44 years from 1971 to 2015 , federal assistance to amtrak amounted to approximately $78 billion in constant 2015 dollars ( see appendix , table a - 1 ) .

amtrak's approximately 20,000 employees operate trains and maintain its infrastructure .

it carries around 31 million passengers annually , providing slightly less than 1% of total u.s. intercity passenger miles traveled by common carrier ( see table 1 ) .

the company operates approximately 44 routes over 21,000 miles of track .

most of that track is owned by freight rail companies ; amtrak owns about 625 route miles .

the primary section it owns — the northeast corridor ( nec ) — includes some of the most heavily used segments of track in the nation .

the nec is used not only by amtrak's intercity trains , but also by regional commuter lines and some freight trains .

by far , the greatest volume of nec traffic consists of commuter trains , not amtrak trains .

amtrak also operates corridor routes ( covering distances under 400 miles ) and long - distance routes ( over 400 miles in length ) .

some of amtrak's corridor routes are financially supported by states they serve .

amtrak also operates commuter service under contract with state and local commuter authorities in various parts of the country .

amtrak owned no infrastructure at the time of its creation .

it was structured as a contracting agency , and amtrak trains were operated by private railroads over tracks they owned .

several years later , as congress was dealing with the bankruptcy of the penn central railroad , congress decided that amtrak would receive much of the trackage owned by the penn central in the 450-mile corridor running from washington , dc , north through philadelphia and new york city to boston , along with shorter lines serving harrisburg , pa , and springfield , ma .

the northeast corridor traverses one of the most densely populated and economically important corridors in the world and carries over 259 million passengers annually ( the vast majority aboard trains run by regional commuter operators ) .

the nec also carries freight trains run by private railroads .

 ( amtrak also inherited 96 miles of track in michigan , and controls short lengths of track in other locations. ) .

portions of the nec are well over a century old , and the alignment was laid out at a time when the top speed of trains was much less than is possible today .

this has caused problems for amtrak's efforts to improve service on the nec .

amtrak has identified three general issues: a large backlog of capital projects needed to bring the nec to a state of good repair ; limits on the number of trains that can operate on the nec , especially due to bottlenecks at tunnels ; and increasing demands for service on the nec , including service by commuter operators .

on march 4 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

749 , the passenger rail reform and investment act of 2015 .

this bill would authorize $7 billion in funding for passenger rail programs , including $5.8 billion for amtrak and $1.2 billion for grants to states for passenger rail activities ( including states along the nec ) over four years , and would make a number of changes to federal intercity passenger rail policies .

proposed changes include the following: restructuring dot's amtrak accounts into an nec account and a national network account ( §101 ) .

this will end the cross - subsidization of operating losses on amtrak's long - distance routes with the operating profits from the nec .

all revenues from the nec will go into the nec account for use on the nec , making the revenues and expenses of the nec and of the long - distance routes more transparent to congress ( §202 ) .

creating a program to provide grants to states for passenger rail service improvement projects on the nec ( §301 ) .

streamlining of environmental review for passenger and freight rail construction projects in order to reduce the time required for review ( §401 ) .

limiting the review period for applications for long - term low - interest loans from the rrif program ( §302 ) , and providing that 40% of the rrif funding availability be set aside for projects on the nec ( §303 ) .

prohibiting federal funding to cover operating losses from amtrak's food and beverage service finances beginning five years after enactment — but no amtrak employee shall be involuntarily separated as a result of any actions amtrak takes to eliminate food and beverage service losses ( §206 ) .

directing amtrak to develop a pilot program for carrying cats and dogs ( §201 ) .

