article i of the u.s. constitution grants all legislative powers to a bicameral congress: a house of representatives and a senate that are the result of a "great compromise" seeking to balance the effects of popular majorities with the interests of the states .

our system currently provides for a two - year term of office for house members from the 435 population - based districts .

in the senate , voters of each state elect two senators , who serve six - year terms that overlap ( such that only one - third of the chamber is up for election in any given election cycle ) .

the two chambers are fundamentally equal in their legislative roles and functions .

only the senate confirms presidential nominations and approves treaties .

only the house can originate revenue legislation , but the senate can amend revenue legislation , and the enactment of law always requires both chambers to separately agree to the same bill in the same form before presenting it to the president .

because each chamber has the constitutional authority to make its own rules , the house and senate have developed very different ways of processing legislation , perhaps partially flowing from their constitutional differences .

in general , house rules and practices allow a numerical majority to process legislation relatively quickly .

senate rules and procedures , on the other hand , favor deliberation over quick action , as they provide significant procedural leverage to individual senators .

congressional action is typically planned and coordinated by party leaders in each chamber , who have been chosen by members of their own caucus or conference — that is , the group of members in a chamber who share a party affiliation .

majority party leaders in the house have important powers and prerogatives to effectively set the policy agenda and decide which proposals will receive floor consideration .

in the senate , the leader of the majority party is generally expected to propose items for consideration , but formal tools that allow a numerical majority to take action are few .

instead , majority party leadership typically must negotiate with minority party leaders ( and often all senators ) to effectively conduct senate floor action .

in both chambers , much of the policy expertise resides in the standing committees — panels of members from both parties that typically take the lead in developing and assessing legislation .

members typically serve on a small number of committees , often for many years , allowing them to become highly knowledgeable in certain policy areas .

all committees are chaired by a member of the majority party , though chairs often work closely with the committee's ranking member , the leader of the minority party on the committee .

in almost all cases , the ratio of majority party to minority party members on a committee roughly reflects the overall partisan ratio in the congressional chamber .

committee members and staff spend much of their time drafting and considering legislative proposals , but committees engage in other activities , as well .

once law is enacted , congress has the prerogative and responsibility to provide oversight of policy implementation , and its committees take the lead in this effort .

both chambers provide their committees with significant powers and latitude for oversight and investigations into questions of public policy and its effects .

although the engine of legislative ideas and action is congress itself , the president has influence in the legislative process , as well .

the president recommends an annual budget for federal agencies and often suggests legislation .

perhaps more significantly , the power to veto legislation can affect the content of bills passed by congress .

because it is quite unusual for law to be enacted over a presidential veto , congress typically must accommodate the president's position on proposed policies .

the process by which a bill becomes law is rarely predictable and can vary significantly from bill to bill .

in fact , for many bills , the process will not follow the sequence of congressional stages that are often understood to make up the legislative process .

this report presents a look at each of the common stages through which a bill may move , but complications and variations abound in practice .

legislation may take one of several forms , depending on the intended purpose .

bills and joint resolutions may become law if enacted during the two - year congress in which they were introduced .

simple resolutions and concurrent resolutions are the other options ; these measures cannot make law , but may be used by each chamber , or by both , to publicly express sentiments or accomplish internal administrative or organizational tasks , such as establishing their rules for proceeding .

only members of the house or senate may introduce legislation , though occasionally a member introduces legislation by request of the president .

members and their staff typically consult with nonpartisan attorneys in each chamber's legislative counsel office for assistance in putting policy proposals into legislative language .

members may circulate the bill and ask others in the chamber — often via dear colleague letters — to sign on as original co - sponsors of a bill to demonstrate a solid base of support for the idea .

in the house , a bill is introduced when it is dropped in the hopper ( a wooden box on the house floor ) .

in the senate , the bill is submitted to clerks on the senate floor .

upon introduction , the bill will receive a designation based on the chamber of introduction , for example , h.r .

or h.j.res .

for house - originated bills or joint resolutions and s. or s.j.res .

for senate - originated measures .

it will also receive a number , which is typically the next number available in sequence during that two - year congress .

in the house , bills then are referred by the speaker , on the advice of the nonpartisan parliamentarian , to all committees that have jurisdiction over the provisions in the bill , as determined by the chamber's standing rules and past referral decisions .

most bills fall under the jurisdiction of one committee .

if multiple committees are involved and receive the bill , each committee may work only on the portion of the bill under its jurisdiction .

one of those committees will be designated the primary committee of jurisdiction and will likely take the lead on any action that may occur .

in the senate , bills are typically referred to committee in a similar process , though in almost all cases , the bill is referred to only the committee with jurisdiction over the issue that predominates in the bill .

in a limited number of cases , a bill might not be referred to committee , but instead be placed directly on the senate calendar of business through a series of procedural steps on the floor .

each committee receives many bill referrals over the course of a congress — far more than the panel is capable of pursuing in any detail .

the committee's chair has the chief agenda - setting authority for the committee ; in essence , the chair identifies the bills or issues on which the committee will try to formally act through hearings or markups ( or both ) .

once a committee has reported a bill , it is placed on one of the respective chambers' calendars .

these calendars are essentially a list of bills eligible for floor consideration ; however , the bills on the calendars are not guaranteed floor consideration .

many will never be brought up on the floor during the course of a two - year congress .

it is also possible , although less common , for a bill to come directly to the floor without being reported and placed on a calendar .

in the house , majority party leadership decides which bills the house will consider , and in what order .

for example , after consulting with committee leaders , majority party leadership may decide to schedule a bill for expedited floor consideration .

alternatively , leadership may ask the rules committee to start the process of bringing a specific bill to the floor for more lengthy consideration and possible amendments .

these different mechanisms by which the majority party proposes floor consideration of a bill are discussed in more detail in the next section .

in the senate , majority party leadership does not have procedures like those in the house for bringing bills to the floor .

one way the senate can take up a bill is by agreeing to a motion to proceed to consider it .

once a senator — typically the majority leader — makes such a motion that the senate proceed to a certain bill , the senate can then normally debate the motion to proceed .

if it eventually agrees to the motion by a majority vote , the senate can then begin consideration of the bill .

alternatively , the majority leader can ask unanimous consent that the senate take up a certain bill .

if no one objects to such a request when it is made , then the senate can immediately begin consideration of the bill in question .

 ( when the leader refrains from making such a request because he has been informed that a senator would object , it is often said that a senator has placed a hold on the bill. ) .

in both chambers , party leaders keep their membership informed of the anticipated floor schedule using various methods — like periodic whip notices or other frequent communications .

the house considers bills under a variety of procedures , each of which differs in the amount of time allotted for debate and the opportunities given to members to propose amendments .

most bills are considered under "suspension of the rules" procedures , which limits debate to 40 minutes and does not allow amendments to be offered by members on the floor .

however , for the house to pass a bill under suspension of the rules requires two - thirds of members voting to agree .

bills not considered on the house floor under suspension of the rules are typically considered instead under terms tailored for each particular bill .

the house establishes these parameters on a case - by - case basis through the adoption of a simple house resolution ( an h .

res. ) .

called a special rule .

special rules are reported by the house rules committee .

this committee is considered an arm of the majority party leadership , and majority party members outnumber minority party members , nine to four .

common provisions found in a special rule include the identification of the text to be considered , a specified period for general debate , and limits on the amendments that can be offered on the floor .

for instance , sometimes the committee reports a rule that places few restrictions at all on amending , which can result in dozens of amendments being offered on the floor during consideration .

in other cases , the special rule will allow only specific predetermined amendments to be offered , or even preclude floor amendments altogether .

note that house rules also place certain other limitations on the content of amendments , unless the special rule waives these restrictions .

for instance , amendments must typically be germane to the text they propose to change .

that is , an amendment cannot change the subject under consideration .

after the rules committee reports a rule for consideration of a bill , the house first considers that special rule itself on the house floor , for approximately one hour .

after debate , the house votes on adopting the special rule ; only after its adoption will the house then proceed to consider the bill itself , under the terms specified by the special rule .

in this situation , the house will typically consider the bill in a procedural setting called the committee of the whole , which allows members an efficient way to consider and vote on amendments .

after any amendments are offered and debated , members vote on approval ; each amendment requires a simple majority to be agreed to .

after the amendment process is complete , the committee of the whole reports to the full house any recommended amendments , which are then usually approved by the house by voice vote .

just prior to voting on final passage , members will typically briefly debate and then vote on a motion to recommit , which allows the minority party to effectively propose its own amendment .

in the house , some votes are taken by voice , but many votes are taken by electronic device , a method that records the individual position of each member who voted .

to consider a bill on the floor , the senate first must agree to bring it up — typically by agreeing to a unanimous consent request or by voting to adopt a motion to proceed to the bill , as discussed earlier .

only once the senate has agreed to consider a bill may senators propose amendments to it .

perhaps the modern senate's defining feature is the potential difficulty of reaching a final vote on a matter .

most questions that the senate considers — from a motion to proceed to a bill , to each amendment , to the bill itself — are not subject to any debate limit .

senate rules provide no way for a simple numerical majority to cut off or otherwise impose a debate limit and move to a final vote .

as a result , senators can wage ( or threaten to wage ) a filibuster on most amendments , bills , or other motions — in effect , insisting on extended debate or taking other actions intended to delay or prevent a final vote .

in addition , under most circumstances , neither debate nor amendments in the senate are required to be germane .

this can lead to much more wide - ranging and less predictable floor consideration than typically occurs in the house .

senate rule xxii , often called the cloture rule , does allow a supermajority to limit debate on a bill , amendment , or motion ; in addition , in the case of a bill , cloture limits the amendments that can be offered .

supporters of , for instance , a bill under floor consideration can file a cloture motion , signed by at least 16 senators .

two days of session later , senators vote on the cloture motion .

if three - fifths — usually 60 senators — agree , then further consideration of the bill is limited to 30 hours , during which only germane amendments submitted in advance can be offered .

after this concluding period of consideration , the senate will take a final vote on the bill .

this vote requires only a simple majority for approval .

however , because a cloture process is often required to end debate on a bill , often the bill first must garner the support of a three - fifths supermajority .

even with the necessary supermajority support , use of this cloture process can require the use of significant amounts of senate floor time .

overall , these rules and practices governing floor debate and amending in the senate provide significant leverage to each individual senator .

rather than relying on the formal rules like cloture , however , frequently the senate can more effectively act using unanimous consent agreements .

such an agreement is a structured plan for limiting debate and amending — a plan that can be tailored to each bill that comes to the floor ( somewhat akin to a special rule in the house ) .

through the use of these agreements , the details of which all senators have agreed upon , the senate can more effectively process its business while protecting the procedural rights of each of its members .

although many votes are conducted by voice , a recorded vote is required in some cases , and it is often requested by senators in others .

unlike the house , the senate does not have an electronic voting system ; recorded votes are conducted through a call of the roll .

in addition to full legislative authority , the u.s. constitution provides the senate with two unique responsibilities: first , the power to confirm certain presidential nominees to the federal judiciary and certain executive branch positions ; and second , the power to approve treaties .

in the legislative process , treaties are treated very much like bills: they are referred to the foreign relations committee , where they may be considered and reported .

the senate can consider a treaty on the floor under similar procedures used for legislation .

however , the constitution requires that two - thirds of voting senators agree for a treaty to be ratified .

most presidential nominations are referred to the relevant senate committee of jurisdiction .

prior to potential committee action to report a nomination , a committee may hold a hearing at which the nominee answers questions from the committee's members .

if a nominee is considered on the senate floor , his or her confirmation requires only a simple majority vote , but nominations are debatable .

therefore , supporters of a nominee may have to use the cloture process to reach a vote on the nominee .

invoking cloture on most questions requires a vote of three - fifths of the senate , as described earlier , but cloture can be invoked on a nomination by a simple majority threshold .

using cloture to reach a vote on a pending nomination , however , may take significant floor time .

a bill must be agreed to by both chambers in the same form before it can be presented to the president .

therefore , at some point in the legislative process , either the house must act on a senate bill or the senate must act on a house bill .

frequently , identical or similar proposals are introduced in the house and in the senate , each potentially moving through the legislative process in the chamber in which it was introduced .

in this case , when one chamber receives the bill passed by the other , it may act on ( and possibly amend ) that bill , or alternatively , it may consider ( and possibly amend ) its own bill first — eventually substituting its language into the other chamber's bill for the purposes of resolving differences between the two proposals .

once one chamber passes a bill , it is engrossed — that is , prepared in official form — and then sent ( or messaged ) to the other chamber .

in a majority of cases , the second chamber simply agrees to the exact text passed by the first chamber , in which case congress has then completed its action on the bill .

in some cases , the second chamber instead decides to amend the first chamber's bill .

the second chamber is often proposing , in effect , an alternative version of the bill , which may differ from the bill in minor or substantial ways .

in some circumstances , the alternative may even embody a proposal on a different topic .

once the second chamber agrees to this proposed alternative to the bill , it may send the proposal back to the first chamber for possible consideration and a vote .

the receiving chamber may also respond with a counterproposal , and so on .

this back - and - forth trading of proposals by the house and senate is called amendments between the houses ( or amendment exchange , or sometimes simply ping - pong ) .

for the bill to have a chance of becoming law , one chamber must eventually agree to the proposal that the other chamber sent it .

sometimes , the resolution of differences between the house and senate proposals may instead be accomplished through a conference committee .

a conference committee is a temporary committee appointed in relation to a specific bill ; its task is to negotiate a proposal that can be agreed to by both chambers .

each conference committee is made up of members of the house and members of the senate — called conferees — who are drawn primarily from the standing committee ( s ) with jurisdiction over the bill .

through a combination of informal negotiations and formal meetings , the conferees try to hammer out a compromise , drawing on elements of the competing proposals that were adopted by each chamber .

if a proposal can garner the support of a majority of the house conferees , and also separately , a majority of the senate conferees , then the negotiated proposal is embodied in a conference report .

this conference report can then be considered in one chamber , and , if agreed to , then considered in the other chamber .

regardless of which chamber goes first , the conference report may be considered under the same procedures used for other business , though it cannot be amended .

reaching a vote on a conference report in the senate may require a cloture process , and in the house , conference reports are typically considered under a special rule .

if the conference report is to become law , both chambers must agree to it .

once both chambers of congress have each agreed to the bill in the same form , it is enrolled — that is , prepared in its final official form and then presented to the president .

beginning at midnight on the closing of the day of presentment , the president has 10 days , excluding sundays , to sign or veto the bill .

if the bill is signed in that 10-day period , it becomes law .

if the president declines to either sign or veto it — that is , he does not act on it in any way — then it becomes law without his signature ( except when congress has adjourned under certain circumstances ) .

if the president vetoes the bill , it is returned to the congressional chamber in which it originated ; that chamber may attempt to override the president's veto , though a successful override vote requires the support of two - thirds of those voting .

if the vote is successful , the other chamber then decides whether to attempt its own override vote ; here , as well , a successful override vote requires two - thirds of voting members to agree .

only if both chambers vote to override does the bill become law notwithstanding the president's veto ; successful overrides of a veto are rare .

bills that are ultimately enacted are delivered to the office of the federal register at the national archives , assigned a public law number , and included in the next edition of the united states statutes at large .

