much progress has been made in achieving the ambitious goals that congress established 40 years ago to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters .

however , long - standing problems persist , and new problems have emerged .

water quality problems are diverse , ranging from pollution runoff from farms and ranches , city streets , and other diffuse or "nonpoint" sources , to "point" source discharges of metals and organic and inorganic toxic substances from factories and sewage treatment plants .

the principal law that deals with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , estuaries , and coastal waters is the federal water pollution control act ( p.l .

92-500 , enacted in 1972 ) , commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa .

it consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities to abate pollution and meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants ; and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction .

both parts are supported by research activities , plus permit and enforcement provisions .

programs at the federal level are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; state and local governments have primary day - to - day responsibilities to implement cwa programs through standard - setting , permitting , enforcement , and administering financial assistance programs .

the water quality restoration objective declared in the 1972 act was accompanied by statutory goals to eliminate the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters by 1985 and to attain , wherever possible , waters deemed "fishable and swimmable" by 1983 .

although those goals have not been fully achieved , considerable progress has been made , especially in controlling conventional pollutants ( suspended solids , bacteria , and oxygen - consuming materials ) discharged by industries and sewage treatment plants .

progress has been mixed in controlling discharges of toxic pollutants ( heavy metals , inorganic and organic chemicals ) , which are more numerous and can harm human health and the environment even when present in very small amounts — at the parts - per - billion level .

moreover , efforts to control pollution from diffuse sources , termed nonpoint source pollution ( rainfall runoff from urban , suburban , and agricultural areas , for example ) , are more recent , given the earlier emphasis on "point source" pollution ( discharges from industrial facilities and municipal wastewater treatment plants ) .

overall , data reported by epa and states indicate that 44% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 64% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

in 2006 epa issued an assessment of streams and small rivers and reported that 67% of u.s. stream miles are in poor or fair condition and that nutrients and streambed sediments have the largest adverse impact on the aquatic species in these waters .

approximately 95,000 lakes and 544,000 river miles in the united states are under fish - consumption advisories ( including 100% of the great lakes and their connecting waters ) , due to chemical contaminants in lakes , rivers , and coastal waters , and one - third of shellfishing beds are closed or restricted , due to toxic pollutant contamination .

mercury is a contaminant of growing concern — as of 2003 , 45 states had issued partial or statewide fish or shellfish consumption advisories because of elevated mercury levels .

the last major amendments to the cwa were the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

that legislation culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and were the most comprehensive amendments since 1972 .

authorizations of appropriations for some programs provided in p.l .

100-4 , such as general grant assistance to states , research , and general epa support , expired in fy1990 and fy1991 .

authorizations for wastewater treatment funding expired in fy1994 .

none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement them .

epa , states , industry , and other citizens continue to implement the 1987 legislation , including meeting the numerous requirements and deadlines in it .

the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public .

lately , however , some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs , especially in view of the continuing problems of the u.s. economy .

criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements .

criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions .

states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates .

many environmental groups believe that further fine - tuning and strengthening of the law is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems .

october 2012 marked the 40 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 25 years since the last major amendments to the law were enacted .

while , as noted , there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain .

however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .

several key water quality issues exist: what additional actions should be taken to implement existing provisions of the law , whether additional steps are necessary to achieve overall goals of the act that have not yet been attained , how to ensure that progress made to date is not lost through diminished attention to water quality needs , and what is the appropriate federal role in guiding and paying for clean water infrastructure and other activities .

for some time , efforts to comprehensively amend the act have stalled as interests have debated whether and exactly how to change the law .

many issues that might be addressed involve making difficult tradeoffs between impacts on different sectors of the economy ; taking action when there is technical or scientific uncertainty ; and allocating governmental responsibilities among federal , state , local , and tribal entities for implementing the law .

these factors partly explain why congress has recently focused legislative attention on narrow bills to extend or modify selected cwa programs , rather than taking up comprehensive proposals .

other factors also have been at work .

these include a general reluctance by some members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the relatively slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; a lack of legislative initiatives by the administration on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation , nor has the obama administration ) ; and the high economic cost of addressing water infrastructure issues .

two cwa issues that have been the focus of much of legislators' interest in recent congresses received some attention again in the 112 th congress — water infrastructure financing , and regulatory protection of wetlands — but with different focus than in the recent past .

after the 2010 election , congressional leadership and priorities shifted — particularly in the house , which used both oversight and legislation to focus criticism on epa regulatory activities .

the 112 th congress enacted two bills that amend the cwa .

one extended the moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels for an additional year , until december 18 , 2014 ( p.l .

112-213 ) , and the other extends authorization of funds for the lake pontchartrain basin program in section 121 of the act through fy2017 ( p.l .

112-237 ) .

with the 113 th congress divided like the 112 th into a republican - controlled house and a democratic - controlled senate , and president obama having been re - elected , consideration of environmental issues generally , including water quality , reflected those of the previous two years .

in addition to enacting appropriations bills ( see " continuing issue: appropriations " ) , the 113 th congress enacted several bills with cwa provisions .

provisions of water resource legislation creating a pilot program for water infrastructure financing , plus some amendments to cwa title vi ( see " wifia pilot program and srf amendments in p.l .

113-121 " ) ; as part of the 2014 farm bill , legislation exempting silviculture activity from requiring a cwa permit ( see " cwa permits for logging road discharges " ) ; legislation providing an additional three - year moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ( see crs report r42142 , epa's vessel general permits: background and issues ) ; and a bill eliminating a number of statutorily required reports to congress , including one cwa report ( p.l .

113-188 ) .

clean water policy and program issues also have been addressed regularly by congress in the context of annual appropriations acts .

epa's appropriations are included in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts .

the administration presented the fy2014 budget request in april 2013 .

it sought $8.15 billion overall for epa , including $1.095 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants ( 25% less than the fy2013 enacted level ) , $165 million for section 319 grants , $259 million for section 106 grants , and $300 million for the great lakes restoration initiative .

in mid - 2013 , the house appropriations subcommittee on interior , environment , and related agencies drafted a bill ( unnumbered ) that would reduce overall funding for epa by 34% from the fy2013 enacted level , including an 83% reduction for clean water srf capitalization grants ( the bill would provide $250 million ) .

according to subcommittee documents , the reduction is appropriate because , despite recent federal support , little progress has been made to reduce the known water infrastructure gap .

the draft bill would provide $60 million for the great lakes restoration initiative .

the full committee did not complete markup of this bill .

the senate appropriations subcommittee on interior , environment , and related agencies drafted an alternative bill that would maintain funding for the clean water srf program at $1.45 billion and would provide small funding increases for several epa programs above fy2013 enacted levels , including the great lakes restoration initiative ( $300 million ) .

there was no further action on this bill .

congress did not reach final agreement on fy2014 appropriations before the start of the fiscal year on october 1 , but did agree to a short - term continuing appropriations measure ( p.l .

113-46 ) , which provided funding through january 15 , 2014 .

final action on appropriations for epa and all other federal agencies and departments occurred as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( h.r .

3547 , p.l .

113-76 ) , signed by the president on january 17 .

this bill provides $1.45 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants ( 5% more than fy2013 funds and 32% higher than the president's fy2014 budget request ) and $300 million for the great lakes restoration initiative .

for water quality grants provided to states , the bill includes $159.3 million for section 319 nonpoint pollution management ( $3.4 million more than in 2013 ) , $230.8 million for section 106 state management ( $3.8 million more than in 2013 ) , and $9.5 million for beaches grants ( $200,000 more than in 2013 ; the administration had requested zero funding for this grant program ) .

the administration's fy2015 budget was presented on march 4 , 2014 .

it sought $7.89 billion overall for epa ( 3.6% below the fy2014 enacted level ) , including $1.018 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants , $15 million for alaska native village and u.s. - mexico border projects , and $1.13 billion for state categorical grants .

the total amount requested for clean water srf capitalization grants was 26% below the fy2014 enacted level .

among the state categorical grants , the budget sought 8% more for clean water pollution control grants ( cwa section 106 ) and 3.6% more for nonpoint pollution management grants ( cwa section 319 ) .

as in fy2014 , the budget sought no funds for the beaches grant program .

the request also included $275 million for the great lakes restoration initiative ( $25 million less than in fy2014 ) and a total of $119 million for other geographic programs , such as chesapeake bay ( 3% more than these programs received in fy2014 ) .

congress did not enact fy2015 appropriations before the start of the fiscal year on october 1 , but it did enact a short - term continuing resolution to provide funding at fy2014 levels through december 11 , 2014 ( h.j.res .

124 / p.l .

113-164 ) .

before taking that action , the appropriations committees took some action on bills to provide epa appropriations .

in july 2014 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

5171 , and in august , a senate appropriations subcommittee released a chairman's mark providing recommendations for the fy2015 interior and environment appropriations act .

final appropriations were included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( h.r .

83 / p.l .

113-235 ) , enacted in december 2014 .

the bill includes fy2015 funds for most epa water programs at the same level as enacted for fy2014: eg , $1.45 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants and $300 million for the great lakes restoration initiative .

the bill also provides $159 million for nonpoint pollution management grants ( cwa section 319 ) , $231 million for state water quality management grants ( cwa section 106 ) , and $73 million for the chesapeake bay program ( $3 million more than fy2014 ) .

generally , these funding levels are higher than were included in the president's fy2015 budget request .

the final bill also included $9.5 million for the beaches grant program , although the administration had requested no funding for it .

