for much of the post - world war ii era , developing countries were relatively minor players in the world economy .

accounting for 80% of the world's population but less than 20% of the world's output two decades ago , developing countries throughout africa , asia , latin america , and the middle east were often dismissively referred to as the third world .

at the time , these countries generally exported raw materials , and few ever expected them to be able to export sophisticated manufactured goods to the industrialized world or to become significant world importers .

developing country economic prospects began to change in the 1980s with the spectacular success of four asian countries — hong kong , south korea , taiwan , and singapore .

dubbed the "asian tigers," these countries adopted export - led growth strategies that helped boost annual per capita incomes by between 5% and 6% over the entire decade .

this success , which also involved the use of industrial policies to develop their manufacturing sectors , helped shift the focus of other developing countries from production for domestic and regional markets to production for world markets .

this reorientation in thinking accelerated dramatically in the early 1990s with the advance of globalization .

bolstered by the fall of communism , the beginnings of the information technology ( it ) revolution , sharply declining transportation costs , the freer movement of capital and technology from developed to developing countries , and economic reforms , economic growth in developing countries began to take off , reaching practically every region of the world and encompassing dozens of developing countries .

china led the way with average annual real gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth increases of nearly 10% from 1979 to 2011 .

its share in global gdp increased from 1.5% in 1990 to 9.5% in 2010 .

growth in a handful of developing countries with very large populations , such as india , brazil , indonesia , turkey , and mexico , was also stronger than it had been in previous periods for various reasons .

these other developing countries increased their share of global gdp from 15% to 22% over the same period , enabling developing countries as a group with now 83% of the world's population ( 5.1 billion people ) to expand their share of global output to almost 33% today .

during this same period , the size of the global economy more than doubled , increasing from $28 trillion in 1990 to $68 trillion in 2010 .

projections abound that a handful of developing countries will continue to gain shares of global output vis - à - vis the advanced countries , and in the process change the face of the global economy .

a world bank study projects that by 2030 , developing countries will contribute about 50% of global output ( with china contributing 20% ) and two - thirds of global economic growth ( with china contributing 25% ) .

long - term projections , however , can be far off the mark .

some of these countries may falter as aging populations , rising labor costs , corruption , environmental challenges , failure to innovate or reform more deeply , or infrastructure deficiencies limit them from growing as rapidly as predicted , while other developing countries currently not on anyone's radar screen could turn their economic and political fortunes around .

nevertheless , there is widespread consensus that in addition to china , many of these other larger populous developing countries will continue to experience faster economic growth than the advanced economies , as they have over the past decade , thus continuing the shift of relative economic wealth to a handful of developing countries .

reasons for this assessment include both a continuing large potential for "catch - up" gains in output and productivity that these developing countries possess , combined with continuing slow growth in advanced economies due to deleveraging and the impact of high debt burdens .

despite likely gains in economic power , the living standards ( as measured by per capita income levels ) of the rising powers are likely to remain well below the levels in advanced countries due to their huge populations and still high poverty rates .

but still "developing" countries are becoming significant forces in the world economy for the first time in hundreds of years , creating uncertainties regarding their role in the global economy .

these rising countries present the united states with both opportunities and challenges .

on the opportunity side , rising imports from these economies offer u.s. consumers an expanding choice of products at lower prices , raising real incomes and contributing towards higher standards of living .

many of the imports are also intermediate goods used in the production of u.s. - produced goods , lowering costs and , thereby , helping to maintain the competitiveness of u.s. firms in the global economy .

as their economies grow , the rep s are also providing u.s. exporters and investors with robust new markets — their successful growth strategies are expected to create billions of new "middle - class" consumers and unleash billions of dollars in infrastructure spending over the next few decades for which u.s. exporters of goods and services can compete .

at the same time , many u.s. - based firms and workers are competing now with an expanded pool of lower - wage labor , much of it located in the reps .

such competition can nudge u.s. - based firms to reduce costs by adopting labor - saving technology , to move production overseas , or to shut operations that may no longer be competitive .

even firms and workers in high - end service sectors are feeling the pressure of competition from these countries .

u.s. relations with the reps , thus , are affecting u.s. economic welfare in fundamental ways .

from the perspective of u.s. trade policy , efforts to reduce the trade and investment barriers of the reps that are impeding u.s. producers and workers from maximizing the benefits of participation in the global economy are likely to be a high priority .

but the views and practices of the reps regarding the role of the state in economic activity , which may differ sharply from u.s. perspectives and actions , make the elimination of trade barriers and the negotiation of new world trade rules more difficult .

for their part , the rep s are also protesting u.s. policies on trade remedies , high tariffs on apparel and other import - sensitive items , pricing of medicines , agricultural subsidies and quotas , the temporary entry of foreign workers , and monetary expansion ( so - called quantitative easing ) .

in addition , they are making their concerns heard in international institutions , particularly the wto .

how the rep s evolve may also affect the nature and integrity of the world trading system .

u.s. trade policy officials have generally assumed that as the reps gain weight in the international trading system , they will become more responsible stakeholders by sharing not only the benefits but the costs of system maintenance and by embracing the principles of free and fair trade with limited government intervention .

as china and other developing economies with heavy state involvement in guiding economic activity evolve , it is not certain that they are going to accept this place in the liberal international economic order that the united states and britain jointly constructed in the aftermath of world war ii .

the rise of china and other developing countries has also coincided with a weakening of the wto - centered multilateral trade order .

bilateral and regional preferential trade agreements have proliferated and wto - sponsored multilateral trade liberalization negotiations have stalled .

in this environment , questions arise over how the world trade order will be kept and how new rules will be established .

these profound changes in the global economy raise a number of questions that the 113 th congress may wish to consider in its oversight of u.s. trade policy .

first , what kinds of trade negotiations can best be utilized to open up rep markets in a way that provides for more balanced and mutually beneficial relationships ? .

second , in what ways can the united states best influence the reps to adopt more market - oriented trade and economic policies or reduce barriers to u.s. exports and investment ? .

third , how can the united states best influence china and the other reps to become responsible stakeholders in the world trading system ? .

this report is organized into four parts .

part one summarizes the key observations of the report .

part two discusses the key characteristics of the reps and their reform challenges .

part three analyzes the relationship between u.s. trade interests and the rep s .

part four considers a range of u.s. trade policy responses to challenges raised by the reps , including the role of congress .

the key observations of the report are summarized below .

more detailed analysis and information is provided in the main body of the report .

predictions abound that a small group of the over 140 countries now classified by the world bank as "developing" will be the growth engine of the global economy and will continue to gain global output vis - à - vis the advanced countries .

outside of the largest developing countries , such as china , india , and brazil , there has been less consensus on which countries to flag for special consideration .

past attempts to identify the rising economic powers from the developing world have adopted many different monikers — emerging markets , big emerging markets , brics , near - bric s , next - 11 , and pivotal powers — often driven by different objectives , such as generating interest in new investment opportunities .

 ( see appendix a for a summary of these past efforts. ) .

this report focuses on countries that are not only up and coming , located throughout the world , and providing expanding markets , but are also playing an increasingly large role in determining the shape of the global trading system .

most predictions mapping out the rise of specific developing countries use a simple methodology that incorporates data on labor force and capital stock growth combined with more subjective evaluations on how individual governments will cope with a range of political and economic challenges .

to the extent that the underlying political and institutional dimensions are given more weight , projections regarding the rise of any one country are probably going to be less firm than the fact that the greatest potential for high rates of economic growth ( and a continuing shift of economic power ) rests with a small group of developing countries ( see appendix b for more detail on the methodology behind the economic projections ) .

there are large differences among the universe of rising developing countries , giving scope for varied groupings and categories .

the likely uneven rise of developing countries is an important consideration for prioritizing u.s. trade interests and concerns .

while this report focuses primarily on seven large , populous rising economic powers — china , brazil , india , indonesia , mexico , russia , and turkey — some of these countries' economic prospects could easily decline if fundamental challenges are not addressed .

simultaneously , a number of large developing countries , such as egypt , iran , nigeria , and vietnam , could emerge as global economic forces over time if their geopolitical conditions are dramatically altered and economic deficiencies addressed .

these long - shot or turnaround economies have the size to exert influence if they break out of their economic doldrums and political constraints .

in addition , nearly a dozen or so fast - growing developing countries , such as colombia , poland , and malaysia , are providing rapidly growing commercial opportunities for u.s. traders , consumers , and investors , although these countries may not have the size to become forces in the global economy .

 ( see appendix c for a discussion of these two alternative country groupings. ) .

the evolution of the economies of the reps impacts u.s. exports , jobs , and economic growth in important ways .

if the united states is to maximize its export potential and boost its living standards , exporters and investors will need to have fair and balanced access to the rep markets .

rep trade barriers , however , are extensive compared to market access and "ease of doing business" obstacles found in most advanced countries .

the ability of the united states to persuade these countries to reduce their barriers arguably is constrained by growing differences over the role that the state should play in economic activity — differences that were exacerbated by the 2008 financial crisis .

the more interventionist practices of the rep governments coincide with a desire to maintain "policy space" to promote economic development via policies that often appear to violate the letter or spirit of wto rules and obligations .

with the imperative for the united states to export more , it may be a critical time to persuade these rising countries to adhere more closely to the free market norms and obligations of the wto system , as well as to consider negotiations that could address many of the barriers not currently covered by wto disciplines .

a major concern is that if this is not done soon , these countries may use their growing economic power to maintain one - sided advantages over time .

reaching robust agreements on the rules of the game between different centers of power which do not share the same values , however , remains a formidable undertaking .

major shifts in the structure of the world economy have taken place .

the reps now account for significant shares of global gdp and trade .

as a result , they also have increased their economic influence and bargaining leverage .

this reconfigured global economy coincides with very different conditions than those that prevailed in the second half of the last century .

most notably , the traditional structure of postwar multilateralism has weakened ; bilateral and regional preferential trade agreements have proliferated ; and priorities for trade liberalization and economic reforms are in flux during a period of heightened economic uncertainty .

in this environment , questions arise over how the world trade order will be kept , how new rules can be established to discipline foreign trade - distorting practices , and how the united states can best respond to the challenges and opportunities posed by the reps .

any response could begin by reconsidering overall u.s. trade policy goals , as well as specific objectives vis - a - vis the reps. to promote those objectives , policymakers have a full range of multilateral , regional , bilateral , and unilateral trade initiatives to consider .

how the obama administration and 113 th congress prioritize and shape these trade initiatives will fundamentally determine the course of u.s. trade leadership in the years ahead .

the overriding goal of post - world war ii trade policy under successive administrations has been to promote the highest possible standard of living for u.s. residents .

to this end , there is a broad consensus among policymakers and economists that by removing a country's tariffs and non - tariff barriers to allow greater specialization in production and trade , the ensuing expansion of trade will have a favorable impact on overall economic well - being .

most economists , however , also agree that while a nation's general welfare may increase , freer trade does not necessarily distribute those production and consumption benefits equally .

while firms and industries that are competitive may gain by increasing exports or by expanding their operations overseas , some segments of the economy that are unable to survive increased competition could lose through worker layoffs and plant closures .

in addition , there are growing concerns that today's more open global economy , which allows millions of low - wage workers around the world to compete with american labor , and digital machines to replace many forms of human labor , is responsible for a number of contemporary economic concerns .

these concerns include income stagnation for the majority of american workers and increased job insecurity , particularly among lower - skilled workers .

given this dilemma , few economists call for halting trade liberalization efforts or technological advances ( i.e. , globalization ) .

but they do recognize that trade policy alone cannot address many of the challenges u.s. companies and workers face in an increasingly global economy .

these experts generally argue that u.s. policy must address those displaced by trade by providing them with better education and training necessary to compete in a globalized economy .

such policies , they argue , are necessary not only to improve u.s. living standards , but also to limit , if not reverse , the decline in popular support for foreign trade .

in addition to recognizing the domestic aspects of the labor market challenges , u.s. trade policymakers are also subject to growing public pressures for greater reciprocity in u.s. trade relations with the reps. polling data reflect an american public that is increasingly skeptical of the benefits of globalization in general and free trade agreements in particular .

more concern about the u.s. ability to compete for trade and investment is directed at the reps than with advanced trading partners such as japan or the european union .

these attitudes stem both from concerns of u.s. stakeholders about jobs , import competition , and wage stagnation and from the tendency of the reps to keep their markets relatively more closed than the u.s. economy to promote home companies and industries .

how the united states can best persuade the reps to make trade liberalization a higher priority or take more responsibility for supporting the world trading system remains uncertain .

on the one hand , it may help u.s. policymakers to have better information on and understanding of the factors driving rep policies , particularly how their trade policies are influenced by domestic growth and development priorities .

in many cases , rep trade policy concerns and obligations tend to be subordinated to powerful elites and domestic concerns .

yet , the reps still depend on access to the u.s. and other advanced country markets , and , thus , cannot easily ignore requests for reciprocity or threats of market closure .

nor are the reps likely to ignore the discriminatory effects of preferential agreements negotiated by the united states with large and significant trading partners .

on the other hand , in choosing to engage the reps , u.s. policymakers may also need to reconsider long - standing positions on trade agreements .

some of these positions relate to multilateral trade agreements and others to the template or formula the united states has used in negotiating bilateral and regional agreements .

to better match their rising economic importance , policymakers may also wish to consider the resources and level of attention the u.s. government devotes to these countries .

in addition , u.s. policymakers may also consider negotiating reductions of u.s. trade barriers about which the rep s often complain .

these alleged u.s. barriers include agricultural subsidies , trade remedy laws , buy - american policies , foreign investment restrictions , and work visas , among others .

under these circumstances , reciprocal bargaining and negotiations may still be possible to maximize economic welfare and avoid trade conflict .

there is little disagreement that the rapid growth of the reps presents an opportunity for gains in exports of u.s. manufactured goods , services , and agriculture , as well as opportunities for the expansion of u.s. investments abroad .

a range of trade negotiating approaches may be employed to open up rep markets in a way that provides for more reciprocal and mutually beneficial economic relationships .

these approaches are multilateral and plurilateral negotiations under the wto , including possible reforms of the wto dispute settlement mechanism , bilateral and regional negotiations to establish free trade agreements ( ftas ) , and unilateral actions that may either threaten or entice the reps to open their markets to u.s. exports , or to end otherwise objectionable commercial policies .

multilateral negotiations were the predominant trade liberalizing vehicle in the 1960s and 1970s , at a time when the economies of the united states , france , germany , and the united kingdom accounted for the predominant share of global gdp .

this is not the case today , as demonstrated by the inability to conclude the wto doha round of multilateral trade negotiations , which were launched in 2001 .

the doha negotiations have been stymied by persistent differences between the united states and europe , on the one hand , and the largest rising economic powers , on the other hand .

the united states and europe , for the most part , have shared similar interests in encouraging the big emerging economies , such as china , india , and brazil , to open their import markets further for services and manufactured goods , while retaining some measure of protection for their own agricultural sectors .

developing countries sought the reduction of u.s. and european agricultural tariffs and subsidies , non - reciprocal market access for manufacturing sectors , and protection for their services sectors .

in the past they might have taken any deal offered by the west because they were not obligated to make any significant concessions , today , countries like india and brazil now hold out for the deal of their choice .

this resolve may have been bolstered by a view by some that they made greater commitments in the 1990s uruguay round of multilateral negotiations than the advanced countries .

moreover , the rising powers may believe that they do not have much to gain by giving up protection of their markets for goods and services because u.s. and european markets are already quite open .

concurrently , the united states , european union , and japan , beset by slow growth and high unemployment , were simply not willing to accept what appeared to be small and unbalanced concessions , especially by advanced developing countries , to salvage a trade round .

according to former u.s. trade representative susan schwab , countries such as china , brazil , india , and south africa have hidden behind the wto's long - standing practice of allowing "developing countries" to undertake significantly fewer obligations than developed countries .

ms. schwab argued that these countries shielded themselves from making market - opening concessions by seeking maximum flexibility for developing countries .

another diplomat described this process as "the elephants hiding behind the mice. .

under this perspective , the fact that these rising and heavily populated economic powers , for the most part , will have low per capita incomes for many decades raises serious concerns that they will continue to resist supporting the open trading system from which they have accrued substantial economic benefits .

the biggest reps also worked together as a bloc to alter the negotiating dynamics of the doha round .

in response to a u.s. - eu proposal on agriculture , brazil and india helped create a negotiating group at the 2003 wto ministerial meeting held in cancun .

the proposal encompassed brazil's and india's respective agricultural liberalization and development goals and received backing from china , but did little to advance the negotiations .

from the perspective of the reps , the united states and other advanced countries are as much to blame for the doha stalemate as they are .

officials from these countries maintain that advanced countries have wanted them to make one - sided concessions because they have been unwilling to reduce their own trade and regulatory barriers , especially in agriculture .

few observers now believe that , given the history of the round , a large and meaningful agreement is likely to be forthcoming in the near future .

for a robust agreement to come to fruition , the united states , the european union , and china , the largest trading countries in the world , would likely need to put additional significant offers on the table .

absent movement in this direction , some observers maintain that consideration should be given to "harvesting" already achieved gains or concessions .

these could include agreements or offers on trade facilitation and the phase out of farm export subsidies , among others .

given that the reps exercised their growing influence to prevent a successful conclusion , as well as to alter the dynamics of the doha round , further progress on trade liberalization within the wto may require alternatives to existing multilateral processes and practices .

it has long been suggested that principles that have guided multilateral trade negotiations in the past , such as unconditional most - favored - nation ( mfn ) and special and differential ( s&d ) treatment , may need to be reexamined .

the unconditional mfn principle , for example , served as a foundation stone of the original gatt ( 1947 ) .

unconditional mfn thwarts discrimination between alternative foreign suppliers and thereby promotes both economic efficiency and harmonious relations between states .

whatever its virtues , unconditional mfn creates an open door for "free riders" and an exit path from reciprocity , especially when concessions among a few countries are extended without cost to all wto members , as they were for much of the history of the gatt and wto .

if "free riders" are developing countries that account for a relatively small amount of international trade , it may not be a big problem for the trading system .

this was a situation long tolerated in the gatt system .

but the prospect of "free riders" the size of brazil , india , or china arguably presents a more formidable challenge for the functioning of most multilateral agreements .

plurilateral agreements may offer one way to get around the unconditional mfn and "free rider" problem .

similar to the codes adopted in the tokyo round multilateral trade negotiations in the early 1970s , such agreements apply to a number of wto members , but not all members .

by incorporating a conditional mfn clause , plurilateral agreements aim to prevent countries from gaining benefits without undertaking obligations .

more positively , the conditional mfn framework is designed to create incentives for reluctant trading partners to join in preferential schemes over time .

a group of 47 countries is now negotiating an international services agreement .

only mexico and turkey among the reps have joined the discussions .

services negotiations are as important to the united states as they are difficult .

given a strong u.s. comparative advantage in areas such as publishing , software , communications , finance , accounting , and engineering , liberalization of services trade offers potentially large economic benefits .

but because services sectors are highly regulated , both at the national and sub - national level , they tend to be politically difficult .

according to one analyst , plurilateral agreements could "end the simplistic distinctions between developed and developing countries and allow members from both groups to adopt rules that met their interests. .

other plurilateral agreements could be proposed to address issues such as foreign investment restrictions , currency undervaluation , and disciplines on state - owned enterprises .

china , india , russia , and brazil have generally opposed the negotiation of plurilateral agreements within the wto on the grounds that they would sacrifice the understanding of a "single undertaking" for the doha round .

this principle , which requires agreement on all provisions being negotiated or no agreement at all , greatly strengthens their negotiating leverage .

whether future multilateral negotiations will occur or how they might evolve remains uncertain given that the advanced countries and the reps are currently at loggerheads over the revision of existing rules or the creation of new rules .

within this context , the wto dispute settlement mechanism ( dsu ) has become the linchpin for maintaining global economic order .

both the reps and advanced countries ( united states and european union ) have tended to be the largest users of the dsu both as complainants and defendants .

of the 896 disputes that have been handled in the dsu from 1995 to 2011 , the united states has been a party to 24% of the cases , the reps ( excluding russia ) 18% , and the european union 17% .

by definition the largest economies have large volumes of trade ( imports and exports ) and greater exposure to complaints about domestic policies or market access barriers .

on one level , the system has been quite successful in diffusing conflicts , resolving differences , and obtaining compliance with rulings .

many disputes are even resolved in consultations before a panel is formed .

most countries that "lose" cases bring their laws or practices into conformity with their wto obligations , rather than paying damages or permitting retaliation .

on another level , the dsu provides the rep s with considerable leeway to violate the letter and spirit of wto obligations due to the facts that cases can take up to three years to complete and remedies are not retrospective .

under these circumstances , by the time a case is resolved , the market has been drastically altered and the aggrieved company may have has lost market share forever .

despite shortcomings , the wto's dsu is likely to remain a key tool for managing trade relations in the years ahead .

for the united states and other advanced countries , the dsu is a way to engage the reps directly about their responsibilities for upholding a system of multilateral trade rules .

for the reps , the dsu provides a way to challenge advanced countries' market access barriers and protectionist threats .

combined with rising levels of economic integration that deter countries from taking actions that would damage each other , the dsu , thus , can provide a key forum for managing trade relations during an era in which both global economic power and leadership are in transition and uncertain .

increasingly , u.s. trade policy ( as well as the trade policies of the other major trading countries ) is becoming dominated by bilateral and regional negotiations to establish ftas .

these agreements offer opportunities between pairs or groups of countries to reduce trade barriers and construct new rules in an effort to generate economic growth through trade expansion .

u.s. ftas have typically removed almost all tariff and border barriers to trade , liberalized services trade , bolstered intellectual property protection , opened up government procurement markets , liberalized foreign investment restrictions , and provided for the enforcement of core worker rights , among other provisions .

ftas may be particularly advantageous when they can address trade barriers not adequately covered by wto rules ( eg , intellectual property rights , state - owned enterprises , export restrictions , trade facilitation , discriminatory regulatory practices , services , foreign investment , effects of trade on small - and - medium - sized businesses , and the effects of ftas on global supply chains ) or include obligations that go beyond current rules .

since the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) went into effect in 1994 , the united states has concluded 12 ftas with 17 countries , including the regional dominican republic - central american free trade agreement ( dr - cafta ) .

these agreements have been comprehensive in scope and have comprised high standards .

they have not only eliminated tariffs on goods and agricultural products but also covered intellectual property , direct investment , government procurement , service sector trade , and regulatory , labor , and environmental issues .

since nafta , u.s. ftas have been concluded with relatively small trading partners ( south korea excluded ) .

post - nafta u.s. fta partners , including south korea , account for less than 9% of total u.s. trade .

for a number of reasons , the united states has not negotiated ftas with large and more significant trading partners , such as china , india , and brazil .

one reason may be that these countries have not been prepared or have shown little interest in negotiating an fta with the united states .

brazil , for example , wants openings for its agricultural exports and india wants greater labor mobility and new opportunities for its service providers , but neither country may be willing to liberalize in other areas of interest to the united states .

nor would they likely accept inclusion of labor and environmental provisions that are now part of the u.s. fta template .

in this changed world , the united states may need to consider deviating from its fta template , as well as putting remaining u.s. trade barriers , particularly agriculture , on the negotiating table , if it is to secure the strategic and economic advantages of agreements with these larger countries .

at the same time , the obama administration has made considerable progress on negotiating the complex free trade agreement known as the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) .

currently , the united states is negotiating this regional trade agreement with australia , brunei , canada , chile , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , peru , singapore , and vietnam .

u.s. negotiators envision the proposed tpp as a "comprehensive and high - standard" fta that will liberalize trade in nearly all goods and services and include commitments beyond current wto obligations .

for example , the negotiation aims to improve the environment for the operation of regional supply chains and establish disciplines on issues such as the role of state - owned or state - controlled enterprises , and foreign investment that could serve as a model for future negotiations .

a successful conclusion to these negotiations could encourage china and other non - participating countries to offer similar rules and opportunities , especially if it also attracts additional countries to join .

the inclusion of vietnam and malaysia in the tpp negotiations , two countries that are direct competitors with china for foreign direct investment , could possibly influence china .

if these two countries were to agree to high standards and comprehensive wto - plus provisions that allowed more competition in product and labor markets , and gave liberalized restrictions on foreign investment in return for greater access to the u.s. market , china may feel greater pressure to liberalize its economy over time or join the negotiations out of fear that foreign investment could be diverted .

the possible negotiation of a comprehensive u.s. fta with the european union ( eu ) could also have strong competitive liberalizing effects .

according to press reports , negotiations on such an agreement may be launched in 2013 .

given that the u.s. - eu economic relationship is the largest in the world , a successful negotiation could establish de facto international standards in a range of sectors through the convergence of regulatory processes or through the mutual recognition of each side's standards .

combined with other possible preferences built into the agreement , a u.s. - eu fta could serve as a strong incentive for the major non - parties to the agreement to view multilateral negotiations more favorably .

beyond bilateral and regional trade negotiations , u.s. policymakers have an array of trade and diplomatic tools available to expand engagement with the reps in an effort to influence their support for an open and non - discriminatory , rules - based trading system .

on the trade side , these tools include trade and investment framework agreements ( tifas ) and other high - level joint commissions and dialogues that serve as a forum for government leaders at all levels to meet and discuss issues of mutual interest with the objective of improving cooperation and expanding trade and investment .

on the diplomatic side , approaches could include increased official exchanges and expanded investments in education and language training .

in addition , export promotion measures , particularly export finance , could be reinforced to make sure u.s. exporters and investors are not disadvantaged by similar efforts from third country competitors .

u.s. unilateral initiatives traditionally have taken the form of threats to restrict a trade partner's access to the large u.s. market in order to induce the partner to open its market to u.s. exports and investment or to cease other practices that burden u.s. commerce .

while the united states employed this approach of imposing unilateral sanctions primarily in the 1980s and early 1990s against japan , this tool is largely unavailable today .

this is because in the wto uruguay round agreements , which were concluded in 1994 and greatly expanded the scope of multilateral trade rules , the united states and other countries largely agreed to end unilateral trade action in favor of a wto dispute resolution system based on binding rulings on violations of wto world trade obligations .

the proliferation of global production chains also makes it more difficult today to impose a measure of economic hardship on a trading partner without adversely affecting one's own economic interests .

in today's more interdependent world economy , unilateral initiatives take the form more of "carrots" or incentives than "sticks. .

possible unilateral initiatives include measures that strengthen the u.s. economy so that the united states sets an example for the rest of the world , as well as u.s. proposals that resonate with the rep s ' own evaluations of their economic self - interest .

reinvigorating the u.s. economy to achieve more rapid long - term growth could be the most important unilateral initiative with a favorable impact on rep reform initiatives .

with the financial and housing markets being repaired and new strengths being found in exports and shale gas , some observers believe that the united states could be just one budget agreement away from strengthening those long - term economic fundamentals needed to preserve a preeminent global economic position .

if this were to come to fruition , the u.s. economic model based on free markets and democracy could regain much of its appeal to the rest of the world .

a stronger u.s. economy spurred primarily by market forces , in turn , could weaken rep justifications and defense of a more muscular role for the state , as well as provide a competitive dynamic and example for others to liberalize their own markets as well .

moreover , brazil , russia , india , and china , operating in the context of their bric grouping , tend to be united more by a shared desire to raise their political profile on the global stage than any other shared interests .

they also want to modernize their own economies according to their own economic policies , and not ones dictated by the united states or any other country .

thus , in the long run , whether the u.s. market - based version of capitalism or more state - centered forms of capitalism prevail could be determined by economic performance .

momentum could rest with the model that produces faster growth , combats inequality more effectively , and protects citizens better against the volatility of the modern marketplace .

given that both a full restoration of u.s. economic vitality and robust unilateral reforms by the rep s are unlikely in the near term , the united states most likely will continue efforts to open rep markets via negotiations .

while u.s. negotiating priorities are likely to be for rules in which the private sector or shareholder - owned companies are the primary economic actors , the rep s are likely to insist on language that will preserve more discretion for government action .

the question of the appropriate role of government has contributed to many trade disputes in the past and is unlikely to be resolved permanently by any future trade negotiation .

u.s. trade negotiators have had much experience in negotiating disciplines on foreign government - directed or - supported practices that provide de facto discrimination against foreign firms .

for example , in the case of japan in the 1980s and 1990s , u.s. negotiators spent considerable time targeting japanese government - directed measures that protected its market from u.s. competitive exports of products such as auto parts , medical devices , semiconductors , and beef .

preferential government treatment in sectors such as insurance , banking , and express delivery similarly limited opportunities for u.s. firms and workers in japan .

some analysts maintain that u.s. trade negotiators made the greatest progress with japan when their pressure , voices , and concerns worked to reinforce domestic pressures for change .

in the context of future negotiations with the reps , the natural allies for such appeals could be the growing numbers of middle - class consumers who are the beneficiaries of a non - discriminatory rules - based trading system , as well as the growing numbers of exporters and investors .

such appeals can be strengthened by reaching out to the european union and other advanced countries to urge a more rapid opening and liberalization of rep markets .

under this view , the rep s are most likely to remove trade barriers and otherwise undertake economic reforms that open their economies to greater competition when they see these measures to be in their own economic interest rather than under the threat of sanctions or other demands .

based on express powers provided in the u.s. constitution ( article 1 , section 8 ) , congress plays a large role in formulating u.s. trade policy .

congress exercises its responsibility to "regulate commerce with foreign nations" in many ways .

these include a major role in setting u.s. trade negotiating objectives and priorities , approval of trade agreements , and general oversight of trade relations .

the 113 th congress may consider a number of questions relating to the future direction of u.s. trade policy , particularly if president obama should ask for a renewal of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) in 2013 .

under tpa ( formerly called "fast - track authority" ) , the president agrees to negotiate trade agreements in line with objectives established by congress .

in return , congress agrees to consider legislation implementing trade agreements meeting those objectives under expedited legislative procedures ( no amendments , strict time limits on debate , and an up - or - down vote ) .

congress has renewed tpa several times , but the last grant of authority expired in 2007 .

any request from president obama to renew tpa could be driven by an effort to open new trade negotiations , such as a u.s - eu fta , or to complete the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , for which negotiations are in progress .

should congress decide to consider reauthorizing tpa , a range of trade policy questions affecting u.s. trade relations with the reps could also be examined .

these include what kinds of new initiatives can best engage the reps , open their markets further to u.s. exports and investments , and revitalize the wto .

whether u.s. trade policy should elevate the attention and resources the reps receive is another important question that could be addressed , along with questions relating to the adequacy of u.s. export promotion and commercial advocacy efforts .

most observers maintain that u.s. trade leadership is bolstered when the president has tpa and a mandate from congress to negotiate new agreements .

in trying to induce the reps with their very different state - led economic models into maintaining and strengthening the market - oriented wto system , u.s. trade negotiators may need considerable resources , flexibility , and leverage to be successful .

appendix a .

previous efforts at identifying a group of rising developing countries over the past two decades numerous efforts have sought to identify which developing countries will change the face of the global economy .

in what was one of the earliest attempts at identifying a group of countries that would be increasingly important to u.s. interests , the clinton administration in the early 1990s undertook what was called a big emerging markets initiative ( bem ) .

china , india , and brazil , three countries with huge populations and land mass , impressive economic progress , and large political ambitions , led the list of 10 countries chosen for the bem initiative .

the "big ten" list also included mexico and argentina in latin america , south africa in africa , poland and turkey in europe , and south korea in asia .

countries were selected not only on the basis of their probable commercial importance to the united states in the decades ahead , but also due to broad foreign policy concerns bearing on security , human rights , and environmental issues .

the bem initiative acknowledged that u.s. policy towards these countries ought to have a stronger commercial dimension and advocated cultivating ties with these countries in broader and more systemic ways .

the world bank's 1997 global economic prospects report was another early attempt to identify a group of rising developing countries .

dubbed the "big 5," this report projected that brazil , russia , india , china , and indonesia would increase their influence on world patterns of resource allocation , production , and trade by 2020 .

in a 2001 report that examined the relationship between the world's leading advanced countries and the world's leading emerging market economies , goldman sachs researchers argued that brazil , russia , india , and china — four populous and fast - growing countries that they dubbed the brics — would propel global growth in the decades ahead and that their weight in the world economy would grow markedly , overtaking the six largest western economies in 40 years .

in 2005 , goldman sachs designated a next group of developing countries that arguably would have the capacity to play a much larger role in the global economy .

this group was dubbed the "next eleven," or n - 11 for short , and included bangladesh , egypt , indonesia , iran , mexico , nigeria , pakistan , the philippines , south korea , turkey , and vietnam .

the so - called civets group of countries — colombia , indonesia , vietnam , egypt , turkey , and south africa — was touted by the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) in 2009 as the next generation of "tiger" economies ( even though they are named after a shy feline mammal ) .

the appeal of these countries is that they all have large , young populations with an average age now of 27 and reasonably sophisticated financial systems , and export a variety of products .

in january 2011 president obama announced a national export initiative ( nei ) aimed at doubling u.s. exports over five years .

in addition to china , india , and brazil , this effort identified colombia , indonesia , saudi arabia , south africa , turkey , and vietnam as "next tier" emerging markets , as well as the asia - pacific region as a whole .

in 2011 , jim o'neil , the head of the goldman sachs research team , maintained that the term "emerging markets" could no longer be applied to the four brics or to four of the n - 11 : indonesia , south korea , mexico , and turkey .

instead , this group of countries with largely sound debt and deficit positions , strong trading networks , and large labor forces were dubbed " growth markets . .

citibank analysts in 2011 identified bangladesh , china , egypt , india , indonesia , iraq , mongolia , nigeria , philippines , sri lanka , and vietnam as the countries with the most promising growth prospects and investment opportunities .

dubbed 3g or global growth generators , these 11 countries were identified base on a weighted average of factors such as savings rates , demographic prospects , health , education , quality of institutions and policies , and trade openness .

rejecting a primarily quantitative approach for singling out and ranking countries in terms of their economic potential , oxford analytica in 2012 identified six countries — turkey , egypt , iran , nigeria , indonesia , and mexico — as candidates for the status of pivotal powers .

in a world of increasingly fragmented power , this report argued that these are "countries that by virtue of their strategic location , size of population , economic potential , policy preferences , and political weighting are destined to shape the contours of geopolitics in key regions of the world and constitute important nodes of economic growth. .

in november 2012 , the german marshall fund of the united states ( gmf ) and center for new american security released a new report , global swing states: brazil , india , indonesia , turkey and the future of the international order .

in this report , the authors examined how the united states and europe can partner with these countries to support a new international order .

appendix b .

methodology for economic projections while the countries identified as rising economic powers have varied , the selection criteria have relied in substantial part on three factors — population or labor force size , capital stock , and what economists call total factor productivity .

of these factors , some projections place more weight on demographics given that only countries with large populations can hope to be one of the largest economies .

others have emphasized underlying political and institutional characteristics that influence total factor productivity as far more important in whether countries rise or fall in the global economic gdp rankings .

the united nations predicts the global population will reach 9.2 billion in 2050 , a large jump from the estimated 6.8 billion in 2009 and 2.5 billion in 1950 .

during this same period , the global labor force is expected to expand by nearly 1.3 billion .

developing regions will see their workforces expand by 1.5 billion people — more than the current population of developed countries — while the labor force will shrink by over 100 million in developed areas .

developing africa and asia will contribute the most to the increase , adding 1.4 billion workers to the global labor force .

by contrast , europe's working - age population will decline by more than 110 million .

research that weights population size and labor force growth as the most critical factors contributing to economic growth tends to argue that the world's most populated countries should have the largest economies when the productivity of their workers ( the more a group of workers can produce with a given set of inputs from time to materials ) increases rapidly .

critically , the countries that are playing an increasingly large role in the world economy , displacing many 20 th century powers in the gdp rankings , have large populations , large markets , and a growing middle class .

demographics matter because they define a country's economic ability to become a large economic power even if living standards are relatively low .

they also enable countries to project power , and , if they are able , to set and implement an agenda for others to follow .

as worker productivity is enhanced by additions of machinery , physical capital stocks are the second key driver of growth .

these stocks , in turn , are a function of savings rates and rising incomes .

having a high savings pool is important because this finances the investment that leads to future growth .

in advanced countries , savings as a share of gdp are declining as populations age .

in many developing countries , capital stocks are predicted to rise substantially as the working population ages .

what economists call total factor productivity ( tfp ) is the third driver of economic growth and may be the most important .

this is the extra growth that occurs when labor and capital are added together in an efficient and optimum manner .

rising tfp can come from a variety of factors including political stability , good governance , sound institutions , exposure to new technologies , and the right economic and financial policies .

while there are no precise formulas to stimulate growth , some of the key ingredients are thought to include policies that allow the free flow of goods , money , and people ; policies that encourage savings and banks to funnel money into productive investments ; and policies that stabilize the economy with low inflation and low budget and trade deficits .

additionally , the rule of law and protection of property rights is required to attract technology transfers and innovation .

top quality education and training systems are also widely viewed as key components .

but there appears to be no magic formula , only a long list of ingredients that offer no real insight into how these factors will or will not combine to produce growth in any given country at any given time .

given that tfp is substantially about policies and institutions , the past may not be a good guide to the future .

as the factors undergirding tfp are inherently unpredictable , long - term forecasts of economic growth are bound to be uncertain as well .

china and india , for example , could falter for any number of reasons .

china faces internal imbalances , a rapidly aging population , rising wages , and social unrest , among other challenges .

india , for its part , must deal with endemic corruption , weak infrastructure , and excessive regulations if it is to reach its economic potential .

conversely , countries such as iran and nigeria that now are seeming long - shots to play a large role in the global economy could conceivably address internal political challenges , adopt outward - looking economic reforms , engage with the rest of the world , enter a path of sustained growth , and rise in the global gdp rankings .

appendix c. alternative rep groupings as discussed in the report , there are large differences among the universe of rising developing countries , giving scope for varied groupings and categories .

while this report focuses on seven countries identified as reps , it is important to flag other countries that are capable of playing a much larger role in the global economy if they are able to overcome political and institutional constraints .

these potential "turnaround" or "long - shot" countries include bangladesh , egypt , iran , nigeria , pakistan , philippines , and vietnam .

there are also at least nine fast - growing developing countries or emerging markets that are providing attractive commercial opportunities , but that are unlikely to become regional or global economic powers because of their relatively smaller populations .

this group includes argentina , colombia , czech republic , malaysia , poland , saudi arabia , south africa , thailand , and venezuela .

long - shot or turnaround economies there are a number of populous developing countries that have enormous economic potential , but must overcome fundamental political and economic obstacles if they are to break out of their economic doldrums .

among the countries that could turn their economic fortunes around with better governance and other institutional and policy reforms are bangladesh , egypt , iran , nigeria , pakistan , philippines , and vietnam .

as shown in table c - 1 , these six countries all have large populations ranging from 75 million in iran to over 160 million in bangladesh , nigeria , and pakistan .

but they currently have shaky and small economies amounting to only $200 billion - $480 billion in gdp .

they also have very low per capita incomes , ranging from a little over $1,000 in pakistan , nigeria , and vietnam to an estimated $4,500 in iran .

some of the economic potential and challenges facing several of these countries are highlighted below: egypt arguably has the size , history as a middle eastern power , and ambition to become a rising economic power .

some of its advantages include the largest population ( 82 million ) in the middle east and north africa , well - educated elite , and a sizeable middle class , plus a strategic location on a critical waterway .

its economy has suffered because of its political instability , an unsettled transition to democracy , and legal uncertainties .

if new leadership adopts pro - growth policies , opens the economy further to trade and investment , and increases the role of the private sector in the economy , its growth prospects could improve immeasurably .

however , the country's new leaders will need to ensure that the benefits of growth are widely distributed to stave off further political conflict .

iran , a current u.s. adversary , is a country of immense commercial and economic potential .

its population of 75 million makes it the second - most populous country in the middle east and north africa , after egypt .

it has a vibrant , well - educated , and entrepreneurial middle class with some of the highest labor participation rates of women in the region .

two - thirds of iranians are under the age of 33 and one - half under the age of 21 .

expatriates of iranian descent , located mostly in the united states and europe , have an estimated $1 trillion in assets and could potentially mediate between iran and global capital and trade markets if the geopolitical environment dramatically improved .

from 2003 to 2008 , iran averaged 5.3% growth and maintained a stable macroeconomic environment .

affected by increased international isolation , economic growth in past years ( 2009-2011 ) has dropped to just over 3% .

absent a more moderate and responsible leadership and a lifting of international sanctions , rapid growth will likely remain elusive .

nigeria aspires to become africa's most powerful and influential country and one of the world's top 20 economies by 2020 .

it has been growing 7% per year for much of the past decade and its gdp could overtake south africa's in the very near future .

nigeria's demographic profile lies at the root of its rising economic status .

with a population currently estimated at around 170 million but expected to exceed 300 million by the middle of the century , it is africa's biggest domestic market by far .

its relatively youthful and rising middle class , entrepreneurial culture , and appetite for consumer goods add to its huge economic potential .

but its economic management and governance ; high unemployment rate ; low development indicators , such as infant mortality and literacy ; and political conflict and instability in parts of the country remain serious challenges .

progress has been slow in lessening the economy's overreliance on oil , harnessing vast natural gas reserves , reviving its agricultural sector , eliminating a chronic infrastructure deficit , tackling endemic graft and corruption , and overhauling dysfunctional institutions .

success in any one of these areas could herald the birth of a continental power .

emerging markets there are a number of other developing countries that are providing rising living standards and significant new trade and investment opportunities .

all have adopted outwar - looking trade and economic policies and are well positioned for continued future growth .

with populations under 100 million , however , none are large enough to become global or even regional economic powers .

argentina , colombia , czech republic , malaysia , poland , saudi arabia , south africa , thailand , and venezuela are selected countries that can be placed in this long - standing category of emerging markets .

as shown in table c - 2 , these emerging markets have gdps ranging from a low of $215 billion ( czech republic ) to a high of $577 billion ( saudi arabia ) .

with populations generally under 50 million ( thailand at 69 million being the exception ) , most of these countries will be hard pressed to break the $1 trillion gdp threshold any time soon .

while thailand , with a per capita income of $4,972 , is the poorest emerging market , it may also have the greatest upside potential for growth .

on average , these emerging markets grew two to four times faster than advanced countries from 2003 to 2008 .

over the most recent three - year period ( 2009-2011 ) , argentina , colombia , malaysia , poland , and saudi arabia have experienced growth rates averaging 3.3% to 6.3% , thus surpassing the advanced countries' negligible growth of two - tenths of one percent by wide margins .

south africa and thailand , which grew by 1.5% and 1.9% respectively , also grew significantly faster than the advanced countries .

only the czech republic , adversely affected by the euro zone crisis , and venezuela , adversely affected by economic mismanagement , performed the same or worse than the advanced countries .

