in the context of large budget deficits , congress was faced with a variety of policies that were set to reduce spending and increase revenues at the end of 2012 .

numerous expiring provisions , across - the - board spending cuts , and other short - term considerations having a major budgetary impact , were scheduled to take effect at the very end of 2012 or in early 2013 .

this combination of policies , estimated by cbo to reduce the deficit by $502 billion between fy2012 and fy2013 , was referred to by some as the "fiscal cliff. .

had these policies taken effect , cbo projected that the economy would likely have returned to recession in fy2013 .

on january 2 , 2013 , president obama signed into law the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) , which prevented many — but not all — of the fiscal cliff policies from taking effect .

even with the enactment of atra , however , there are budget issues that remain unresolved and will likely continue to be debated in the 113 th congress .

specifically , there are uncertainties associated with the debt limit and with appropriations for the final six months of the fiscal year .

the continuing resolution currently funding the operations of the federal government expires at the end of march .

therefore , how government operations will be funded after that date needs to be determined .

in addition , under current fiscal policy , an increase to the debt limit would be required in early 2013 to meet existing obligations .

finally , because the federal debt remains on an unsustainable path due to long - term imbalances , it is likely that further debate over appropriate levels of spending and revenues will continue .

this report provides a brief overview of the major tax and spending policies that comprised the "fiscal cliff. .

it discusses how the provisions of atra did and did not address these policies and provides information on additional budget - related considerations for the 113 th congress .

a variety of revenue and spending provisions had been set to expire around the end of calendar year 2012 .

these included the "bush - era tax cuts" and other related tax provisions , extended emergency unemployment benefits , the social security payroll tax reduction , the "doc fix," other tax extenders , and the farm bill .

had congress and the president allowed all of these measures to expire as scheduled and let the spending cuts under the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) take effect ( see discussion below ) , the budget deficits beginning in fy2013 would gradually have fallen as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) reaching sustainable levels between fy2014 and fy2022 .

however , as a result the extension of certain revenue policies and the postponement of certain spending reductions by atra , budget deficits may rise to levels over the next several years that will no longer be considered sustainable .

 ( however , these levels are estimated to be lower than the levels seen over the fy2009-fy2012 period. ) .

prior to the enactment of atra , the budget deficit was estimated to fall by $502 billion between fy2012 and fy2013 .

as congress changed the trajectory of these policies by increasing spending and decreasing revenue , these policies have increased the deficit relative to the baseline .

budget changes are measured by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) relative to "current law" baseline , or the law in place at the time the legislation is being considered .

therefore , as shown in table 1 , the spending increases and revenue decreases in atra are estimated to increase the budget deficit by $330 billion in fy2013 and nearly $4 trillion over the fy2013-fy2022 period relative to current law .

compared to a "current policy" baseline , however , atra modestly reduced the deficit because it raised taxes relative to those policies that were in place at the end of 2012 .

a current policy baseline measures changes relative to policies in place at the time legislation is being considered .

for official scorekeeping purposes , policy changes are measured relative to current law .

atra addressed several revenue provisions that had been set to expire at the end of 2012 .

these included the "bush - era tax cuts," provisions related to the estate tax , certain tax provisions enacted or expanded as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , and a number of temporary tax provisions ( also known as "tax extenders" ) .

in addition to these revenue provisions , atra also addressed several spending policies that were scheduled to reduce spending beginning in fy2013 .

these included temporary emergency unemployment benefits , payments to medicare physicians under the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) system , the automatic spending cuts enacted as part of the budget control act of 2011 , and the 2008 farm bill .

atra did not address two policies considered to be part of the "fiscal cliff" — the expiration at the end of 2012 of the two - percentage - point reduction in the social security payroll tax and the aca taxes on higher - income tax filers , which are scheduled to take effect in 2013 .

as noted above , congress may choose to reconsider several provisions temporarily extended in atra before they expire .

in march , the automatic spending reductions from the budget control act of 2011 are scheduled to take effect .

at the end of 2013 , unemployment provisions , the farm bill , the "doc fix," and several tax extenders are scheduled to expire .

in addition , this section discusses two other issues that congress is likely to consider in early 2013 , appropriations and the debt limit .

many budget analysts are concerned about future levels of federal debt and acknowledge that the current spending and revenue policies resulting in large deficits cannot continue indefinitely .

however , making significant changes to reduce the deficit at this time may be harmful to the ongoing economic recovery .

some economists believe that the uncertainty surrounding the "fiscal cliff" was holding back the recovery as individuals , businesses , and state and local governments did not know what they would be facing in january 2013 , leading some to reduce or delay purchases of goods and services .

although atra eliminated uncertainty surrounding some major tax and spending policies , it did not restore fiscal sustainability .

the effects on the economy of certain policies enacted to combat the economic downturn , such as the spending and revenue provisions of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , are waning under current law .

cbo recently projected that the economy will not return to full employment until fy2018 .

though atra is likely to increase economic growth in the short - run relative to what growth would have been if the policies of the "fiscal cliff" had taken effect , ongoing large budget deficits could dampen economic growth over the long - run .

many policy issues affecting the federal budget over the next decade and beyond remain unresolved .

increases in mandatory spending due to rising healthcare costs and the aging of the population are expected to begin taking effect towards the end of the decade .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , or approximately at its historical average , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid , reining in the costs of these programs , or some combination of the two .

putting the budget on a sustainable path would require less spending , increases in revenue collections , faster - than - average economic growth , or a combination of these things .

increasing levels of debt require interest payments that can strain budgets if debt levels and interest rates are high .

high debt levels could limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or in responding to emerging needs of its citizens .

