the "farm bill" is an omnibus bill which reauthorizes dozens of agriculture and agriculture - related statutes and their programs approximately every five years .

since 1973 , the farm bill has included the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ( formerly , food stamp program ) , and has come to include certain other nutrition programs administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) .

many programs reauthorized by the food , conservation and energy act of 2008 ( or "2008 farm bill" ; p.l .

110-246 ) , expired at the end of fy2012 ( september 30 , 2012 ) — although many continued on the basis of appropriations action .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 , enacted on january 2 , 2013 ) included an extension of the 2008 farm bill through september 30 , 2013 .

this report focuses on the nutrition title ( title iv ) of the 2012 farm bill proposals included in the 112 th congress's senate - passed bill ( agriculture reform , food , and jobs act of 2012 ; s. 3240 ) and house committee - reported bill ( federal agriculture reform and risk management act of 2012 ; h.r .

6083 ) .

these were five - year reauthorization proposals , and , while the 113 th congress must "start from scratch," it is expected that these actions during 2012 will influence the farm bill formulation during the current congress .

this report's introduction includes a legislative history of the 112 th congress's farm bill actions as well as a budget - oriented overview .

subsequent sections will take a closer look at the bills' proposed changes to snap .

the report also discusses the two bills' changes to the emergency food assistance program , commodity supplemental food program , commodity foods in schools , and additional farm bill nutrition assistance programs and policies .

for general background on the usda - fns programs , consult crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; as well as crs report r42505 , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) : a primer on eligibility and benefits , by [author name scrubbed] .

while this report focuses on the five - year proposals in s. 3240 and h.r .

6083 from the 112 th congress , the text box below summarizes the impact of the p.l .

112-240 extension on the domestic food assistance programs .

of the programs in title iv , snap ( as food stamps was renamed in the 2008 farm bill ) accounts for the largest amount of federal funding and also serves the largest number of households .

in fact , the vast majority of the current farm bill's spending is for snap — nearly 78% based on current cbo baseline projections .

snap is an open - ended appropriated entitlement and program benefits are 100% federally funded .

further , snap participation ebbs and flows in relation to the nation's economy .

"programs in lieu of snap" refers to the related programs operated by entities that do not operate snap or which are offered as an alternative to snap .

puerto rico , american samoa , and the northern mariana islands do not participate in the snap program .

instead they receive a nutrition assistance block grant , under which they administer a nutrition assistance program with service delivery unique to each territory .

indian tribal organizations may choose to operate the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , instead of having the state offer regular food stamp benefits ; the full cost of benefits and most administrative expenses are covered by the federal government .

usda commodity foods are foods purchased by the usda for distribution to usda nutrition programs .

they are not necessarily specific types of food ; the catalog of commodity foods is a wide variety of fruit , vegetable , livestock , dairy — fresh , frozen , and processed foods .

the 2012 farm bill provisions in this section of the report are those which relate to programs that distribute usda commodity foods .

the usda food and nutrition service programs that include usda commodity foods are the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , national school lunch program ( nslp ) , summer food service program ( sfsp ) , and child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) .

many of these programs distribute "entitlement commodities" ( an amount of usda foods to which grantees are entitled by law ) as well as "bonus commodities" ( usda food purchases based on requests from the agricultural producer community ) .

both senate - passed and house - reported bills would have repealed the authority to operate a nutrition information and awareness pilot program .

this discretionary authority had not been funded or utilized in recent years .

