the carl d. perkins career and technical education improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-270 ) , reauthorized and revised the carl d. perkins vocational and technical education act of 1998 ( perkins iii ; p.l .

105-332 ) and renamed the act the carl d. perkins career and technical education act of 2006 ( perkins iv ) .

perkins iv supports the development of academic and career and technical skills among secondary and postsecondary education students who elect to enroll in career and technical education ( cte ) programs , sometimes referred to as vocational education programs .

perkins iv was authorized by statute through fy2012 and was funded at $1.1 billion in fy2014 .

the general education provisions act ( gepa ) automatically extended the authorization for one additional fiscal year to fy2013 .

cte provides occupational and non - occupational preparation at the secondary , postsecondary , and adult education levels .

generally , cte programs require two years or less of postsecondary education or training .

as defined in a publication by the u.s. department of education's ( ed's ) national center for education statistics ( nces ) , cte prepares students for roles outside the paid labor market , teaches general employment skills , and teaches skills required in specific occupations or careers .

for example , cte provides preparation in homemaking and a variety of occupations , such as nursing , business administration , culinary arts , automotive maintenance , software programming , engineering technology , and cosmetology .

the definition distinguishes cte from liberal arts: the fine arts , english , mathematics , science , foreign languages , and the humanities .

on april 19 , 2012 , the obama administration announced its blueprint for reauthorization of perkins iv ( hereinafter referred to as the blueprint ) in an effort to create more high quality cte programs .

the blueprint is intended to conform to the policy goals of all high school graduates being prepared for both college and a career and the united states having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world .

the proposal is expected to "usher in a new era of rigorous , relevant , and results - driven cte shaped by four core principles:" 1 .

more effective alignment of cte programs with labor market needs and high - growth industry sectors , in particular ; 2 .

stronger collaboration among secondary and postsecondary institutions , employers , and industry partners in an effort to improve the quality of cte programs ; 3 .

a meaningful accountability system based upon common definitions and clear metrics for performance ; and 4 .

increased innovation supported through systemic reform of state policies and practices .

as of february 2014 , the house in the 113 th congress has held two hearings on reauthorization of the act .

on september 20 , 2013 , the house subcommittee on early childhood , elementary , and secondary education held a hearing entitled "preparing today's students for tomorrow's jobs: a discussion on career and technical education and training programs. .

on november 19 , 2013 , the house committee on education and the workforce held a hearing entitled "preparing today's students for tomorrow's jobs: improving the carl d. perkins career and technical education act. .

this report is divided into three major sections .

the first section provides a brief history of federal legislation supporting cte .

this is followed by an examination of perkins iv that describes the major programs and provisions .

the last section provides statistics on the funding of and participation in perkins iv programs .

to reduce reliance on individuals trained in foreign vocational schools , improve domestic wage earning capacity , reduce unemployment , and protect national security , federal funding for vocational education was initiated with the passing of the smith - hughes act in 1917 .

about 30 years later , the george - barden act ( p.l .

80-402 ) expanded federal support of vocational education to support vocations beyond agriculture , trade , home economics , and industrial subjects .

the national defense education act ( p.l .

85-864 ) , signed into law in 1958 , focused on improving instruction in science , mathematics , foreign languages , and other critical areas .

it also provided additional funding for vocational education to prepare individuals for technical occupations related to national defense .

in addition to the smith - hughes act , congress provided further support for the development of vocational education in states and territories .

a 1934 act provided grants to states for the salaries of faculty of agricultural , home economics , and trades and industrial subjects .

a 1936 act replaced the 1934 act , added funding for the salaries of faculty in distributive occupations , and further required that states match the federal grants .

the vocational education act of 1946 amended the 1936 act to change the allocation of funds for each vocational education subject and allow support for salaries , teacher training , training program development , counseling , and equipment and supplies .

in 1963 , the vocational education act ( p.l .

88-210 ) was signed into law .

in addition to increasing federal support for vocational education schools , including the construction of area vocational education school facilities , the act also provided funding for vocational work - study programs and research , training , and demonstration programs related to vocational education .

five years later , the vocational education amendments of 1968 ( p.l .

90-576 ) modified the existing vocational education programs .

the amendments also established a national advisory council on vocational education and provided funding for collecting and disseminating information about programs administered by the commissioner of education , now the secretary of education ( hereafter referred to as the secretary ) .

in 1984 , the vocational education act was renamed the carl d. perkins vocational education act ( perkins i , p.l .

98-524 ) .

while continuing federal support for vocational education , it established programs emphasizing the acquisition of job skills through both vocational and technical education .

the act also sought to make vocational education programs accessible to "special populations," including individuals with disabilities , disadvantaged individuals , single parents and homemakers , and incarcerated individuals .

the carl d. perkins vocational and applied technology education act amendments of 1990 ( perkins ii , p.l .

101-392 ) made several revisions to the 1984 act .

notably , the act created the tech - prep program designed to coordinate secondary and postsecondary vocational education activities into a coherent sequence of courses .

the law also provided up to 25% of funds for state programs and required that at least 75% of funds be allocated to local recipients .

most set - asides for "special populations" were removed from the legislation , but the program remained focused on providing members of special populations with access to high - quality vocational education .

these populations included disadvantaged and disabled students , limited english - proficient students , and students enrolled in programs to eliminate sex bias .

programs to eliminate sex bias were designed to prepare students for nontraditional training and employment ( eg , training women to be welders or men to be nurses ) .

the law also required states to develop and implement performance standards and measures ( eg , program completion and job placement ) to assess gains in learning and program performance .

the carl d. perkins vocational and applied technology education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-332 ) reauthorized and revised perkins ii and renamed the act the carl d. perkins vocational and technical education act of 1998 ( hereafter referred to as perkins iii ) .

perkins iii increased the funds distributed to the local level by states from 75% to 85% , of which 8.5% could be reserved for programs in rural and other high - need areas .

perkins iii also allowed states to set aside up to 1% of their total grant for programs for individuals in state institutions ( such as prisons ) and required that states set aside between $60,000 and $150,000 for services related to nontraditional programs and employment .

the act strengthened accountability through the establishment of core indicators of performance with levels negotiated between each state and the secretary ( i.e. , adjusted levels of performance ) , sanctions based on states' failing to meet the performance levels , and incentive grants to states for exceeding performance levels established under perkins iii and under the workforce investment act ( wia , p.l .

105-220 ) .

on august 12 , 2006 , the carl d. perkins career and technical education improvement act of 2006 was signed into law ( perkins iv ; p.l .

109-270 ) .

perkins iv renamed the act to refer to cte rather than vocational and technical education .

the act reinforced the existing accountability system by establishing separate core indicators of performance for the secondary and postsecondary levels , requiring grantees to meet at least 90% of their adjusted levels of performance on each of their core indicators of performance or be required to develop and implement an improvement plan , and limiting fiduciary sanctions .

the act also explicitly linked cte provisions with the academic standards required under the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

a major innovation was the requirement that each local recipient offer the relevant elements of at least one state developed program of education , providing a progressive sequence of secondary and postsecondary courses that lead to an industry recognized credential .

finally , the act permitted eligible agencies to consolidate their funding under the tech - prep program into the basic state grants program .

perkins iv is the main source of specific federal funding for cte .

the most recent estimate of the total funds expended on cte that were federal funds was published in 2004 by ed and estimated that 5% of cte expenditures were federal funds .

the remainder is funded by state and local funds .

the act authorizes federal funding for five main programs: ( 1 ) the basic state grants program ( title i ) , ( 2 ) tech prep ( title ii ) , ( 3 ) national programs ( section 114 ) , ( 4 ) the tribally controlled postsecondary career and technical institutions program ( tcpctip ; section 117 ) , and ( 5 ) occupational and employment information ( section 118 ) .

this section describes the major sections and provisions of perkins iv .

the purpose of perkins iv is to develop the academic and career and technical skills of secondary and postsecondary education students who elect to enroll in cte programs , particularly programs that prepare students for high - skill , high - wage , or high - demand occupations in current or emerging professions .

the act aims to achieve this through the following grant programs: basic state grants , which support the development , maintenance , and improvement of cte at the state and local level ; tech prep , which specifically supports programs that integrate secondary and postsecondary cte ; and tribally controlled postsecondary career and technical institutions ( tcpcti ) , which supports cte programs at tcpctis .

grant recipients are expected to develop rigorous and challenging academic and technical standards and assist students in meeting such standards .

the standards must link secondary and postsecondary education .

perkins iv is also intended to promote professional development that improves the quality of cte teachers , faculty , administrators , and counselors , and to support partnerships among educational institutions , local workforce investment boards , and business and industry .

in addition to the grant programs , perkins iv authorizes the conduct and dissemination of national research and information on best practices that improve cte programs through two initiatives .

national programs support research , evaluation , and dissemination of cte practices .

occupational and employment information supports the dissemination of occupational and employment information .

perkins iv defines cte as organized educational activities that offer a sequence of courses that provides individuals with coherent and rigorous content aligned with challenging academic standards and relevant technical knowledge and skills needed to prepare for further education and careers in current or emerging professions ; provide technical skill proficiency , an industry - recognized credential , a certificate , or an associate degree ; and may include prerequisite courses ( other than a remedial course ) ; and include competency - based applied learning that contributes to the academic knowledge , higher - order reasoning and problem - solving skills , work attitudes , general employability skills , technical skills , and occupation - specific skills , and knowledge of all aspects of an industry , including entrepreneurship , of an individual .

funds cannot be used for students prior to the 7 th grade , except that equipment and facilities purchased may be used by such students .

the unduplicated cte course enrollment counts are shown in figure 3 .

enrollment is an unduplicated count of all students reported by each state as having taken one or more cte courses at the secondary , postsecondary , and adult levels .

these courses may or may not be funded with perkins iv funds .

enrollment increased from 10.6 million students in 2001-2002 to 13.0 million in 2006-2007 before declining to 12.1 million students in 2007-2008 .

the latest enrollment reported for 2009-2010 was 12.5 million .

table 2 disaggregates enrollment in cte courses by student characteristics , including gender , race / ethnicity , and special populations .

these courses may or may not be funded with perkins iv funds .

although male students are overrepresented ( 53% ) at the secondary level , they are underrepresented ( 45% ) at the postsecondary level .

over half of the participants are white , 54% at the secondary level , 57% at the postsecondary level , and 62% at the adult level .

approximately half of the participants are economically disadvantaged — 51% at the secondary level , 50% at the postsecondary level , and 59% at the adult level .

this percentage may suggest the effectiveness of the focus on low - income students in the formula allocation process .

figure 4 disaggregates cte concentrators by career cluster and by education level .

the most popular career clusters at the secondary level are business management ( 21% ) , agriculture ( 17% ) , information technology ( 16% ) , and human services ( 15% ) .

at the postsecondary level , almost two - thirds of cte concentrators are clustered in either the health sciences ( 42% ) or business management ( 23% ) .

almost two - thirds of cte concentrators in adult cte programs are focused in either the health sciences ( 48% ) or transportation ( 16% ) .

the most recent program performance results reported by ed are for the 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 program years .

the performance results indicate each state's progress in achieving its adjusted levels of performance on the core indicators of performance ( described in the section entitled "accountability and performance" ) .

py2008-2009 was the first year for which states were required to report all of the performance indicators .

the 2007-2008 program year was a transition year to perkins iv from perkins iii .

transition year reporting requirements were abbreviated in comparison to the aforementioned full requirements for subsequent years .

for the secondary level core indicators of performance ( table 3 ) , 10 states met or exceeded each of their adjusted levels of performance in py2008-2009 compared to 12 states in py2009-2010 .

an additional 27 states were required to develop an improvement plan following py2008-2009 because they did not meet at least 90% of their adjusted levels of performance on every indicator .

the number of states requiring an improvement plan increased to 28 states following py2009-2010 .

in py2009-2010 , the graduation rate indicator was met or exceeded by the largest ( 49 ) number of states , and the indicator for placement after secondary education was met or exceeded by the fewest ( 30 ) number of states .

for the postsecondary level core indicators of performance ( table 3 ) , 14 states met or exceeded each of their adjusted levels of performance in py2008-2009 compared to 10 states in py2009-2010 .

an additional 25 states failed to meet at least 90% of an adjusted level of performance and thus were required to develop an improvement plan following py2008-2009 .

following py2009-2010 , 15 states were required to develop an improvement plan .

in py2009-2010 , the technical skill attainment indicator was met or exceeded by the largest ( 48 ) number of states , and the indicator of student placement after postsecondary education was met or exceeded by the fewest ( 28 ) number of states .

