the prevent all cigarette trafficking act ( pact act ) requires remote retailers of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco — that is , retailers who sell cigarettes and smokeless tobacco without a face - to - face transaction with the buyer — to pay all state and local taxes before delivering the purchased goods .

three remote retailers have challenged the pact act on the ground that it violates the due process clause .

in quill corp. v. north dakota , the supreme court held that the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment "requires some definite link , some minimum connection , between a state and the person , property , or transaction it seeks to tax and that the income attributed to the state for tax purposes must be rationally related to values connected with the taxing state. .

in red earth llc v. united states and gordon v. holder , the federal district courts for the western district of new york and the district of columbia , respectively , granted preliminary injunctions concluding , among other things , that the plaintiffs were likely to prevail in demonstrating that the pact act's requirement that remote retailers pay the state and local taxes of the jurisdictions to which they send cigarettes and smokeless tobacco violates due process because it does not require minimum contacts .

the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit upheld the preliminary injunction in red earth , and the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit will consider the preliminary injunction in gordon on appeal in the coming months .

in musser's inc. v. united states , the federal district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania rejected the due process argument because , it concluded , the pact act is merely a federal statute that requires compliance with state and local laws and does not implicate due process .

the pact act , the court determined , is no different in principle from other federal statutes that incorporate state law .

moreover , the court determined , the plaintiff had minimum contacts with the jurisdictions into which it shipped tobacco products because it transacted business through its interactive website .

the supreme court stated in quill : "while congress has plenary power to regulate commerce among the states and may thus authorize state actions that burden interstate commerce , it does not similarly have the power to authorize violations of the due process clause. .

it seems from this statement that congress may not be able to require remote retailers to pay taxes to jurisdictions with which they do not have minimum contacts .

it appears , therefore , that the constitutionality of the pact act would depend on what constitutes minimum contacts for remote retailers .

in quill , in the context of catalogue retailers , the supreme court noted that in connection with jurisdiction to adjudicate lawsuits against out - of - state defendants , it has said that the existence of minimum contacts depends on the degree to which the retailer has "purposefully avail[ed] itself of an economic market in forum state" or "purposefully directed" activities at the state's residents .

moreover , in quill , the supreme court wrote that due process requires that the tax paid must be rationally related to "values connected with the taxing state. .

in another case , the supreme court wrote that this requirement means that the state must give something for which it can ask return .

among the purposes of the pact act were to require remote sellers of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco to abide by the same laws that apply to law - abiding brick and mortar retailers ; to increase the collection of federal , state , and local excise taxes ; to discourage cigarette smuggling ; and to reduce youth access to inexpensive cigarettes and smokeless tobacco .

to increase the taxes collected on remote sales of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco , the pact act does two things .

first , the pact act in effect deems interstate sales to be intrastate sales: with respect to delivery sales into a specific state and place , each delivery seller shall comply with — all state , local , tribal , and other laws generally applicable to sales of cigarettes or smokeless tobacco , as if the delivery sales occurred entirely within the specific state and place , including laws imposing — excise taxes ; licensing and tax - stamping requirements ; restrictions on sales to minors ; and other payment obligations or legal requirements relating to the sale , distribution , or delivery of cigarettes or smokeless tobacco .

second , the pact act requires that prior to delivery , a remote seller pay to the state and local government all taxes that apply to sales of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco in the buyer's locality and apply required stamps or other indicia to indicate that the taxes have been paid .

two constitutional provisions govern state taxation of out - of - state businesses doing business within the state: the commerce clause and the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .

under the commerce clause , state taxes may not be imposed in a manner that unduly burdens or discriminates against interstate commerce .

under the due process clause , states may not impose taxes on a foreign business unless the business has a sufficient connection to the state and the taxes reasonably relate to value that the taxpayer receives from the state .

congress may authorize state activities that would otherwise violate the commerce clause , but it may not authorize state activities that would violate the due process clause .

the commerce clause and the due process clause , therefore , are "analytically distinct. .

the remote retailers have challenged the pact act under the due process clause .

the due process issue is governed by the supreme court's opinion in quill .

in quill , the court considered whether the state of north dakota could require an out - of - state mail order retailer to collect a use tax on merchandise sold in the state .

the retailer argued that the due process clause required that it have a physical presence in the state in order to satisfy the requirement of minimum contacts .

concluding that the reasoning for state taxation of out - of - state businesses was "comparable" to reasoning for jurisdiction over out - of - state defendants , the court quoted its opinion in burger king corp. v. rudzewicz , in which the court upheld the jurisdiction of florida courts over an out - of - state franchisee who remotely conducted business in florida and had a contract with a florida corporation: jurisdiction in these circumstances may not be avoided merely because the defendant did not physically enter the forum state .

although territorial presence frequently will enhance a potential defendant's affiliation with a state and reinforce the reasonable foreseeability of suit there , it is an inescapable fact of modern commercial life that a substantial amount of business is transacted solely by mail and wire communications across state lines , thus obviating the need for physical presence within a state in which business is conducted .

so long as a commercial actor's efforts are purposefully directed toward residents of another state , we have consistently rejected the notion that an absence of physical contacts can defeat personal jurisdiction there .

because the retailer in quill had directed a "deluge of catalogues" to north dakota residents , the court concluded that the retailer had "fair warning" that it would be subject to the tax and that it had purposefully directed its activities at north dakota residents , unquestionably satisfying the requirement for minimum contacts .

under quill , therefore , the issue is whether the out - of - state business has directed its activities at the taxing state and whether , as a result , it has fair warning that it would be liable for the taxes .

in authorizing state taxation of out - of - state businesses in the pact act , congress appears to have exercised its authority under the commerce clause to subject out - of - state businesses to state laws that would otherwise violate the commerce clause .

however , if the pact act subjects out - of - state businesses to the taxing authority of states with which they do not have minimum contacts , it appears that its provisions may not comport with the requirements of the due process clause .

the courts in red earth and gordon analyzed the constitutionality of the pact act under the due process clause exclusively and considered whether the pact act authorized state taxation of retailers that do not have minimum contacts with the taxing jurisdiction .

the opinion in musser's may be interpreted as conflating the commerce clause and the due process analyses to conclude that the pact act does not implicate due process .

even applying the due process analysis exclusively , however , it is not clear whether higher courts will conclude that a single sale into a jurisdiction satisfies the due process requirement of minimum contacts .

as the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit noted in reviewing the preliminary injunction in red earth , whether one sale into a jurisdiction satisfies the due process requirements for minimum contacts is a "close question. .

