in late october 2012 , hurricane sandy developed into a large weather system affecting both coastal and interior portions of the east coast , including major population centers like new york city and smaller centers like atlantic city , nj .

in addition to the wind damage and electricity disruptions to 8 million customers in the northeast , the storm's surge damaged public and private property and infrastructure in coastal and inlet areas , while the storm's precipitation swelled rivers and creeks .

although the storm was not notable for its wind intensity , the storm's significant size , its unusually low atmospheric pressure , and the astronomic high tide combined with other weather systems to amplify coastal , river , stream , and local flooding .

this flooding disrupted transportation , business , and government operations and created public safety concerns that necessitated voluntary and emergency evacuations .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) has extensive authorities to assist with emergency actions and recovery efforts from hurricane and flood damage .

in implementing the federal response fema can assign missions to numerous other federal agencies .

the u.s. army corps of engineers ( hereinafter referred to as the corps ) has been actively working on emergency engineering missions related to infrastructure using its power engineering and dewatering expertise .

in addition to its fema assignments , the corps has its own emergency response authority and a program to assist with repairs of eligible hurricane protection and flood control projects .

while availability of funding is unlikely to interfere with near - term emergency response activities in the case of federal response and recovery programs without significant existing balances , federal funding for these programs may become an issue .

this is the case for the corps' flood and hurricane project repair program .

as recovery proceeds , congress may be faced with questions about the efficacy of current federal approaches and participation in hurricane protection ( and the relationship of these issues to mandatory flood insurance ) and a reevaluation of how federal programs and policies influence coastal development .

as decision makers evaluate options for how to manage the atlantic coast's coastal flood hazard , it is important to distinguish between the frequency of a storm with particular characteristics and the frequency of a storm surge height or other coastal flood hazard for a specific location .

that is , while probability of another storm just like sandy is unlikely , the likelihood of coastal communities seeing storm surges and flooding hazards like those experiences with hurricane sandy is much higher .

this report first provides a primer on federal flood policy .

the remainder of the report describes the federal role in emergency flood response and post - disaster repair and rehabilitation of flood protection measures .

this report will help answer the following questions: which federal programs can assist with floodfighting ? .

which federal programs can assist with repairing damaged dunes , levees , and flood control works ? .

what are the flood policy and funding issues that may arise during recovery from hurricane sandy ? .

developing and investing in flood - prone areas represents a tradeoff between the location's economic and other benefits and the exposure to a flood hazard .

hurricane sandy in 2012 , midwest flooding in 2011 and 2008 , hurricane ike in 2008 , and hurricanes katrina and rita renewed interest in the suite of tools available to improve flood resiliency .

in addition to oversight and funding of emergency response activities , at issue for congress is deciding on whether and how to enact and implement feasible and affordable flood policies and programs to reduce flood risk .

the challenge is how to structure federal actions and programs so they provide incentives to reduce flood risk without unduly infringing on private property rights or usurping local decision making .

tackling this challenge would require adjustments in the flood insurance program , disaster aid policies and practices , and programs for structural and nonstructural flood risk reduction measures and actions .

