t his report provides an overview of income tax deductions for individuals .

a tax deduction reduces the amount of a tax filer's income that is subject to taxation , ultimately reducing the tax filer's tax liability .

every tax filer has the option to claim deductions when filing their income tax return .

however , some tax filers and policymakers may not have detailed knowledge of tax deductions , including future changes in the requirements to claim certain deductions .

in addition , tax deductions may be of interest to congress from a budgetary perspective , as some deductions are classified as tax expenditures , and result in losses in federal revenue .

this report first describes what tax deductions are , how they vary in their effects on reducing taxable income , and how they differ from other provisions ( eg , exclusions or credits ) .

next , it discusses the rationale for deductions as part of the tax code .

the final section includes tables that summarize each individual tax deduction , under current law .

this report focuses on the standard treatment of tax deductions for individuals under the individual income tax code .

as such , the following are beyond the scope of this report: the different treatment of deductions under the alternative minimum tax for individuals , tax deductions for businesses under the individual income tax code , and options for reforming itemized deductions .

to understand what tax deductions are , it is helpful to first understand how a tax filer calculates individual income tax liability .

figure 1 provides an overview of how a tax filer calculates his or her federal tax liability .

to calculate taxes owed ( tax liability ) , tax filers first add up all of their forms of income ( see step 1 in figure 1 ) to calculate their gross income .

next , the tax filer subtracts any above - the - line deductions to calculate their adjusted gross income , or agi ( step 2 ) .

agi is often referred to as "the line. .

then , the tax filer subtracts personal exemptions , or fixed dollar amounts per spouse and dependent child ( step 3 ) .

the tax filer then subtracts the greater of either the sum of all of their below - the - line , or itemized deductions , or the standard deduction , which is a fixed amount based on filing status , in order to arrive at taxable income ( step 4 ) .

the marginal tax rates are applied to taxable income ( step 5 ) to arrive at a preliminary tax liability .

finally , tax credits are subtracted from preliminary tax liability ( step 6 ) to arrive at final tax liability .

the provisions in figure 1 surrounded by dotted lines are covered in this report .

simply stated , deductions reduce taxable income .

each deduction reduces tax liability by the amount of deduction times the tax filer's marginal tax rate .

in contrast , a tax credit reduces tax liability on a dollar - for - dollar basis because it would be applied after the marginal tax rate schedule .

an individual in a 35% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $35 for each $100 deduction while an individual in a 25% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $25 for each $100 deduction .

hence , the same deduction can be worth different amounts to different tax filers depending on their marginal tax bracket .

the tax savings from deductions are generally equal to the tax filer's marginal tax rate times the amount of the deduction .

so higher - income tax filers typically benefit more than lower - income tax filers from deductions .

deductions serve four main purposes in the tax code .

first , they can account for large , unusual , and necessary personal expenditures , such as the deduction for extraordinary medical expenses .

second , they are used to encourage certain types of activities , such as homeownership and charitable contributions .

third , they account for and ease the burden of paying for nonfederal forms of taxes , such as state and local taxes .

fourth , deductions adjust for the expenses of earning income , such as deductions for work - related employee expenses .

the following sections define each form of deduction and explain in greater detail how deductions are used in the calculation of an individual's tax liability .

to arrive at final tax liability , all taxpayers may be able to claim above - the - line deductions whether they claim itemized deductions or the standard deduction .

each of these deductions has a specific line on the form 1040 ( eg , line 23 for teacher classroom expenses ) .

figure 2 shows how tax deductions appear on the irs form 1040 .

these deductions are commonly referred to as above - the - line deductions , because they reduce a tax filer's agi ( the line ) .

above - the - line deductions are sometimes also called adjustments to income , because they generally represent costs incurred to earn income .

in contrast , itemized and standard deductions are sometimes referred to as below - the - line deductions , because they are applied after agi is calculated to arrive at taxable income .

above - the - line deductions may provide additional benefits to some tax filers seeking to claim certain tax preferences .

a number of tax provisions have a phaseout of benefits as income increases .

the higher the agi , the less likely the tax filer will be able to claim a larger value of the tax preference .

tax deductions that lower agi increase the likelihood that the tax filer will be able to claim a larger value of the tax preference .

as previously discussed , tax filers have the option to claim either a standard deduction or the sum of their itemized deductions .

whichever deduction the tax filer claims — standard or itemized — the deduction amount is subtracted from agi to arrive at final tax liability .

 table 1 and table 2 provide a summary of above - and below - the - line tax deductions , respectively .

the first column provides a reference to where the provision can be found on the form 1040 ( if an above - the - line deduction ) or on the schedule a form ( if a below - the - line , itemized tax deduction ) .

the provision column contains a reference to where the provision can be found in the internal revenue code ( irc ) , which is title 26 of the u.s. code .

a brief summary of the provision follows in the adjacent column .

when applicable , annual limits ( whether they are floors or ceilings ) and income limits and phaseouts are provided .

the last column provides the tax expenditure amount for fy2016 and fy2017 .

tax expenditures are defined under the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 ) as "revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws which allow a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction from gross income or which provide a special credit , a preferential rate of tax , or a deferral of tax liability. .

tax expenditure estimates are based on current law , which does not assume extensions of temporary provisions that are subject to expire within the time period observed .

not all tax deductions have jct tax expenditure estimates , as some provisions are estimated to result in revenue losses less than $50 million per fiscal year ( jct's de minimus level ) .

in addition , some tax deductions are not considered tax expenditures for various , other reasons .

for example , the deduction for uncompensated employee expenses is considered an appropriate measure to adjust a tax filer's agi .

