on october 25 , 2012 , tropical storm sandy strengthened to become hurricane sandy .

the next day , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) elevated its ongoing preparedness efforts , sending incident management assistance teams to states from north carolina to vermont .

public and private sector entities began to ramp up efforts to prepare for the storm , including a wide range of federal entities from the federal aviation administration to the department of energy .

on october 28 and 29 , as the storm neared land , the president signed emergency declarations for eight states , as well as the district of columbia , making federal resources available to help state and local governments as they prepared and as the storm began to impact coastal communities .

hurricane sandy made landfall in new jersey the night of october 29 , 2012 , as a category 1 hurricane , with a field of hurricane - force winds 900 miles across .

the storm was responsible for at least 131 deaths in the united states , and damage estimates are still being made .

in early november eqecat , an economic forecasting firm , estimated economic losses from sandy as $30 billion to $50 billion .

as of january 31 , 2013 , the president had declared major disasters for 12 states as well as the district of columbia under the authority of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) .

given the scale of the damage , the administration submitted a request to congress on december 7 , 2012 , for $60.41 billion in supplemental funding and legislative provisions to address both the immediate losses and damages from hurricane sandy , as well as to mitigate the damage from future disasters in the impacted region .

table 1 below outlines the administration's request for supplemental funding and mitigation funding in the wake of hurricane sandy , and the congressional response to those requests .

all figures are in millions of dollars of budget authority .

the administration's request is redistributed by appropriations subcommittee .

there is no distinction made in this table for mitigation funding .

a breakdown of the administration's request that illuminates the administration's separate request for mitigation funding is included in the appendix .

headers in bold italics note the appropriations subcommittee of jurisdiction , followed by the department or independent agency in bold capitals .

two columns then specify where a given appropriation is going , by bureau , if applicable , then account or program .

the administration's request is next , in millions of dollars of budget authority , followed by the appropriations that would have been provided if senate - amended h.r .

1 from the 112 th congress had been enacted .

this is provided only for historical reference , as the bill expired with the end of the 112 th congress .

the last column reflects the amount of funding provided in h.r .

152 as it passed both house and senate and was ultimately signed into law .

where accounts are funded through transfers , that number is shown in the table and the donor account is reduced accordingly .

after the table is an analysis of this supplemental appropriations bill in the context of the budget control act , and a more detailed discussion of the contents of the request and the positions taken by the house and senate in response to it .

this section of the report is organized by alphabetically by subcommittee of jurisdiction .

except where otherwise noted , all numbers are in budget authority rounded to the nearest million .

while the administration indicated a need for legislative language on a number of issues , no draft texts of proposed language was circulated publicly .

there are four general provisions that apply to the appropriations provided in p.l .

113-2 .

three of these were generally administrative in nature , as were two of the nine included in senate - passed h.r .

1 — provisions traditionally carried in supplemental appropriations bills with emergency funding .

the president's request included a proposal to require the office of management and budget ( omb ) to direct federal agencies to submit internal control plans for the programs receiving supplemental appropriations .

the president's request stated that the internal control plans should contain enhanced grant management protocols , including quarterly program and financial monitoring , timely submission of single audit reports and grants closeout , and improper payments testing and reporting .

existing statutory and regulatory provisions , and omb guidance , already address these grants management practices , so it is unclear what enhancement of grant management protocols might entail .

additionally , the president's request did not include specific provisions for additional resources for federal agencies to implement grants oversight , such as supplemental funds for federal agency inspector general offices or an increase in the allowable management and administration percentage for individual grant programs .

the administration's request also did not identify which programs would be affected by the enhanced protocols .

in the 112 th congress , senate - passed h.r .

1 included a provision that would have required omb to issue guidance to federal agencies to develop internal control plans for funds provided by the bill .

the bill also included funding for oversight of supplemental funding and certain management and administration activities , however the amounts were provided at the program level and not all programs received additional funding for these activities .

p.l .

113-2 requires federal agencies to submit internal control plans to omb , gao , agency inspectors general , and house and senate appropriations committees for all supplemental funding provided therein ; and directs gao to develop the template for the internal control plans .

the president's request did not specifically address improper payments , but included a provision to ensure the integrity of federal spending .

both p.l .

113-2 and senate - passed h.r .

1 included a provision that designated all programs and activities funded through the legislation as "susceptible to significant improper payments" under the provisions of the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) .

this designation requires federal agencies to estimate the annual amount of improper payments made under the program and submit the estimates to congress annually .

additionally , for programs that have estimated improper payments that exceed $10 million , the federal agency is required to develop a report that identifies the causes and corrective actions the agency will take to reduce the improper payments .

several programs that receive funding under the bill are not currently identified as "susceptible to significant improper payments. .

this provision , therefore , increases the administrative burden on agencies and grant recipients .

no specific appropriations to fund compliance with this provision were requested or included .

two provisions were added to senate - passed h.r .

1 through the floor amendment process that sought to prohibit payments from funds provided in the bills .

one provision would have prohibited payments to individuals who were deceased at the time funds were made available , and another would have prohibited payments to an individual or entity using funds provided under the bill if the individual or entity had a pending "seriously delinquent tax debt. .

in regards to the tax provision , it was unclear how agencies would have implemented this provision , as there is some question regarding federal agencies' ability to access irs tax records to screen disaster recipients prior to providing federal disaster assistance .

neither the president's request nor p.l .

113-2 included these provisions .

the president's request recommended the withdrawal of grant funds awarded through certain programs if funds were not expended within 24 months of the award .

it was unclear exactly which federal grant programs , and what types of grant awards , were the intended objects of this proposal .

senate - passed h.r .

1 would have directed agencies to identify ( for application of the trigger ) grants funded through the legislation where funds should have been expended within the 24-month period following the federal agency obligation of funding .

the bill would also have required the director of omb to issue guidance establishing the methods federal agencies would use to identify grant awards affected by the trigger .

recipients of identified grants would have had to expend funds in the 24-month period following the award .

the federal agency would have had to de - obligate any funds remaining unexpended after the 24-month period .

federal agency heads could have requested a waiver of the 24-month expenditure requirement after consultation with the director of omb to discuss exceptional circumstances that might justify an extension .

it is unclear whether the senate provision would have required the director to approve the waiver , and what "consultation" might have entailed .

additionally , in the absence of specific language establishing a time frame for the waiver process , grant recipients could have faced uncertainty about whether they could have continued expending funds once the 24-month period had elapsed .

this could have resulted in disaster recovery activities coming to a halt while federal agencies debate approval of the waiver .

p.l .

113-2 contains a provision requiring grant recipients to expend funds within the 24-month period following the federal agency obligation of funds for the grant award unless the omb director waives the requirement .

if the requirement is waived , the omb director must submit written justification to the house and senate appropriations committees .

grant recipients that receive a waiver are required to return any funds remaining unexpended after 24 months to the awarding federal agency .

the administration's request proposed that federal agencies work in partnership with state , local , and tribal officials to develop mutually agreed upon assessments of future risks and vulnerabilities facing the region , including extreme weather , sea level rise , and coastal flooding and incorporate these into their recovery planning and implementation .

while congress did not address these specific factors in p.l .

113-2 , the language of the request was reflected in the text of section 1104 of senate - passed h.r .

1 .

for example , section 1104 ( a ) of senate - passed h.r .

1 would have directed federal agencies , in partnership with state , tribal , and local governments to " inform plans for response , recovery , and rebuilding to reduce vulnerabilities from and build long - term resiliency to future extreme weather events , sea level rise , and coastal flooding" ( italics added ) .

further , the provision stated that with respect to "repairing , rebuilding , or restoring infrastructure and restoring land , project sponsors shall consider , where appropriate , the increased risks and vulnerabilities associated with future extreme weather events , sea level rise and coastal flooding" ( italics added ) .

section 1104 ( b ) would also have made available funds under the legislation for the coordinated development of "regional projections and assessments of future risks" to help improve the plans required under 1104 ( a ) .

in general , the impact of this full provision would have depended on how the relevant federal agencies interpreted and implemented the directive to inform their plans , and how recipient project sponsors interpreted and implemented the directive to consider these increased risks .

it is possible , for example , that a requirement , or choice , to take into account the risks delineated in the provision could have resulted in the need for new flood hazard maps that reflect new flood insurance zones based on the future impact of extreme weather events , sea level rise , and coastal flooding ; and also possibly new floodplain management standards requiring communities under the nfip that reflect new land - use planning and construction standards in special flood hazard areas ( sfha ) .

also by example , in interpreting and implementing this provision , the u.s. army corps of engineers could have adjusted their plans for the level of flood protection needed along the eastern seaboard .

section 1105 of senate - passed h.r .

1 as amended would have required the secretary of hud , as the chair of the hurricane sandy rebuilding task force , to issue guidelines on how recipients of federal funds for reconstruction should "to the greatest extent practicable ... maximize the utilization of technologies designed to mitigate future power outages , continue delivery of vital services and maintain the flow of power to facilities critical to public health , safety and welfare. .

these guidelines could have been issued in a number of ways , ranging from policy guidance to enforceable regulations .

depending on the scope of the guidelines and whether recipients were required to follow them , the guidelines could have impacted the expenditure of funds for a number of programs .

for example , recipients may have been more likely to invest funds received from fema's hazard mitigation grant program or hud's community development block grant program in technologies that would mitigate power outages , such as backup generators .

the administration's proposal did not specifically request this provision , but it was arguably consistent with the administration's emphasis on using funding to mitigate future damages .

no similar provision was included in p.l .

113-2 .

section 1107 of senate passed h.r .

1 would have authorized the department of state to transfer up to about $1 billion in overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funds , previously appropriated in fy2012 for operations in iraq , for increased security at u.s. embassies and other overseas posts identified in the department's security review after the benghazi attack .

these unobligated funds are no longer needed because of reduced operations in iraq , according to senator mikulski .

cbo had determined that the amendment had no outlay scoring impact , but the legislation did require the department of state to follow congressional notification requirements prior to using the funds .

p.l .

113-2 carried no such provision , and it was not included in the administration's formal request .

the administration's proposal included $47.44 billion in funding for response and recovery , and $12.97 billion specifically for mitigation of damage from potential future storms and flooding .

this division is not typical of recent supplemental requests , and does not conform to either traditional definitions of "recovery and repair" versus "mitigation" or the recent patterns for funding mitigation .

of note , there are four accounts that have funding requests for both "repair and recovery" and "mitigation," and five accounts where the request for mitigation was the only request .

the administration also requested that the mitigation portion include legislative provisions that would allow monies to be flexibly transferred between programs .

in reading the mitigation portion of the administration's request , it is useful to understand how the administration may be defining "recovery and repair" and "mitigation. .

using definitions drawn from presidential policy directive 8 ( ppd - 8 ) , "recovery" refers to those capabilities necessary to assist communities affected by an incident to recover effectively , including , but not limited to , rebuilding infrastructure systems ; providing adequate interim and long - term housing for survivors ; restoring health , social , and community services ; promoting economic development ; and restoring natural and cultural resources .

in the same directive , the administration noted that "mitigation" refers to those capabilities necessary to reduce loss of life and property by lessening the impact of disasters .

mitigation capabilities include , but are not limited to , community - wide risk reduction projects ; efforts to improve the resilience of critical infrastructure and key resource lifelines ; risk reduction for specific vulnerabilities from natural hazards or acts of terrorism ; and initiatives to reduce future risks after a disaster has occurred .

if one relies on these definitions , the key difference between recovery funding and mitigation funding may be that the mitigation funding will be explicitly directed to "initiatives to reduce future risk after a disaster has occurred. .

however , some of the activities outlined in the administration's proposal as "mitigation" appeared to be orientated towards "recovery and repair," and vice versa .

for example , the administration proposed $400 million in mitigation funding for the fish and wildlife service's resource management account that would be used , among other purposes , for "restoring and enhancing natural systems on state , local and private lands. .

further , the administration's proposal for mitigation funds did not include at least one noteworthy program most traditionally linked with hazard mitigation , that being fema's hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) , which is funded through the disaster relief fund .

when congress considered supplemental funding for hurricane sandy , it did not follow the administration's format for providing a distinction between funding for "mitigation" and the funding for "repair and recovery. .

in senate - passed h.r .

1 there was no distinct chapter or title that separately funded accounts for mitigation .

as h.r .

152 worked its way through the house on its way to enactment , $17.1 billion was identified by the house appropriations committee as being for "immediate needs. .

an amendment provided $33 billion in additional funds , but the distinction between the "immediate needs" and other assistance was not clearly split between "repair and recovery" and "mitigation .

provisions in h.r .

152 as it passed the house included "mitigation" as part of the purpose of the funds , without separating that purpose from recovery .

in another circumstance , provisions in senate - passed h.r .

1 specifically identified subset of funds from the total appropriation to an account that may be used exclusively for "mitigation. .

in addition , sections 1104 and 1105 of senate - passed h.r .

1 , which were general provisions applying to all funds in the legislation , would have encouraged funds provided in the bill to be used in a manner that mitigates future risks .

requested funding levels are provided by appropriations account in table a - 1 , below .

it provides a summary and brief analysis of the administration's budget request .

a series of columns notes the agency , bureau , and account for which appropriations were requested .

the table then notes how much the administration sought as funds needed for recovery and repair of damage , as opposed to mitigation of future disaster impacts , and a total of the two categories .

the table then notes what percentage that request is of the overall total sought .

finally the table includes a quick assessment of whether the appropriation is intended to pay for damaged federal government property or provide other disaster assistance .

these final categories on potential recipients are not mutually exclusive at the account level .

requests for appropriations of $10 million or less are combined in a single line for the sake of brevity — as the table indicates , these 30 items represent less than 0.2% of the total request .

they can be found in the more complete accounting of the request , and the senate legislative response to date , in table 1 .

