four major principles currently underlie u.s. policy on legal permanent immigration: the reunification of families , the admission of immigrants with needed skills , the protection of refugees and asylees , and the diversity of immigrants by country of origin .

these principles are embodied in federal law , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

the immigration and nationality act amendments of 1965 replaced the national origins quota system ( enacted after world war i ) with per - country ceilings , and the statutory provisions regulating legal permanent immigration to the united states were last revised significantly by the immigration act of 1990 .

despite extensive critiques of the permanent legal immigration system , no consensus exists on the specific direction reforms to the system should take .

some maintain that revising provisions governing legal permanent immigration should be a key component of any major immigration reform proposal , while others support the existing provisions and their underlying rationales .

this report on legal permanent immigration may help inform the debate and discussions of policy options that may emerge as congress considers current immigration proposals .

legal aliens are of three main types: immigrants , nonimmigrants and refugees .

as defined in the ina , immigrants are synonymous with lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) and refer to foreign nationals who come to live lawfully and permanently in the united states .

n onimmigrants — such as tourists , foreign students , diplomats , temporary agricultural workers , exchange visitors , or intracompany business personnel — are admitted for a specific purpose and a temporary period of time .

nonimmigrants must leave the united states before their visas expire , although certain classes of nonimmigrants may adjust to lpr status if they otherwise qualify .

refugees and asylees are people fleeing their countries because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution .

after one year in refugee status in the united states , refugees must apply to adjust to lpr status .

in contrast , asylees may , but are not required to , apply for lpr status after one year .

the conditions for the admission of immigrants and refugees are more stringent than for nonimmigrants , and many fewer immigrants than nonimmigrants are admitted each year .

once admitted , however , immigrants are subject to few restrictions ; for example , they may accept and change employment , and may apply for u.s. citizenship through the naturalization process , generally after five years .

naturalization is voluntary , and persons may remain as lprs indefinitely as long as they do not commit a crime or some other act that makes them deportable .

prospective immigrants must maneuver a multi - step process through federal departments and agencies to obtain lpr status .

first , petitions for lpr status are filed with u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) by the prospective immigrant or by the sponsoring relative or employer in the united states ( in the case of family - sponsored or employment - based immigration , respectively ) .

if the prospective lpr is residing abroad or has not established a lawful residence in the united states , the petition is forwarded to the department of state's ( dos ) bureau of consular affairs in the alien's home country after uscis has approved it .

if the prospective immigrant is already legally residing in the united states , uscis handles most of the process , which the ina refers to as "adjustment of status" because the alien is moving from a temporary status to lpr status .

roughly half of all persons granted lpr status in fy2016 — the most recent year for which such data are available — did so by adjusting status .

the consular affairs officer ( when the alien is coming from abroad ) or the uscis adjudicator ( when the alien is adjusting status from within the united states ) must be satisfied that the alien is entitled to lpr status .

these reviews are intended to ensure that prospective immigrants are not ineligible for visas or admission under the grounds for inadmissibility spelled out in the ina .

immigrant admissions and adjustments to lpr status are subject to complex numerical limits and preference categories that give priority for admission on the basis of family relationships , needed skills , and geographic diversity .

in addition , immigrants who enter through the family - sponsored and employment based preference categories are subject to a 7% per - country cap ( see " per - country ceilings " below ) .

numerical limits on immigration combined with the per - country cap for some categories has resulted in a sizable "visa queue" of foreign nationals with approved immigration petitions who must wait until a numerically limited visa becomes available before they can immigrate permanently to the united states ( see " the visa queue " below ) .

the pool of people eligible to immigrate to the united states as lprs each year typically exceeds the worldwide level set by u.s. immigration law .

at the end of each fiscal year , the department of state ( dos ) publishes a tabulation of immigrant petitions that have been approved by uscis and forwarded to dos's national visa center .

these published figures do not constitute a backlog of petitions to be processed ; they represent persons who have been approved as family - sponsored or employment - based immigrants who cannot yet immigrate to the united states due to numerical limits in the ina .

the national visa center caseload drives the priority dates published in the monthly visa bulletin .

family - sponsored preference immigrants dominated the queue of 4.06 million approved lpr visa petitions pending with the national visa center at the end of fy2017 ( figure 4 ) .

over half ( 58% ) of all approved petitions pending were 4 th preference siblings of u.s. citizens , and one - quarter ( 25% ) were 1 st preference unmarried adult children and 3 rd preference married adult children of u.s. citizens .

second preference family members of lprs totaled 14% of the queue .

figure 4 indicates that employment - based preference immigrants accounted for 3% of the 4.06 million lpr visas pending with the national visa center as of november 1 , 2017 .

this figure of 112,189 reflected not only principal applicants or petition beneficiaries , but also their spouses and children entitled to derivative status under the ina ) .

some posit that revising the system of permanent legal immigration should be a major component of any immigration reform proposal .

in recent years , congress has considered proposals to alter the legal immigration system — either with a comprehensive approach or with incremental revisions aimed at strategic changes .

those favoring expanded immigration typically advocate for specific changes .

some favor a significant reallocation of the visa categories or a substantial increase in legal immigration to satisfy the desire of u.s. families to reunite with their relatives still abroad and to meet the labor force needs of employers hiring foreign workers .

others favor a reallocation toward employment - based immigration to help u.s. employers compete for the "best and the brightest," including foreign professional workers in science , technology , engineering , or mathematics ( stem ) fields .

proponents of family - sponsored migration maintain that any proposal to increase immigration levels generally should also include the option of additional family - sponsored visas to reduce wait times — currently up to years or decades — for those already "in the queue. .

those who favor reduced immigration contend that family - sponsored immigration permits relatively large numbers of foreign nationals to permanently settle in the united states without regard to their skill , education levels , or potential contribution to the u.s. economy .

some argue that family - sponsored immigration should be limited to immediate relatives of u.s. citizens and lprs .

others favor revising employment - based immigration so that immigrants are selected on the basis of "merit - based" criteria ( eg , educational attainment , employment in a high demand field , english language skills , age ) rather than largely being sponsored by employers under the current system .

many in congress also support eliminating the diversity immigrant visa which they contend poses security risks and requires relatively little in terms of skill and education requirements .

