the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was last amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) .

most programs authorized by the esea were authorized through fy2007 .

as congress has not reauthorized the esea , appropriations for esea programs are currently not explicitly authorized .

however , because the programs continue to receive annual appropriations , appropriations are considered implicitly authorized .

during the 112 th congress , both the house and senate have considered legislation to reauthorize the esea .

on october 20 , 2011 , the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee considered and ordered reported the elementary and secondary education reauthorization act of 2011 ( s. 3578 ; s.rept .

112-221 ) by a bipartisan vote of 15-7 .

the house education and workforce committee considered and ordered reported two bills that together would provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea: ( 1 ) the student success act ( h.r .

3989 , h.rept .

112-458 ) , and ( 2 ) the encouraging innovation and effective teachers act ( h.r .

3990 ; h.rept .

112-459 part 1 ) .

both bills were ordered reported on february 28 , 2012 , on strictly partisan votes ( 23-16 in each case ) .

it is unclear whether s. 3578 or h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 will be considered on the senate or house floors , respectively .

s. 3578 and h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 would take different approaches to reauthorizing the esea , most notably in three key areas: ( 1 ) accountability for student achievement , ( 2 ) teacher quality versus teacher effectiveness , and ( 3 ) targeted support for elementary and secondary education versus the use of a block grant .

in addition , both the help committee and education and workforce committee bills would eliminate existing programs , while creating new programs .

this report examines major features of s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 with respect to current law .

the report begins by discussing the approach that each bill takes toward reshaping the esea in key areas .

next , the report provides a structured orientation by esea title and part to how the esea would be reconfigured under each bill .

then it more thoroughly summarizes the major proposals in the aforementioned bills , focusing on those aspects of the bills that would fundamentally change a portion of current law .

the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of these bills or of technical changes that would be made by each measure .

the report concludes with an appendix that examines the proposed program authorizations included in each bill .

as h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 would collectively provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea , beginning with the structured orientation to how the bills would change the esea , they are considered as if they are one bill .

for the purposes of this report , a program is considered to be a new program if the program is a newly proposed program or is a substantively changed or reconfigured existing program ( eg , changes multiple aspects of a program , such as the purpose of the program , distribution of funds , uses of funds , or eligible recipients of funds ) .

programs included in the esea reauthorization bills are considered to be similar to programs in current law if they are substantively similar in purpose , recipients , and activities .

the tables in this report refer to these programs as being "retained" by a particular bill .

for example , the advanced placement program is considered to be retained under s. 3578 , as the new program ( accelerated learning ) would be substantively similar to the program included in current law , despite the inclusion of new funding to support tests administered under the international baccalaureate program .

on the other hand , the block grant program created under h.r .

3990 is considered a new program , as it differs from the current innovative programs block grant program in numerous ways including program purposes , funding to subgrantees , and allowable activities .

concurrently , the current law block grant program is considered to be "not retained" under h.r .

3990 .

it should be noted that an indication that a particular program or activity would not be included in a particular bill does not mean that all of the activities authorized under current law for the program would be eliminated .

the activities may be continued under a different program .

for example , while h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 would no longer retain many of the current esea programs , h.r .

3990 would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained .

the uses of funds under the proposed block grant program are discussed in this report .

similarly , if an existing program or activity is not specifically mentioned as allowable under a new program , it should not be assumed that funds could not be used to support such programs or activities .

it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss proposed programs or activities in great detail .

at the same time , an indication that a program would be "similar to current law" does not mean that it would be retained without changes .

as previously discussed , this report focuses on major changes that would be made to current law , so there may be additional changes made to a program or activity that are not highlighted in this report .

this section of the report examines the reauthorization approaches taken by s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 in three key areas: ( 1 ) accountability for student achievement , ( 2 ) teacher quality versus teacher effectiveness , and ( 3 ) targeted support for elementary and secondary education versus the use of a block grant .

for each of the three areas , a brief discussion of the treatment of the issue under current law is included , followed by a summary of how s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 would address the issues .

table 1 provides a structural orientation by esea title and part of how s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 would modify current law based primarily on line - item amounts for esea programs included in appropriations tables , as well as the individual programs included under the fund for the improvement of education .

this list of "programs" does not take into account the number of programs , projects , or activities that may be funded under a single line - item appropriation , so the actual number of esea programs , projects , or activities being supported through appropriations is not shown .

current esea programs under which the federal government provides grants to the initial grantee ( as opposed to a subgrantee ) by formula are noted on the table .

the table provides appropriations information for fy2012 .

it also indicates where s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 would place a given program in a reauthorized esea if the program is retained .

it should be noted that an indication that a program would not be retained does not mean that all of the activities authorized under current law for the program would be eliminated .

the activities may be continued under a different program .

for example , while h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 would no longer retain many of the current esea programs , h.r .

3990 would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained .

in addition , if an existing esea program would not be retained but a new , targeted program would address similar broad purposes ( eg , literacy , dropout prevention ) , this has been noted in the table .

at the same time , an indication that a program would be retained does not mean that it would be retained without changes .

for example , while both s. 3578 and h.r .

3990 would retain a state grant program focused on teachers like title ii - a of the esea , both bills would modify the formula used to award grants and would change the uses of funds .

in addition , an indication that a program would be retained does not mean that it would be retained under the same name .

for example , the advanced placement program in current law would be retained as the accelerated learning program under s. 3578 .

the program would be expanded to include international baccalaureate programs and exams .

table 2 compares s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 to current law .

it provides a more detailed description of specific features of each bill .

it is arranged thematically , focusing on key issues that have arisen during the reauthorization process .

the themes are as follows: overall structural and funding issues accountability title i - a other issues related to special populations / areas teachers , principals , and school leadership science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education flexibility and choice other program areas addressed by current law programs currently authorized outside of the esea and proposed for inclusion in the esea general provisions key changes included in esea reauthorization bills to non - esea programs / acts no attempts were made to provide a comprehensive analysis of each of the bills or to compare s. 3578 with h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 .

table a - 1 examines specific program authorizations included in current law compared with those included in s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , and h.r .

3990 .

overall , current law included 46 specific authorizations compared with 36 in s. 3578 and 12 in h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 .

it should be noted that a single authorization may apply to more than one program .

table a - 1 was designed to show the actual number of explicit authorizations included in current law and each of the bills .

in order to make this table more useful , however , if proposed statutory language indicated that certain programs receive a specific share of a given authorization , this has been indicated on the table as well .

for example , h.r .

3989 includes only two authorizations , but proposed statutory language would provide a specified share of one of those authorizations to multiple , individual programs .

a new program authorization under s. 3578 , h.r .

3989 , or h.r .

3990 should not be interpreted to mean that the program was not authorized under current law .

for example , s. 3578 would include separate authorizations for teacher incentive fund ( tif ) grants and for promise neighborhoods .

both of these programs are currently funded and were enacted through appropriations language using general authority available to the secretary under the fund for the improvement of education ( fie ; title v - d - 1 ) .

under current law , there is only one authorization for fie that encompasses 21 subparts , including title v - d - 1 , without specifying a share of the authorization for a given subpart .

therefore , under current law , separate authorizations are not listed for the tif or promise neighborhoods program .

in general , all of the authorizations included in s. 3578 are for "such sums" for fy2012 and each of the four succeeding fiscal years ( i.e. , through fy2016 ) .

h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 specify authorization amounts for fy2013 only .

the amounts authorized for fy2014 through fy2018 would be determined by increasing the fy2013 authorization amount by a percentage equal to the percentage of inflation as determined by the consumer price index for the calendar year ending prior to the beginning of that fiscal year .

given that most of the authorizations in current law and all of the authorizations in s. 3578 are for "such sums as may be necessary," it is not possible to calculate the total amount authorized across current law and the esea reauthorization bills .

with that said , the total authorized level in h.r .

3989 and h.r .

3990 is $24.0 billion .

fy2012 appropriations for esea under current law are $23.3 billion .

it should be noted that an authorization of an appropriation is only an authorization .

congress can and does enact appropriations at funding levels that differ from authorization levels .

