federal water projects operated by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the u.s. bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) may be operated for a variety of authorized purposes , which are identified by congress at the time each project is authorized .

if applicable under these project - specific authorities , the corps and reclamation may provide storage for water supply at a given project .

additionally , the corps and reclamation have general authority under the water supply act of 1958 ( wsa ) to include water storage for municipal and industrial ( m&i ) use as a project purpose for new and existing projects .

the wsa requires congressional approval of water storage if water supply storage would seriously affect the original project purposes or involve a major operational change for the project .

although the wsa requires congressional approval for some modifications of federal water projects , the issue of what modifications may be made without approval has not been defined .

this ambiguity has become a particular issue when severe drought raises the competition for water supply , and is an especially contentious issue in eastern riparian states where all users are affected by any drought .

increasing pressures on the quantity and quality of available water supplies are raising interest in — and concern about — changing operations at federal facilities to meet m&i demands .

for example , the corps is studying whether to reallocate storage to m&i use at dams in numerous states ( eg , colorado , kentucky , and georgia ) , and corps data indicate that more reallocation requests are forthcoming .

the tradeoffs inherent in such reallocations may garner controversy because a shift from a currently authorized purpose ( eg , hydropower , navigation , flood control ) to m&i use changes the types of benefits produced by a dam and the stakeholders served .

this issue is also at the center of litigation related to the corps' operation of lake lanier in the apalachicola - chattahoochee - flint river basin ( acf ) .

two federal appellate courts have examined questions related to water allocation at lake lanier , and each reached a different result .

first , the issue was the subject of a 2008 decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit , southeastern federal power customers v. geren .

then , in 2011 , the u.s. court of appeals for the 11 th circuit considered consolidated cases challenging related issues ( in re tri - state water rights litigation ) .

using the context of the corps' reallocation of water in lake lanier , this report specifically analyzes the reallocation issues under the wsa , including the various legal challenges to the corps' actions and outcomes of the litigation .

it also analyzes data regarding the corps' reallocations under the wsa in various projects and legislative options for congress .

although the wsa provides authority to reclamation as well , the application of the wsa to reclamation is beyond the scope of the report .

although congress has authorized federal agencies to operate projects for water supply storage in some cases , the federal role in m&i water supply development generally is constrained .

instead , congress has recognized states and local entities as having the prominent role: it is hereby declared to be the policy of the congress to recognize the primary responsibilities of the states and local interests in developing water supplies for domestic , municipal , industrial , and other purposes and that the federal government should participate and cooperate with states and local interests in developing such water supplies in connection with the construction , maintenance , and operation of federal navigation , flood control , irrigation , or multiple purpose projects .

accordingly , the federal government's investments in water resources infrastructure have focused more heavily on other water resource missions such as flood control , navigation , irrigation , and hydropower .

when congress authorizes a federal role , it may do so through project - specific legislation or through generally applicable statutes .

each type of authority is distinct such that the corps' general authority is supplemental to any legal authority provided in project authorization legislation .

the corps has indicated that it will examine its existing authority for a particular project as well as its general authority when evaluating requests for water supply storage at its facilities .

a total of 134 corps reservoirs have roughly 11 million acre - feet ( af ) of storage designated for m&i water .

most of the m&i water stored is authorized under project - specific authorities .

however , 44 reservoirs derive all or part of their m&i storage authority from the wsa ( see table 1 for a list of the reservoirs ) .

the wsa is the basis for less than 640,000 af in reallocations to m&i of corps storage .

table 1 shows that the corps has reallocated more than 50,000 af of storage space for m&i use at only one reservoir , lake texoma ( tx / ok ) .

the corps has used its discretionary authority to perform four reallocations at lake texoma — one for 77,400 af ( later revised to 84,099 af ) and three smaller reallocations , for a total of 103,003 af .

other texoma reallocations have been made with specific congressional approval .

the 77,400 af reallocation from hydropower to m&i use was approved in a 1985 corps document that included a compensation arrangement for lost hydropower , which had been negotiated among lake texoma stakeholders .

the corps found that the reallocation would neither significantly harm the lake's authorized purposes ( in part because of the compensation arrangement ) , nor require significant structural modifications .

thus , the corps concluded that the transfer could be performed under the wsa without congressional approval , even though it exceeded the agency - established policy limiting reallocations without congressional approval to 50,000 af .

table 1 shows that the corps stayed below the 15% of usable storage criterion , except at cowanesque lake ( pa ) , where reallocated water supply represents almost 30% of storage .

the cowanesque lake case is unusual in that it represents a mix of project - specific reallocation direction from congress and use of the corps' discretionary authority under the wsa .

the cowanesque reallocation was mentioned in p.l .

99-88 , the supplemental appropriations act of 1985 , and was discussed as occurring under the corps' wsa discretionary authority in the accompanying h.rept .

99-236 .

the corps is to evaluate whether reallocation would be subject to the limitations of the wsa when studying potential reallocations .

whether the studies used to support the reallocations shown in table 1 sufficiently evaluated how an m&i reallocation may affect authorized purposes or whether it may constitute a major operational change has been a general concern .

an evaluation of the sufficiency of corps reallocation analyses is beyond the scope of this crs report .

crs included lake lanier in table 1 , but the quantities associated with supply reallocated under the wsa currently are not available .

lake cumberland ( ky ) is not included , although m&i withdrawals occur there , because these withdrawals have not been authorized .

enforcement action to stop the withdrawals at lake cumberland has not been taken .

how many other unauthorized withdrawals and operational actions that support m&i uses occur at other corps facilities is largely unknown as many corps dams are decades old , often predating the wsa , and their operations have evolved incrementally over time .

the question of when congressional authorization is required for modifications made under the wsa appears not to have been litigated prior to the dispute raised regarding lake lanier .

however , a myriad of litigation dating to 1990 has resulted in two federal appellate decisions addressing the corps' authority to reallocate storage at lake lanier under project - specific legislation and general legislation .

congress first authorized construction of federal facilities for water resources development in the acf in the rivers and harbors acts of 1945 and 1946 .

these project - specific authorities recognized various purposes , including navigation , hydropower generation , and flood control .

subsequent laws provided general authority ( eg , the wsa , fish and wildlife coordination act of 1958 , and endangered species act ) and expanded what the corps considers when making operating decisions .

as a result , acf reservoirs now operate with various other purposes , including fish and wildlife protection , water quality protection , and recreation , in addition to the original authorized purposes .

lake lanier also supplies water to the atlanta metropolitan area , but the degree to which the corps may operate the reservoirs for water supply is disputed .

in the 1970s and 1980s , georgia officials became increasingly concerned with obtaining water supply for the atlanta area's growing needs .

in 1989 , the corps agreed to provide storage space for roughly twice as much m&i water in lake lanier by reallocating space from hydropower to water supply , citing its authority under the wsa , which led to the initial lawsuit in the acf litigation challenging the impact such reallocation would have on the lower basin .

as discussed in detail below , several more cases related to the corps' actions in the acf have been filed in various federal district courts .

one of the recurring issues in the acf litigation is the determination of the authorized purposes of lake lanier .

generally , each of the parties recognizes at least three authorized uses under project - specific authorities: flood control , hydropower , and navigation .

georgia has maintained that m&i use also was authorized .

courts have disagreed on whether m&i water supply was an authorized purpose and consequently whether reallocation requires congressional approval .

the legal dispute regarding the corps' actions in the acf is ongoing .

the decisions issued in the consolidated cases addressed questions included in what is referred to as "phase 1" of the litigation , which addressed the corps' operational authority with regard to lake lanier and buford dam .

phase 2 of the litigation involves environmental claims , including claims under the endangered species act and the national environmental policy act , which were addressed separately and are beyond the scope of this report .

the parties may also seek a legislative solution to resolve these issues under the wsa .

these options are examined below .

to date , the corps' operation of lake lanier for m&i water supply has constituted the agency's most controversial provision of permanent m&i water supply .

the acf litigation raised numerous concerns , including the possibility that previous reallocations at other corps facilities could be disputed , and uncertainty about how future reallocation at corps facilities will be evaluated and performed .

thus far , most corps reallocations have taken place without the national attention or litigation of lake lanier , either using the corps' delegated authority or through specific congressional legislative direction .

as shown in table 1 , existing reallocations under the wsa , with few exceptions , were within the numeric criteria that the corps established for implementing its discretionary authority .

whether congress agrees with the corps' interpretation and use of its discretionary authority is a policy issue of increasing relevance as interest grows in m&i reallocation at federal facilities .

other issues raised by current use of the discretionary authority and reservoir operations include whether multiple reallocations in a single basin are to be treated separately or on a watershed basis , how much discretion the agency should have in making reallocation agreements with stakeholders , including financial charging and crediting arrangements , and how the agency should handle ongoing unauthorized withdrawals .

current policies on m&i reallocations at corps facilities reflect numerous decisions and tradeoffs that may be reexamined as more reallocations are requested .

for example , if permanent reallocations to m&i are made , how is the transition to be carried out , given that stakeholders , such as recreation interests and hydropower customers , have developed around existing operations ? .

how should the federal government charge for the m&i storage space provided ? .

should the federal government credit for return flows ( i.e. , water not consumed by m&i uses that is returned to a corps reservoir ) ? .

m&i water supply at corps facilities also is part of several broader water policy questions for congress .

for example , what is the appropriate federal role in municipal water supply ? .

should that role change if a community's existing water supply is reduced by potential climate change effects , such as extended drought ? .

do current water resources infrastructure operations , laws , divisions of responsibilities , and institutions reflect the national interest and present challenges ? .

addressing these questions is complicated by the wide range of opinions on the proper response and the difficulty of enacting any change to how federal facilities are operated , other than incremental change or project - specific measures , because of the many affected constituencies .

