u.s. - ghanaian relations are warm , as signaled by president barack obama's travel in 2009 to ghana , where he laid out his views on democratization and governance in africa in his single major africa - focused policy address .

ghana is the only sub - saharan african country to which mr. obama has thus far traveled while serving as president .

then - president george w. bush also traveled there , in 2008 , and members of congress regularly visit ghana , which is widely seen as a key u.s. partner in west africa and as an african success story .

it has built a relatively robust democracy and a growing economy , although it faces persistent , widespread poverty and a range of profound development challenges .

ghana , which last held national elections in early december 2012 ( see below ) , is considered a model for many of the outcomes that congressional and executive branch policy - makers have long sought to achieve in the region under diverse programs that have drawn substantial congressional engagement .

ghana has received a large u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) compact and may soon receive a second one .

it also participates in three presidential development initiatives , the global climate change ( gcc ) initiative , feed the future ( ftf ) , and the global health initiative ( ghi ) , and hosts u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and u.s. drug enforcement agency ( dea ) regional offices and the usaid - administered west africa trade hub .

the hub activities seek to expand intra - regional and bilateral trade with west african countries , a focus of renewed congressional interest and a key pillar of the obama administration's june 2012 u.s. strategy toward sub - saharan afric a .

ghana has also drawn u.s. attention because of its recent discovery of sizable oil reserves and its potential contributions to global and u.s. energy security .

energy production may boost national income and development prospects , but may also pose good governance and resource management challenges , as is common in oil - rich developing countries .

ghana has evolved into a u.s. partner in the region , in part , because in recent decades — after two politically tumultuous decades following independence — it developed into a stable country in an often volatile sub - region .

commitment to constitutional governance has become increasingly ingrained , as illustrated by successful inter - party transfers of state power following close recent national elections .

similarly , when president john atta mills died in july 2012 , state power was transferred to then - vice president john dramani mahama , as constitutionally mandated , within hours .

ghana's regional stability and international peace efforts have dovetailed with those of the united states , which has often sought to support regional solutions to regional political crises and to mitigate the effects of conflict in west africa by providing large amounts of humanitarian assistance .

ghana's government has helped to mediate several armed civil conflicts in west africa in recent decades and has hosted refugees fleeing such crises .

in late 2012 , the last of a residual long - term liberian refugee population in ghana was repatriated , but ghana continues to host refugees from côte d'ivoire who fled during or following that country's 2011 civil - military crisis .

such populations are generally peaceful , but can contain politically restive elements , some opposed to their home governments , as was the case with a small number of the liberian refugees .

in recent months , ghana has detained or deported multiple ivoirian who , while in ghana , have allegedly participated in efforts to destabilize the government of côte d'ivoire or are accused of crimes during the ivoirian crisis .

ghana has pledged not to allow such activities and , in coordination with ivoirian officials , is investigating attacks allegedly carried out from its territory .

still , critics contend that it has taken insufficient action to counter such acts .

ghana is a steady contributor of troops to international peacekeeping operations , both in africa and elsewhere , and is a recipient of u.s. training and assistance aimed at supporting such deployments .

ghana also faces threats from illicit narcotics trafficking , notably related to a rise in cocaine being transported from south america to europe via west africa .

shared interest in countering such trafficking is a growing area of u.s. - ghanaian cooperation .

ghana is viewed as having achieved substantial progress in its socio - economic development , despite many remaining challenges .

in fy2013 , it met or greatly exceeded the minimum score on 18 out of 20 millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) policy performance criteria that are prerequisites for mcc compact eligibility .

these criteria pertain to three broad eligibility assessment categories: economic freedom , investing in people , and ruling justly .

its fy2012 performance had also been strong , especially in the area of governance ; it ranked among the top 5% "of all low - income countries on every single ruling justly indicator , including control of corruption , government effectiveness and democratic rights. .

ghana completed a five - year $547 million mcc compact in february 2012 , and is a likely recipient of a second mcc compact .

the anticipated compact , for which ghana had been found eligible to apply in early 2011 , is expected to support higher rates of economic growth by increasing access to credit , secure land tenure , and electrical power .

these goals were identified as national development priorities under joint partnership for growth and mcc analyses .

power sector enhancements are seen by the mcc as offering "an opportunity to advance u.s. interests by addressing problems in the power sector that are a brake on economic growth in one of africa's most important regional anchors. .

an economic constraints analysis for the proposed compact was completed in november 2011 .

ghana was selected as one of four initial u.s. partnership for growth countries globally for several reasons .

these include its positive mcc scores and compact completion record ; potential synergies between the expected second mcc compact and other u.s. assistance programs ; and increases in other types of u.s. - ghanaian engagement , including private sector business deals .

ghana's economy has grown steadily in recent years ; gross domestic product ( gdp ) totaled $32 billion in 2010 , rose to $39 billion in 2011 , and is projected to rise further .

goods export earnings have also grown ; estimated at $8 billion in 2010 , they grew to $13 billion in 2011 , with additional gradual growth projected in the next three years .

spurred by new oil sector investment and production ( discussed further below ) , the economy grew at an estimated annual rate of 14.4% in 2011 , according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu , a private economic analysis firm ) , which projected a decline to 7.3% in 2012 and 7.6% in 2013 .

the international monetary fund also estimated that the economy grew by 14.4% in 2011 , but provided a slightly more optimistic estimate of 8.1% for 2012 and 7.8% in 2013 .

this prospective decline is attributable , in part , to slowing new investment in the oil sector , lower - than - expected initial oil output , and a temporary dip in prices for cocoa .

in general , rising commodity prices and production , notably for key exports like cocoa and gold , along with growth in tourism , have helped propel economic growth in recent years .

despite diversification into oil , mining and , to a lesser extent , financial services and offshore information processing , and even though about 52% of ghanaians are urban , farming remains a cornerstone of the economy .

agriculture employs over half of workers , and contributes about 27% of annual gdp , although its share has dropped since the mid - 2000s .

the government , with donor backing , is investing heavily in agricultural productivity gains , including in the cocoa sector .

services have expanded rapidly , and contributed 47% of gdp in 2011 .

industry , notably the gold mining sector , has also grown markedly ; it provides about 25% of gdp .

in recent years , gold has contributed a high share of export revenues , in part due to high global prices .

government policies are supportive of the extensive small - scale and informal sectors .

the ghana stock exchange , which has performed well in recent years , plans to establish a separate exchange for small firms , the ghana alternative market .

ghana cooperates closely with international financial institutions and received substantial foreign debt relief in the mid - 2000s .

in recent years , the world bank's annual doing business report has consistently rated ghana positively — better than all but four countries in sub - saharan africa .

ghanaians enjoy better access to public goods and services than is typical in west africa , and poverty rates are slowly declining .

average annual per capita income , at $1,570 in 2011 , has grown markedly from $310 in 2003 .

rates of access to cell phones are high , and most social indicators have also steadily improved in recent years .

rates of access to electricity are also relatively high , although there are regular periodic electricity shortages .

insufficient electricity supplies have long hindered economic growth , but several national and international regional power generation / distribution projects and efforts to liberalize the electricity sector are under way .

development of ghana's natural gas reserves ( see below ) for use in fueling electricity generation — notably at asogi , a major power plant — and other types of longer term industrial development has been beset by technical problems associated with piping the gas from offshore and construction of a new gas processing plant .

asogi has also been idled due to a break in chevron - operated west african gas pipeline , designed to ferry gas from nigeria to ghana and other coastal countries .

despite significant economic success , poverty is widespread , notably in rural areas , and income distribution is unequal .

slightly more than half of ghanaians have access to piped water , tarred roads , sewage systems , and health clinics , leaving many without access to these public goods and services , according to a recent survey of economic and social conditions .

as discussed previously , the survey also found that 63% of respondents rated national economic conditions as "bad" or "very bad" ; in contrast , only 30% described conditions as "good" or "very good," and six percent were neutral on the matter .

such views have generally remained roughly similar over the past decade , apart from the most recent prior survey , undertaken in 2008 .

at that time , the proportion of respondents who saw conditions as "bad or very bad" and as "good or very good" was equal , at 45% for each group , indicating that a growing number of ghanaians have become dissatisfied with economic trends .

rising import demand , spurred by the oil sector , has also driven a substantial devaluation in 2012 of the national currency , the cedi .

this , in turn , has led to a nascent rise in smuggling of cocoa into côte d'ivoire , where sellers can obtain relatively more stable euro - pegged cfa francs , reversing a trend in which large amounts of ivoirian cocoa were reportedly smuggled into ghana .

u.s. - ghanaian relations are close .

a small population of americans , many of african - american descent , has settled permanently in ghana , and many prominent ghanaians have received education in the united states .

in its foreign aid congressional budget justification ( cbj ) for fy2013 , the obama administration stated that the united states supports the ghanaian government's "efforts to improve on and sustain middle - income status , and to solidify its position as a regional leader in an area better known for civil strife and economic stagnation. .

it also pledged to help ghana to achieve the poverty reduction and development - focused united nations millennium development goals by 2015 .

the united states also sponsors a variety of exchange visits for ghanaian government officials , focused on increasing ghanaian familiarization with u.s. legislative and other governance practices , and a variety of educational programs for students and civil society organizations .

a 130-member peace corps program , funded at $3.8 million in fy2012 , with $3.9 million requested for fy2013 , supports work in information technology , education and business development , health , and food security .

close u.s. - ghanaian relations are growing stronger , as reflected by ghana's selection as a partnership for growth country , and appear likely to remain positive .

ghana is a key target for increased and more diverse public - private development cooperation and investment under several u.s. initiatives , and has a growing and increasingly diverse economy .

ghana's role as a new oil producer is also likely to increase its strategic importance to the united states .

prospects for growing trade and investment relations may spur new congressional interest in ghana .

development cooperation is likely to remain a key area of congressional engagement ; despite its economic successes , ghana faces deep - seated socio - economic development challenges .

it also may face natural resource governance challenges — a growing area of policy interest among some members — associated with its anticipated oil export earnings windfall .

