in a sharp reversal of its policy of denying the existence of a chemical weapons program , the syrian government agreed to destroy its chemical weapons stocks and joined the treaty banning the possession and use of these weapons , the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) , on september 12 .

president obama had been seeking congressional authorization to use military force in response to a large - scale chemical weapons attack by syria , but on september 10 asked congressional leaders to postpone a vote in order to give the administration time to pursue a u.s. - russian diplomatic initiative to achieve chemical weapons disarmament in syria .

on september 14 , 2013 , secretary of state john kerry and russian foreign minister sergey lavrov announced a proposed framework for elimination of syrian chemical weapons .

the target dates for implementation are completion of initial on - site inspections of syria's declared chemical weapons - related sites by november 2013 ; destruction of syrian chemical weapons production , mixing , and filling equipment by november 2013 ; and complete elimination of all chemical weapons material and equipment in the first half of 2014 .

details are discussed in the " chemical weapons dismantlement " section below .

as a first step , the syrian government is required to declare all its stocks , munitions , precursor chemicals , and production and storage facilities to the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons ( opcw ) .

the syrian government submitted this document to the opcw on september 20 , 2013 .

based on this declaration , the opcw recommended a plan for cw destruction , which was approved by its executive council on september 27 , 2013. international inspectors would first verify that the declaration was accurate and complete , and are to begin inspections by october 1 .

then , inspectors would oversee that the amounts declared were then destroyed .

they would also check that any related production facilities were shuttered or converted .

the united nations and the opcw have had experience successfully monitoring the destruction of chemical weapons in several countries .

syria has requested technical assistance for the cw dismantlement process , which would likely include u.s. technical or financial assistance to the opcw .

in past cases of chemical weapons elimination , the country holding the stocks was responsible for securing the stockpile and related facilities while awaiting dismantlement .

u.n. security council resolution 2118 authorizes measures under chapter vii of the u.n. charter if syria does not comply with its chemical weapons disarmament commitments .

under chapter vii , a response could include sanctions or use of military force .

the u.n. mission to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the syrian arab republic released its report on september 16 .

based on its investigation on the ground in syria , the inspection team concluded that surface - to - surface rockets containing the nerve agent sarin were used in the ghouta area of damascus against civilians on a "relatively large scale. .

the syrian case may be the first time the international community has faced a civil war in a state with a known stockpile of chemical weapons .

this contingency has raised two major policy concerns: the use of chemical weapons by the regime of president bashar al asad ; and whether the regime could lose control over these weapons .

the first scenario has apparently come to pass ; the british , french , and u.s. governments have issued reports assessing that the syrian government has used chemical weapons against opposition forces in the country .

the largest - scale use to date was on august 21 , 2013 .

president barack obama and other world leaders had said that the use of chemical weapons against the civilian population would be met with consequences , which could include the use of military force .

for example , president obama suggested during an august 2012 press briefing that the united states might take military action against syria if damascus used or lost control of its chemical weapons , explaining that "a red line for us is we start seeing a whole bunch of chemical weapons moving around or being utilized .

that would change my calculus. .

on august 31 , 2013 , president obama stated that the united states should respond with "military action against syrian regime targets" and added that he would ask congress to grant authorization for the use of military force .

the white house had previously announced on june 13 , 2013 , that the syrian government had used chemical weapons "on a small scale against the opposition multiple times in the last year. .

the statement added that , in response to the asad regime's use of chemical weapons , the president had authorized the expansion of military assistance to the opposition forces in syria .

u.s. officials have expressed confidence that chemical weapons stocks in syria are secured by the asad regime , which dispatched elite special forces for that purpose .

due to the urgency of preventing access to these weapons by unauthorized groups , including terrorists , the united states government has been preparing for scenarios to secure the weapons in the event of the asad regime's loss of control .

however , this presents unique challenges .

in testimony before the senate armed services committee on march 7 , 2012 , then - secretary of defense leon panetta said , "it's 100 times worse than what we dealt with in libya .

and for that reason , that's why it's raised even greater concerns about our ability to address how we can secure those sites. .

the pentagon has estimated that , in a non - permissive environment , it would take over 75,000 troops to neutralize the chemical weapons .

possible scenarios of highest concern include syrian government use of chemical weapons — authorized or unauthorized by local commanders ; or syrian government loss of control through either defections by local commanders in charge of chemical weapons sites or a facility turnover in the course of battle .

the united states and other governments have warned syria that use of chemical weapons could prompt unspecified response , presumed to be military intervention .

at the same time , the united states has been urging russia , historically a patron of syria , to encourage asad to maintain control over chemical weapons .

some have suggested that the united states should communicate to syrian government commanders at the sites that they will be rewarded for maintaining control of these weapons and protecting these facilities from extremist elements .

other possible options include training or assisting the free syrian army in securing chemical weapons , should that army capture such facilities .

preventing chemical weapons from falling into the hands of extremist elements is the ultimate goal of such policies .

there will continue to be limits , however , to the united states' ability to monitor the security of these stockpiles and limits to intelligence about where , how well , and by whom they are being secured .

specific scenarios to secure chemical weapons have not been discussed in detail to date in open testimony .

even before the current proposal laying out plans for chemical weapons destruction in syria , some analysts have proposed that advanced planning for international teams would be required .

press reports say that a joint exercise in jordan in the spring of 2012 included scenarios for securing chemical weapons stocks .

the united states and the czech republic , which leads nato chemical defense preparation , are also cooperating to prepare for various scenarios .

israeli president shimon peres has appealed to russian president putin to urge asad to ensure chemical weapons' security .

the proposal being discussed by secretary kerry and russian foreign minister lavrov in geneva most likely includes security of the chemical weapons stockpile awaiting eventual dismantlement .

in past cases , the government possessing the chemical weapons has been responsible for guarding chemical weapons stocks and facilities awaiting dismantlement .

syria has had a chemical weapons program "for many years," according to an office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) report to congress covering 2011 .

however , u.s. official assessments regarding the origin of syria's chemical weapons program have varied over the years .

a 1995 intelligence assessment states that "syria has had a chemical warfare program since the mid - 1980s. .

however , a 1997 department of defense report states that the program began in the 1970s .

damascus probably developed its chemical weapons program in response to a perceived threat from israel , according to a 1988 u.s. intelligence assessment and the 1997 defense department report .

some analysts point out that egypt provided syria with a small number of chemical weapons and delivery systems in the lead - up to the yom kippur war in 1973 .

syria began to expand its program in the late 1970s and early 1980s .

declassified u.s. documents indicate that the soviet union supplied syria with chemical agents , delivery systems , and training related to chemical weapons use .

syria is likely to have procured equipment and precursor chemicals from private companies in western europe .

u.s. government documents indicate that damascus has sought a self - sufficient chemical weapons program since the mid - 1980s .

a 1983 special national intelligence estimate indicated that syria did not have an "indigenous capability to produce [chemical weapon] agents or material," but a 1985 state department telegram suggests that the country was attempting to develop its own chemical weapons .

stating that "damascus is enhancing its chemical weapon capability," the cable explains that the united states was imposing export controls on eight dual - use chemicals that "can be used … in the manufacture of chemical weapons. .

twelve years later , syria was seeking an "independent chemical warfare capability," according to the defense department .

damascus has apparently not yet achieved this goal .

like egypt , syria has never signed the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) , which prohibits the development , production , stockpiling , transfer , and use of chemical weapons .

however , in 1968 , syria acceded to the 1925 geneva protocol for the prohibition of the use in war of asphyxiating , poisonous or other gases , and of bacteriological methods of warfare , which bans the use of chemical or biological agents in warfare .

therefore , "syria has formally renounced both first and retaliatory use of chemical or biological weapons against any state," according to the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons , which implements the cwc .

syria has said that its ratification of the cwc ( and bwc ) is contingent on establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the middle east .

syrian foreign minister walid moallem stated during a july 29 , 2012 , press conference that damascus supports the establishment of such a zone .

"there is no doubt amongst the uk intelligence community that the syrian regime possesses vast stockpiles" of chemical weapons , according to a british parliamentary report published in july 2013 .

israel defense forces deputy chief of staff major - general ya'ir nave described syria's chemical weapons arsenal as "the largest in the world" during a june 2012 interview .

damascus possesses mustard blister agent , sarin nerve agent , and vx nerve agent , according to official u.s. assessments .

according to a french intelligence report published on september 2 , 2013 , syria has more than 1,000 metric tons of chemical warfare agents and precursor chemicals .

this stockpile includes several hundred metric tons of sarin , which represents the bulk of syria's chemical weapons stockpile .

syria also has several hundred metric tons of mustard agent in ready - to - use form and several tens of metric tons of vx .

the sarin and vx are , in part , stored in binary form ( see below for a description of binary chemical munitions ) .

syria is developing both another blister agent ( nitrogen - based mustard ) and a nerve agent more toxic than sarin .

the country's chemical weapons and related facilities appear to be distributed throughout the country .

u.s. defense department press secretary george little told reporters on july 24 , 2012 , that syria has "a really distributed network of [chemical weapons] stockpiles. .

similarly , director of national intelligence james clapper told the senate armed services committee on february 16 , 2012 , that damascus has "an extensive network" of chemical weapons installations .

as noted , syria has sought an independent chemical weapons production capability for some time .

however , according to the odni report covering 2011 , "syria remains dependent on foreign sources for key elements" of its chemical weapons program , "including precursor chemicals. .

defense intelligence agency ( dia ) director michael flynn made a similar statement in april 2013 congressional testimony .

precursor chemicals are generally dual - use chemicals with legitimate industrial uses that can be combined as feedstock to produce blister or nerve agents .

syria appears to lack the capacity to independently produce key precursors .

the potency and effectiveness of syrian chemical agents are unknown since precursor chemicals may degrade over time , but , as noted , syria has used chemical weapons with some apparent effectiveness .

according to the odni report covering 2011 , syria's chemical weapons agents "can be delivered by aerial bombs , ballistic missiles , and artillery rockets. .

it is worth noting that syria has also been testing new methods of dispersing chemical agents , according to the september 2013 french intelligence report .

according to an august 30 , 2013 , white house statement , the government "has thousands of munitions that can be used to deliver chemical warfare agents" and "has the ability to strike simultaneously in multiple locations. .

the september 2013 french intelligence report concurs that syria has several thousand delivery vehicles .

regarding these delivery vehicles , public official u.s. assessments apparently only provide detailed information about syria's ballistic missiles .

according to flynn's testimony and a state department report covering 2008 , syria possesses "several hundred" scud b , scud c , scud d , and ss - 21 short - range ballistic missiles ( srbms ) , all of which are mobile .

past u.s. official reports have not been entirely clear regarding the composition of syria's scud missile inventory ; a 2006 report from the national air and space intelligence center ( nasic ) includes the scud b , scud c , scud d , and ss - 21 in syria's srbm inventory , but nasic reports from 2009 and 2013 omit the scud b and scud c. an odni report to congress covering 2006 indicates that syria's scud b , scud c , and scud d missiles , as well as its ss - 21 missiles , "can employ" chemical warheads .

but exactly which of these missiles are tasked with delivering chemical weapons is unclear .

a 1988 u.s. assessment identifies syria's scud b missiles as delivery vehicles for chemical weapons .

however , more recent u.s. government statements have been somewhat less precise .

in june 2003 , then - under secretary of state for arms control and international security john bolton told a house committee on international relations hearing that syria "is believed to have chemical warheads available for a portion of its scud missile force," but he did not specify which types of scud missiles were assigned this mission .

dia director flynn made a similar statement in his april 2013 testimony .

while missile warheads can deliver non - persistent chemical agents such as sarin , persistent agents such as vx and blister are viewed by many chemical weapons experts as being more effectively employed by missile warheads than non - persistent agents .

the september 2013 french intelligence assessment provides more detail regarding syria's ballistic missiles , specifying that syria's scud c missiles are capable of delivering sarin , vx , and mustard agent ; the scud b missiles are capable of delivering sarin and vx .

syria's ss - 21 missiles are capable of delivering sarin , mustard agent , and vx , according to the report , which also identifies syria's m600 missiles as capable of delivering sarin , mustard agent , and vx .

press reports have identified the m600 missile as a syrian version of iran's fateh - 110 srbm .

certain syrian missiles can carry up to several hundred liters of chemical agents , the report says , though it does not identify which missiles have this capability .

a 1991 national intelligence estimate states that syria had 500-kilogram aerial bombs containing sarin .

the september 2013 french intelligence report also states that damascus has such weapons .

each bomb can deliver 100-300 liters of sarin , depending on the model , the report says .

syria could also use its batteries of bm - 21 multiple rocket launchers , which can more reliably deliver ordnance to a targeted area .

according to the september 2013 french intelligence report , syria has 302 and 320 mm artillery rockets with maximum ranges of 50 kilometers which can deliver sarin , mustard agent , and vx .

rocket launchers , when massed , can be used to rapidly achieve lethal doses of non - persistent agents in a concentrated area .

while scud missiles might be used for targeting a neighboring country , it is more likely that artillery rockets would be used on the battlefield against rebel forces .

indeed , damascus has used artillery rockets in such a fashion , according to u.s. and french public assessments ( see section on " chemical weapons use and potential responses " ) .

syria possesses other tactical munitions which can deliver sarin at ranges of less than 50 km , the report says , but it does not specify further .

well - known difficulties in the employment of chemical weapons include inability to control the gas cloud resulting from an attack , putting one's own troops at risk without proper protection ; contaminating the area attacked for days and weeks , depending on the chemical agent and weather conditions ; and uncertain delivery of a lethal dose of the agent ( due to dissipation of agents into the atmosphere or volatility of the agent ) .

storage and munitions design could impact the length of time syrian forces or other forces would have to deploy chemical weapons .

chemical munitions are either unitary or binary in design .

unitary munitions are filled with the chemical agent at a central facility , while binary munitions include two separate canisters of precursor chemicals that combine either manually or automatically inside the weapon when launched .

the exact composition of syria's chemical munitions stockpile is not known from open sources , but a 1991 national intelligence estimate states that damascus had developed binary scud missile warheads and aerial bombs .

more recently , dia director flynn testified in april 2013 that syria's chemical weapons stockpile "includes either complete or binary components of sarin , mustard , and vx. .

if unitary munitions are employed , it is not known whether chemical agent is stored in bulk , or warheads are filled in advance .

this process could take weeks to months for battlefield quantities and is considered a hazardous undertaking for troops involved in filling unitary chemical munitions , as well as those troops handling , transporting , and delivering them .

if syria used binary munitions , then the warheads could potentially be deployed immediately .

press reports in early december 2012 quoted unnamed officials as saying that syria had combined the precursor chemicals for sarin into warheads , but no officials have publicly confirmed that information .

the asad regime "views chemical weapons as one of many tools in its arsenal , including air power and ballistic missiles , which they indiscriminately use against the opposition," the august 30 , 2013 , white house statement said .

according to a french intelligence assessment published on september 2 , 2013 , the asad government has adapted its chemical weapons munitions and tactics in order to achieve its goal of terrorizing the syrian population .

specifically , the regime has been using chemical weapons for localized and targeted purposes during the current civil conflict .

the munitions contain lower amounts of chemical agents .

president asad is "the ultimate decision maker for the chemical weapons program and members of the program are carefully vetted to ensure security and loyalty," according to the u.s. assessment , which adds that the syrian scientific studies and research center "manages syria's chemical weapons program. .

the september 2013 french assessment concurs with this judgment .

the center "is subordinate to the syrian ministry of defense," according to the statement .

an element of the institute called branch 450 is responsible for filling chemical weapons and for the security of chemical stocks .

press reports have identified branch 450 ( which is referred to as unit 450 in english language news accounts ) as the syrian military organization which controls the country's chemical weapons .

syria submitted its instrument of accession to the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) on september 14 , 2013 .

damascus has also requested provisional application of the cwc to syria prior to its entry into force for that country .

on september 14 , 2013 , secretary of state john kerry and russian foreign minister sergey lavrov presented a proposed framework for elimination of syrian chemical weapons .

the executive council of the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons ( opcw ) is developing a destruction plan for syria .

this plan was adopted by the executive council on september 27 , 2013 .

president obama said on september 10 that any cw elimination process would have to ensure "verifiable and enforceable destruction. .

key implementation issues will include verification , access , security of stocks and of international personnel , and timelines for action .

because syria is in the midst of civil war , there are many risk factors that have not been present in past cases of chemical weapons destruction , such as in libya or iraq .

a top priority would be ensuring the security of the chemical weapons stocks awaiting dismantlement .

international inspectors would be at great physical risk and would require adequate protection , and the changing nature of the conflict could limit access of inspectors to sites .

also , the destruction of chemical weapons is a time - consuming , expensive process with great need for safety precautions .

therefore , the initial stage of the process may focus on securing the chemical weapons at existing locations , consolidating at centralized storage facilities if possible , or even shipping out of the country for storage for destruction , although the latter options pose risks during transport .

in past cases , the government possessing the chemical weapons has been responsible for guarding chemical weapons stocks and facilities awaiting dismantlement .

the question of a syrian biological weapons program has also been raised in discussions of loss of sensitive military sites .

syria's biological weapons activities appear to be considerably less advanced than the country's chemical weapons program .

past u.s. assessments have stated that damascus was pursuing biological weapons .

according to a 1988 intelligence estimate , syria was "conducting research and development" on a biological weapons program .

a 1991 intelligence estimate assessed that the government had "a mature offensive [biological weapons] program" and that some agents "could be weaponized in the next three to five years. .

however , a 1997 defense department report was similar to the 1988 estimate and added that damascus had not "begun any major weaponization or testing related to biological warfare. .

several years later , syria was "not believed to have progressed much beyond the research and development phase and may have produced only pilot quantities of usable agent," according to an october 2001 defense department report .

some u.s. assessments issued during the past decade have indicated that damascus has continued to pursue biological weapons .

for example , a report from the director of central intelligence to congress covering the second half of 2002 states that "[i]t is highly probable that syria also continued to develop an offensive [biological weapons] capability. .

more recently , principal deputy assistant secretary of state vann van diepen stated in april 2012 that syria "has been researching biological weapons. .

nevertheless , it appears that syria is still not capable of producing biological weapons .

an odni report to congress covering 2009 states that damascus is "not believed to have achieved a capability to put [biological weapons] agents into effective weapons. .

the odni report covering 2011 states only that "syria's biotechnological infrastructure is capable of supporting bw agent development. .

according to the 2012 state department report regarding compliance with arms control and disarmament agreements , "the united states is concerned that syria ... may be engaged in activities that would violate its obligations under the bwc," if damascus were a party to the agreement .

"it remained unclear during the reporting period whether syria would consider the use of biological weapons as a military option," the report adds .

the 2013 version of the report reiterates this analysis .

according to april 18 , 2013 , testimony from director of national intelligence clapper before the senate armed services committee , syria's biological weapons program may be somewhat more advanced than suggested by the assessments described above .

clapper stated that [b]ased on the duration of syria's longstanding biological warfare ( bw ) program , we judge that some elements of the program may have advanced beyond the research and development stage and may be capable of limited agent production .

syria is not known to have successfully weaponized biological agents in an effective delivery system , but it possesses conventional and chemical weapon systems that could be modified for biological agent delivery .

dia director flynn testified during the same hearing that "[w]e do not believe syria has achieved a capability to use biological agents as effective mass - casualty weapons. .

as referenced above ( " resources " ) , u.s. government programs could be used to address or fund efforts to secure or dismantle syrian weapons of mass destruction or advanced conventional weapons following a regime collapse scenario .

there are two most likely sources of such funding .

the state department's nonproliferation and disarmament fund ( ndf ) has authority to spend funds "notwithstanding any other provision of law" and is authorized to work in states outside the former soviet union .

the department of defense's cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) has authorization to use funds in the middle east region as a whole .

secretary of defense hagel told the senate armed services committee on april 18 , 2013 , that ctr funds are being used to assist syria's neighbors to bolster border defenses and prevent wmd proliferation from syria: through our cooperative threat reduction program , the department of defense personnel and our interagency partners are also working closely with syria's neighbors , including jordan , turkey and iraq to help them counter the threat from syria's chemical weapons .

as part of this effort , the department of defense is funding over $70 million for activities in jordan including providing training and equipment to detect and stop any chemical weapons transfers along its border with syria and developing jordanian capacity to identify and secure chemical weapons assets .

the program will continue to train and equip border security staff in jordan , iraq , and turkey in fy2014 to prevent proliferation of wmd across borders shared with syria .

prior to this , ctr programs were used most recently in the middle east in libya and iraq .

the estimated scope of the chemical ( and potential biological ) weapons stocks and facilities in syria is far greater than those in those countries .

in libya , the dismantlement process was initially undertaken with the agreement of the government .

in 2011 , when unrest toppled the qaddafi regime , the chemical stocks were secured by forces aligned with the united states .

however , additional stocks were hidden by the qaddafi regime and only identified after the conflict , showing the limits of u.s. and other intelligence .

in the case of iraq , the united states undertook similar work in 2003 after operation iraqi freedom .

however , united nations inspectors had completed much of the dismantlement work after the 1991 persian gulf war , and stockpiles and capacity turned out to have been overestimated in 2003 .

a continued focus of nonproliferation programs in both iraq and libya has been engaging former wmd weapons scientists in civilian projects to prevent the exploitation of their expertise for weapons proliferation purposes .

international partners under the g - 8 global partnership have experience cooperating in dismantling former soviet chemical weapons stockpiles .

in general , ctr and ndf programs are not designed to work in a non - cooperative environment and require the agreement of the host country .

therefore , the focus to date for the syria challenge has been to bolster capacity of neighboring states to interdict any transfers .

civil war and possible loss of control or regime collapse by a state in possession of weapons of mass destruction poses a distinct change from the way these nonproliferation programs have been implemented in the past .

the syrian case may be the first time the international community faces the possibility of a civil war in a state with a known stockpile of chemical weapons .

due to the urgency of preventing access to these weapons by unauthorized groups including terrorists , the united states government has been preparing to secure the weapons in the event of the asad regime's loss of control .

a successor regime may not agree to renounce and eventually dismantle syrian chemical weapons .

a new government in syria may believe that chemical weapons continue to serve as a military deterrent to israel or others .

some experts and policy makers have suggested that the united states and other countries make joining the chemical weapons convention ( and therefore chemical weapons dismantlement ) a condition for recognition and support of a new government in syria .

this situation may have changed after the assad regime acceded to the chemical weapons convention in mid - september .

it is now obligated to destroy its stocks and production facilities , although implementation poses many challenges , and chemical weapons security will remain a concern .

with the cooperation of the syrian government ( or a successor government ) , cooperative threat reduction programs could have a prominent role to play .

the organization for the prohibition of chemical weapons will play a key role in dismantling the chemical weapons in syria .

therefore , the united states and other countries may contribute funds or technical support for syrian chemical weapons destruction through the opcw .

syria's chemical weapons stocks have been addressed in recent legislation .

the free syria act of 2013 ( h.r .

1327 ) , section 204 has a provision giving the president the authority to establish a program to facilitate syrian chemical and biological weapons destruction in cooperation with a "syrian entity" to "secure , safeguard , disable , dismantle , transport out of syria , or destroy chemical and biological weapons , their precursor and constituent parts and associated equipment. .

it includes congressional reporting requirements and funding authorities .

the syria democratic transition act of 2013 ( s. 617 ) , section 10 proposes that the united states work with regional partners to develop a plan to secure conventional and unconventional weapons stockpiles in syria ; recover and dispose of all unconventional weapons stockpiled in syria "with particular attention to chemical weapons" ; and prevent the illicit transfer of these weapons .

it gives the president notwithstanding authority to conduct these activities .

it also includes the sense of congress that the state department's fy2014 budget request should include an increase in nadr funding for these goals .

the house fy2013 foreign operations appropriations bill ( h.r .

5857 ) said nadr funds "may also be used for such countries other than the independent states of the former soviet union and international organizations when it is in the national security interest of the united states to do so. .

this could include syria .

the syria freedom support act ( h.r .

2106 ) as passed by the house committee on foreign affairs in march 2012 included a provision that would authorize the president to assist a future democratic syrian government with securing and dismantling its inherited weapons of mass destruction and related facilities .

section 106 of the bill provides $250 million in drawdown authority and transfer authority from any other appropriated funds "notwithstanding any other provision of law. .

the senate fy2012 foreign operations appropriations committee report ( s.rept .

112-85 ) said in regard to the nonproliferation , demining , and anti - terrorism funding , "the committee recognizes that dynamic change in the near east and ongoing threats and humanitarian needs in other regions afford opportunities to conduct and expand nonproliferation , demining , and anti - terrorism programs , including in syria should the current regime fall .

the committee recommends additional funding above the budget request to accelerate the u.s. response to such opportunities , which is in the security interests of the united states and regional allies. .

the national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1960 ) as reported by the house includes section 1205 , which gives authority to the "secretary of defense , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , to provide assistance to the military and civilian response organizations of jordan , kuwait , bahrain , the united arab emirates , iraq , turkey , and other countries in the region of syria in order for such countries to respond effectively to incidents involving weapons of mass destruction in syria and the region. .

it authorizes up to $4 million for this purpose .

section 1251 ( b ) of this bill gives the sense of congress that "the president should fully consider all courses of action to reinforce his stated 'redline' regarding the use of weapons of mass destruction by the assad regime in syria. .

the chemical and biological weapons control and warfare elimination act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-182 ) requires that the president , following the receipt by the executive branch of "persuasive information ... indicating the substantial possibility that , on or after october 28 , 1991 , the government of a foreign country has made substantial preparation to use or has used chemical or biological weapons," determine within 60 days "whether that government , on or after october 28 , 1991 , has used chemical or biological weapons in violation of international law or has used lethal chemical or biological weapons against its own nationals. .

the law also requires the president to report such a determination to congress "promptly. .

the report is to specify sanctions to be imposed on the government pursuant to the law .

the law also contains a provision that enables the chairs of the senate committee on foreign relations and the house foreign affairs committee ( in consultation with the ranking members ) to request at any time a report within 60 days "on the information held by the executive branch which is pertinent to" whether a specified foreign government "on or after december 4 , 1991 , has used chemical or biological weapons in violation of international law or has used lethal chemical or biological weapons against its own nationals. .

the use , change of hands , or loss of control of chemical weapons stocks in syria could have unpredictable consequences for the syrian population as well as for u.s. allies and forces in the region .

congress may wish to assess the administration's plans to respond to possible scenarios involving the use , change of hands , or loss of control of syrian chemical weapons .

congress may also wish to assess the administration's plan for chemical weapons verification and destruction in syria .

forces , funding , and authorization by congress may be required to address potential contingencies .

