experts believe that terrorist use of chemical agents is an event with low probability , but potentially high consequences .

while terrorist groups may or may not have an increased interest in chemical agent acquisition and use , the domestic vulnerability of the united states to chemical attack remains an issue .

both the united states and russia have signed and ratified the chemical weapons convention ( cwc ) , and are reducing , and eventually eliminating , their chemical weapon stockpiles .

the possibility that terrorist groups might obtain insecure chemical weapons led to increased scrutiny of declared libyan chemical weapon stockpiles following the fall of the qadhafi regime .

experts have expressed similar concerns regarding the security of syrian chemical weapons , reportedly including stocks of nerve ( sarin , vx ) and blister ( mustard gas ) agents , and their potential use .

for analysis of chemical weapons possession and use in syria , see crs report r42848 , syria's chemical weapons: issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

policy approaches to reducing chemical agent vulnerability have generally treated them as a group , rather than addressing specific agents .

additionally , military and civilian chemical agent detection has developed with little coordination , so that civilian toxic industrial chemical kits and military chemical weapons detectors have varying sensitivities and detection capabilities .

treatments for chemical exposure vary on a chemical by chemical basis .

because comparatively few individuals have been exposed to modern chemical weapons , health care providers have limited practical experience in treatment of chemical casualties , especially among civilians .

while national efforts to reduce vulnerability to terrorist chemical agent use continue , it is not clear whether these efforts address the risks from those specific agents that pose the greatest danger .

this report describes the different types of chemical weapons and toxic industrial chemicals , their availability , treatment , and detection .

chemical agents are , for the purpose of this report , chemicals posing exceptional lethality and danger to humans .

some chemical agents are toxic industrial chemicals used for commercial purposes , while others are chemicals developed predominantly as weapons .

different chemical weapons cause different symptoms in and injuries to their victims .

because of this range of potential effects , identifying the chemical agent is a key step to determining the most effective treatment .

also , chemical weapons may produce their effects by multiple different exposure routes , for example by skin contact or by inhalation .

as a consequence , depending on the encountered chemical , those affected must employ different protective equipment and approaches ; for example , a gas mask alone does not provide sufficient protection against chemicals that can damage through skin contact .

military planners generally categorize chemical agents into at least four classes: nerve , blister , choking , and blood agents .

this method organizes chemical agents by their biological effects .

modern militaries have generally focused on nerve and blister agents as weapons .

several choking and blood agents are chemicals widely used in industrial processes .

protection against chemical agents is predominantly physical , rather than medicinal , in nature .

physical protections limit exposure by protecting the eyes , lungs , and / or skin from chemical contact .

decontamination , where chemicals are removed from the victims , usually through washing the eyes and skin with water and ( against some chemical agents ) a dilute bleach solution , is an essential protection against secondary chemical exposure .

in addition to stopping the victim's exposure to the chemical agent , this procedure prevents those treating the victim from becoming victims themselves , and avoids contamination of treatment facilities .

decontamination is especially important in those cases where victims have encountered liquid chemical agents , and may have significant amounts of chemical agent trapped in their garments .

in events with gaseous agents , decontamination may be less critical .

treatment of the victims with general care or agent - specific antidotes occurs following decontamination .

chemical weapons detection has been predominantly an area of concern for military planners , although the manufacture of some of these agents for commercial use requires detection capabilities at manufacturing plants and by first responders trained to handle hazardous materials .

while some military units have equipment for chemical weapon detection , civilian first responders use a variety of commercial equipment to detect and identify a wide range of chemicals , generally in a hazardous material context .

because of the wide spectrum of potential chemical agents , the development of a portable , integrated instrument that quickly detects all chemical agents remains an area of research and development .

the department of defense employs a series of technologies to detect and identify chemical agents , including personal sensors , automated atmospheric sampling , and laboratory methods adapted for battlefield use .

detection of chemical agents can serve multiple purposes .

one is to provide warning of a chemical attack , allowing additional time to react to potential exposure .

another is to identify the chemical agent used in an attack .

this might provide for better treatment and more effective response .

finally , determining when an area is clear of chemical agents after an attack requires sensitive post - event detection .

some techniques for detecting chemical agents , such as detection paper , tickets , and tubes , rely on sampling the local environment .

detection paper is absorbent paper impregnated with special dyes .

when the paper absorbs a drop of chemical agent , one of the pigments dissolves , causing the paper to change color .

detection tickets are similar to detection paper .

the ticket is waved in the air or used with a hand pump to determine if chemical agents are present .

detection tubes use a similar technology , but rely on a hand pump to draw air samples through the tube , which discolors in the presence of an agent .

a disadvantage to these techniques is that other substances can also dissolve these pigments , causing false positives .

the pigments involved can be specific to a type of agent , so an array of papers , tickets , or tubes may be required to identify the exact agent encountered .

handheld detectors , such as the chemical agent monitor ( cam ) , are able to detect some chemical agents , namely mustard agents and nerve agents .

automatic sampling devices , such as the automatic chemical agent detector / alarm ( acada ) , are also employed to provide automated , constant atmospheric sampling .

these devices sometimes use a technique called ion mobility spectroscopy to detect the presence of chemical agents .

much of the above equipment is commercially available , and hazardous material response teams could use it to assess a chemical release .

typically , hazardous material response teams possess detection paper , tickets , or tubes , but these teams may not have standardized equipment across jurisdictions .

to aid first responders in choosing the best or most appropriate system for their use , the department of homeland security has provided guidelines to assess various types of detectors .

another way of detecting a chemical terrorism event would be through the public health system .

the sudden arrival of chemical casualties in local hospitals will quickly alert health care professionals .

since september 11 , 2001 , increases in public health networking have improved information sharing between localities .

this may increase the likelihood of identifying , for example , a covert release of blister agents through identification of symptoms .

public health monitoring also may aid in forensic investigations following a covert event , especially if symptoms are delayed .

such public health monitoring may also provide opportunities to identify terrorists who may have self - inflicted chemical weapon injuries .

additionally , the laboratory response network has been established , which links together diagnostic laboratories for the identification of chemical agents , as well as disease outbreaks .

in february 2012 , the director of the defense intelligence agency identified that "terrorist organizations are working to acquire and employ chemical , biological , and radiological materials. .

many experts believe that it would be difficult for terrorist groups to use chemical agents as weapons of mass destruction .

in 1993 , the office of technology assessment estimated that vx , the most lethal of nerve agents , spread uniformly and efficiently would require tons of material to kill 50% of the people in a 100 km 2 area .

on the other hand , chemical agents might be effectively used as weapons of terror in situations where limited or enclosed space might decrease the required amounts of chemical .

that is , the use of the weapon itself , even if casualties are few , could cause fear that would magnify the attack's effect beyond what would be expected based solely on the number of casualties .

few examples exist of successful chemical terror attacks .

in 1995 , aum shinrikyo , a japanese apocalyptic cult , used sarin on the tokyo subway .

the attack killed 12 people and sent more than 5,000 to the hospital with some degree of injury .

this same cult reportedly carried out an attack in matsumoto as well , where 7 people were killed and over 200 injured .

both of these attacks used g - series nerve agents , which are more toxic through inhalation than by contact .

v - series agents employed in a similar manner might have caused greater fatalities .

in comparison , blister agents would likely be less lethal , but more injurious , if used in a similar manner .

blister agents are dermally active , so contact with the agent would cause injury .

additionally , since mustard agent vapor penetrates most fabrics , victims near the point of release might suffer grievously .

blister agents , while not likely to cause mass destruction , might cause mass terror and injury .

military planners no longer consider choking agents as useful military weapons , since chemical suits and masks provide high protection .

however , according the director of national intelligence , the 2006-2007 attacks in iraq using conventional explosives combined with chlorine gas "highlighted terrorist interest in using commercial and easily available toxic industrial chemicals as weapons. .

as a weapon of mass destruction used against civilians , the comparatively low lethality of choking agents complicates their use as a weapon of mass destruction , since very large volumes would be needed .

on the other hand , the industrial availability of some choking agents provides opportunities for acquisition and subsequent use of potentially very large volumes of such agents .

for example , the united states produces approximately 1 billion pounds of chlorine a year for use in water treatment facilities .

experts have noted the potential vulnerabilities of chlorine - filled rail tank cars , its primary transport method .

terrorist attack on industrial stores at chemical or water treatment facilities or during shipment is another potential source of concern .

in order to address the concern of security at chemical facilities with large amounts of hazardous chemicals , congress provided dhs with statutory authority to regulate these facilities for security purposes .

in 2007 , dhs issued regulations , called chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) , but compliance with these regulations is incomplete .

the 113 th congress has held oversight hearings on cfats and considered its reauthorization .

terrorists may find blood agents difficult to employ as weapons of mass destruction for many of the same reasons that apply to choking agents .

the quick dispersal of blood agents , combined with the large amounts necessary to cause mass casualties , make such agents difficult to use on a mass scale .

some industrially manufactured blood agents are used on - site without being shipped .

however , terrorist groups continue their interest in these agents , perhaps because of a belief that they may cause mass casualties .

