since 2001 , hundreds of thousands of elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education students have been adversely affected by natural disasters , such as hurricanes and floods , and by national emergencies , such as the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

to assist congress in responding to catastrophic events , this report provides a general overview of existing statutory and regulatory authorities , flexibilities , and programs that are available to assist students and educational institutions affected by a major disaster or a national emergency .

the report also reviews several no - longer - authorized temporary provisions that were enacted by congress to provide additional assistance to support education - related disaster recovery .

some of the initial education - related problems that may need to be addressed following a disaster relate to utilities outages , displaced students , homeless students , damage to buildings and school property , and school closures .

to address such problems , the federal government has responded in various ways to disasters that have affected the provision of education .

these responses have included the provision of financial support , waivers of existing statutory and regulatory provisions , and the creation of new programs .

the majority of federal assistance for disaster management is made available from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , as authorized under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act: p.l .

93-288 ) .

the public assistance available under the stafford act largely provides funds for disaster relief activities such as debris removal , emergency protective measures , and the repair , replacement , or restoration of public facilities damaged during the disaster .

on several occasions , congress has also enacted legislation to create temporary targeted assistance programs to support department of education ( ed ) administered programs at the elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education levels .

such assistance was authorized to meet the needs of students , schools , and states during specific disasters .

for example , temporary programs have provided funds to restar t school operations , reopen schools , and re - enroll students .

in addition to the assistance authorized by the stafford act and temporary targeted assistance programs , a wide range of disaster aid is provided by ed under statutory authority that specifically refers to disaster assistance , as well as under general assistance provisions .

at the elementary and secondary education level , schools , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and states have needed assistance in complying with various educational accountability requirements included in the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) and in meeting fiscal requirements .

a number of statutory flexibilities can be triggered to provide adjustment to , and in some instances exemptions from , such requirements during periods of disaster .

at the postsecondary education level , institutions of higher education ( ihes ) have needed assistance complying with the statutory requirements pertaining to the disbursement and reimbursement of federal student aid ( eg , pell grants and direct loan program loans ) , and students have needed assistance in securing , maintaining eligibility for , and repaying federal student aid .

where federal student aid is concerned , relief has been provided related to the interruption or cancelation of periods of study and ensuing challenges associated with reimbursement of funds for the federal government from ihes and / or students and portability of aid should students need to be relocated .

the first part of this report briefly describes recent education - related developments in response to numerous disasters in 2017 .

it then describes education - related federal assistance provided by fema in the aftermath of disasters generally .

this is followed by an examination of education - related disaster recovery and issues related to elementary and secondary education , postsecondary education , and various ed - administered programs typically serving adult learners .

the report also includes an appendix summarizing education - related disaster appropriations administered by ed from between 2005 and 2010 .

in august and september of 2017 , the united states experienced several major hurricanes and tropical storms in quick succession .

in response to hurricane and tropical storm harvey , president trump issued a major disaster declaration for texas and an emergency declaration for louisiana ; in response to hurricane irma , president trump issued emergency declarations for florida , the u.s. virgin islands , and puerto rico ; and in response to hurricane maria , president trump issued major disaster declarations for puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands .

in december 2017 , california experienced multiple wildfire incidents .

the scope of the adverse effects from these natural disasters is extensive .

included among the currently known and expected adverse effects are physical damage to local elementary , secondary , and postsecondary schools , possible school closures , and temporary or permanent displacement of students .

as of the date of this report , legislation has been enacted in response to the 2017 hurricanes to provide the secretary of education ( the secretary ) with waiver authority for certain statutory provisions not otherwise authorized , which relates to the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) title iv campus - based student aid programs , and to permanently make private schools eligible for funding under the project school emergency response to violence program ( project serv ) , as authorized under the esea .

in addition , ed has released updated guidance for elementary and secondary schools , for ihes and students related to the federal student aid programs authorized under title iv of the higher education act , and for other programs administered by ed , including general guidance on grants administration .

finally , ed awarded project serv grants to various state and territory departments of education to assist with hurricane recovery efforts .

on february 9 , 2018 , the further additional supplemental appropriations for disaster relief act , 2018 ( division b , subdivision 1 of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) was enacted .

it includes fy2018 supplemental appropriations for disaster relief for "covered disasters or emergencies" ( i.e. , hurricanes harvey , irma , maria , or wildfires in 2017 for which a major disaster or emergency has been declared under sections 401 or 501 of the robert t. stafford disasters relief and emergency assistance act ) , including for education - related programs and activities .

the act includes the following education - related disaster relief provisions: $2.5 billion for immediate aid to restart school operations and for temporary emergency impact aid for displaced k - 12 students .

these programs are identical to disaster relief programs passed in response to the 2005 hurricane season and authorized under p.l .

109-148 .

funds are targeted to schools that have been damaged by a covered disaster or emergency and to states and leas that have enrolled students displaced as a result of a covered disaster or emergency .

funds under the temporary emergency impact aid program are distributed to the states and leas based on the numbers of displaced students enrolled .

extra funds are provided to schools for displaced students with disabilities and displaced students who are english learners .

up to $35 million for the project serv program , authorized under section 4631 ( b ) of the esea , for education - related services to help students in affected areas recover from the trauma associated with natural disasters .

$25 million for assistance to leas serving homeless children and youths displaced by a covered disaster or emergency , consistent with the education for homeless children and youth program authorized under section 723 of the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act .

$100 million for the federal supplemental educational opportunity grant ( fseog ) program , the federal work - study ( fws ) program , and the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education ( fipse ) .

funds shall be for ihes located in areas affected by a covered disaster or emergency and students enrolled in such institutions .

matching requirements under fseog and fws are waived for ihes receiving such funds .

funds may be used for a variety of expenses including student financial assistance , staff salaries , student supplies and equipment , or any other purpose authorized under the hea .

up to $75 million for ihes to help defray the unexpected expenses associated with enrolling students displaced from ihes at which operations have been disrupted by a covered disaster or emergency .

authorization for the secretary to waive , modify , or provide extensions for any statutory or regulatory provisions applicable to the hea title iv programs or student eligibility or institutional eligibility provisions in the hea for affected individuals , students , and ihes in covered disaster or emergency areas , if the secretary deems such waiver , modification , or extension necessary in connection with a covered disaster or emergency .

authorization for the secretary to modify required and allowable uses of funds under the various minority - serving grant programs authorized under hea title iii , parts a and b , and under the trio and gear - up programs .

authorization for the secretary to forgive any outstanding balance owed to ed under the hbcu hurricane supplemental loan program established under p.l .

109-234 and in response to the 2005 hurricane season .

$4 million to ed's office of the inspector general for carrying out administrative and oversight activities .

this report reflects the most recently available information on laws and guidance related to education - related disaster response and flexibilities .

it will be updated should new or additional statutes be enacted or guidance be issued .

the principal authority governing federal assistance for emergencies and major disasters in the united states is the robert t. stafford relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ; p.l .

93-288 , 42 u.s.c .

5121 et seq. ) .

the federal emergency management agency of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has been given the responsibility of administering almost all of the president's stafford act authorities through other law , a series of executive orders , and a dhs delegation .

if a major disaster or emergency has been declared by the president under the authority of the stafford act , federal assistance can be made available to the declared tribal governments , states , local governments , owners of certain private nonprofit facilities , and individuals and families .

if located in a declared disaster area , public educational institutions , and certain private nonprofit institutions , may receive disaster assistance grants through fema's public assistance ( pa ) program .

pa grants may assist educational institutions with a range of disaster assistance needs , including , but not limited to , the repair and reconstruction of damaged facilities , debris removal , the provision of temporary school facilities , and the replacement of certain necessary equipment and supplies ( eg , books and desks ) .

the specific eligibility of private nonprofit educational facilities is outlined in fema policy , but generally includes accredited primary , secondary , and higher education institutions .

eligible institutions may also apply for funding to reduce risks and damages that might occur in future disasters through hazard mitigation grants .

the federal government has provided support for elementary and secondary education for many decades .

federal support for public elementary and secondary education accounts for less than 10% of the nation's overall k - 12 education revenues .

for fy2017 , about $38 billion was appropriated for elementary and secondary education programs administered by ed .

the majority of these funds are provided under the elementary and secondary education act , the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , and the carl d. perkins career and technical education improvement act ( perkins ) .

the esea represents the major federal commitment to the nation's elementary and secondary schools and was last comprehensively reauthorized by the essa on december 10 , 2015 .

the title i - a program is the largest grant program authorized under the esea and is funded at $15.5 billion for fy2017 .

title i - a of the esea authorizes aid to leas for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending prekindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

title i - a has also become a vehicle to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all students have been attached as conditions for receiving title i - a grants .

other esea programs include improving teacher quality , 21 st century community learning centers , rural education , english language acquisition grants , charter schools grants , and impact aid , collectively funded at $8.4 billion in fy2017 .

in addition to the esea , another important source of federal funding for elementary and secondary education is the idea .

the act provides federal funding for special education and related services for children with disabilities and requires the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) as a condition for the receipt of such funds .

the statute also contains detailed due process provisions to ensure the provision of fape and fiscal accountability provisions .

total idea funding for fy2017 equaled $13.0 billion .

the perkins act is a federal law supporting the development of career and technical education skills among students in secondary and postsecondary education .

the bulk of perkins funds are distributed via a formula to the states , which then distribute funds to local recipients , such as leas and community colleges .

perkins was most recently comprehensively reauthorized in 2006 , and appropriations were authorized through fy2012 .

the authorization of appropriations was automatically extended for an additional fiscal year through fy2013 under section 422 of the general education provisions act , and perkins has continued to receive fairly constant appropriations through fy2016 .

total perkins funding for fy2017 was $1.1 billion .

this section of the report provides an overview of existing general statutory and regulatory authorities for elementary and secondary education that enable the secretary of education ( the secretary ) to waive or modify various education requirements .

this section also discusses temporary authorities that have been provided to the secretary by congress in response to various disasters .

additionally , it examines temporary elementary and secondary education programs that were created by congress in response to various disasters and administered by ed .

the section concludes with a discussion of other actions taken in response to disasters affecting elementary and secondary education .

with respect to elementary and secondary education , the education - related disaster recovery efforts examined in this report are primarily related to the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes ( katrina and rita ) , 2008 hurricanes ike and gustav , and natural disasters that occurred through 2010 , including flooding in the midwest in 2008 .

ed has not issued waivers or new funding related to disasters that occurred subsequent to this time period .

while the esea was recently reauthorized by the essa , this report discusses relevant esea provisions both prior to and following the enactment of the essa .

the federal government supports postsecondary education , primarily through programs authorized by the higher education act of 1965 , as amended ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) .

the hea authorizes a broad array of federal student aid programs that assist students and their families with paying for or financing the costs of obtaining a postsecondary education .

in fy2016 , nearly $136 billion in grant , loan , and work - study aid was made available to 13 million students enrolled in approximately 6,000 institutions of higher education .

the hea also authorizes a series of programs that provide support to ihes and additional federal student aid .

about $948 million was appropriated for these postsecondary programs in fy2016 .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) administers entitlement programs providing vocational and educational assistance .

the veterans educational assistance programs ( gi bills ® ) provide eligible servicemembers and veterans and their dependents with financial assistance while enrolled in approved educational and training programs .

the vocational rehabilitation and employment ( vr&e ) program provides education , job training , and related services to veterans with service - connected disabilities .

the va estimates that it will obligate approximately $15 billion in fy2017 for veterans educational assistance and vr&e .

this section provides an overview of the existing statutory and regulatory authorities that have been and may be useful in supporting education - disaster recovery .

the first section examines the existing general statutory and regulatory authorities that enable the secretary of education and ihes to waive or modify various hea requirements .

this is followed by the description of an hea program that authorizes education disaster and emergency relief loans .

the next part of this section examines temporary higher education provisions and programs that were enacted by congress in response to various disasters and administered by ed .

finally , a discussion of existing general statutory and regulatory authorities that reduce the negative financial impact of disasters on gi bill participants follows .

the department of education administers various other programs related to education that are not necessarily classified as serving elementary and secondary education or postsecondary education purposes .

two such programs are state grants authorized under the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) , which support education for adults at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training ; and vocational rehabilitation state grants authorized under the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which support the provision of vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) services to individuals with disabilities .

this section provides an overview of the authorized statutory and regulatory authorities that may be useful in supporting education - disaster recovery within these programs .

generally , current law permits disaster - affected grantees under these programs to receive a waiver for each program's maintenance of effort requirements and certain timely reporting requirements but does not permit waivers for required state matching funds .

the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) provides grants to states to support education for out - of - school adults at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training .

aefla requires states to match a portion of the federal grant and has a maintenance of effort requirement ( moe ) that reduces a state's federal grant if the state reduces its nonfederal support .

statute authorizes the secretary to waive the moe requirement if "a waiver would be equitable due to exceptional or uncontrollable circumstances , such as a natural disaster or an unforeseen and precipitous decline in the financial resources. .

statute specifies that if the secretary grants a waiver for a given fiscal year , the level of required effort of meet the moe requirement shall not be reduced in subsequent years because of the waiver .

aefla does not grant ed the authority to waive states' nonfederal match .

in addition , aefla state grantees are required to submit annual performance reports as a condition of receiving funding .

aefla performance reports are included with reports for other federally supported workforce grant programs .

regulations specify that a state will not be subject to financial sanctions if the state fails to submit a complete and timely report due to exceptional circumstances outside the state's control , including a disaster .

under the authorization of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , as amended ( the rehabilitation act ) , ed provides grants to state agencies to provide vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) services to individuals with disabilities .

states may use grant funds to assess clients and help eligible clients develop and carry out an individualized plan for employment .

the rehabilitation act requires states to match a portion of the federal grant and has a moe requirement that reduces a state's federal grant if the state reduces its nonfederal contribution .

statute authorizes the secretary to waive the moe requirement if a waiver "is necessary to permit the state to respond to exceptional or uncontrollable circumstance , such as a major natural disaster or serious economic downtown. .

the rehabilitation act does not grant ed the authority to waive states' nonfederal match .

in addition , vr state grantees are required to submit annual performance reports as a condition of receiving funding .

vr performance reports are included with reports for other federally supported workforce grant programs .

regulations specify that a state will not be subject to financial sanctions if the state fails to submit a complete and timely report due to exceptional circumstances outside the state's control , including a disaster .

between 2005 and 2010 , congress appropriated nearly $2 billion for ed to provide support to local educational agencies ( leas ) , schools , and institutions of higher education ( ihes ) that were affected by hurricanes katrina , rita , or gustav and other natural disasters .

funding provided for elementary and secondary education and for higher education is discussed below .

table a - 1 details how much of this funding was allocated specifically to alabama , florida , louisiana , mississippi , texas , and all other states combined , by program .

in addition , temporary provisions and flexibilities provided for elementary and secondary education , higher education , and the vocational rehabilitation state grant program are described below .

elementary and secondary education following the gulf coast hurricanes , funding to support elementary and secondary schools affected by hurricane katrina or hurricane rita was provided through three public laws: p.l .

109-148 ( $1.4 billion ) , p.l .

109-234 ( $235 million ) , and p.l .

110-28 ( $30 million ) .

p.l .

109-148 created two new programs: ( 1 ) immediate aid to restart school operations ( $750 million ) and ( 2 ) temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students ( $645 million ) , specifically designed to address needs resulting from the hurricanes and to provide support to leas through an existing federal education program administered by ed .

it also added $5 million to the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act to serve homeless children and youth who had been displaced by the gulf coast hurricanes.p.l .

109-234 provided additional funding of $235 million for the temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students enacted under p.l .

109-148 .

p.l .

110-28 appropriated $30 million for elementary and secondary schools affected by the hurricanes through the hurricane educator assistance program to assist in recruiting , retaining , and compensating staff in those schools .

congress then appropriated an additional $15 million through p.l .

110-329 to provide support to leas whose enrollment of homeless students increased as a result of hurricanes , floods , or other natural disaster during 2008 .

most recently , congress appropriated $12 million through p.l .

111-117 for the gulf coast recovery initiative to improve education in areas affected by hurricanes katrina , rita , or gustav .

a brief description of each of these programs and the amount of funding each received is presented below .

table a - 1 details the funding amounts various states received under each of the programs .

immediate aid to restart school operations the immediate aid to restart school operations provided support for leas and nonpublic schools in louisiana , mississippi , alabama , and texas to restart school operations , reopen schools , and re - enroll students .

p.l .

109-148 provided $750 million for this program .

this program is no longer authorized .

temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students the temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students program provided federal funding to assist schools in enrolling students who had been displaced by the gulf coast hurricanes .

funds were made available to leas and schools based on the number of displaced students that enrolled , irrespective of whether the school in which parents chose to enroll their child was a public or nonpublic school .

p.l .

109-148 appropriated $645 million for this program .

subsequently , p.l .

109-234 appropriated an additional $235 million for this program , bringing the total program appropriation to $880 million .

portions of the funds appropriated were provided to 49 states and the district of columbia based on the number of displaced students each enrolled .

louisiana , texas , and mississippi received the largest proportion of funds .

this program is no longer authorized .

mckinney - vento homeless assistance act the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act ( p.l .

100-77 ; 42 u.s.c .

11433 et seq. ) .

provides funding to states to ensure that homeless children and youth are provided equal access to a free , appropriate public education in the same manner as provided other children and youth through the education for homeless children and youths program .

p.l .

109-148 appropriated $5 million for this program for leas serving homeless children and youth who had been displaced by hurricanes katrina or rita .

eight states received funding under this program , with the largest grants provided to texas and louisiana .

while the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act continues to provide funding related to the education of homeless students , the provisions enacted specifically in response to the gulf coast hurricanes are no longer authorized .

hurricane educator assistance program the hurricane educator assistance program made federal funding available to louisiana , mississippi , and alabama to use for recruiting , retaining , and compensating school staff who committed to work for at least three years in public elementary and secondary schools affected by hurricanes katrina or rita .

states were required to apply to receive funds , and the funds were allocated based on the number of public elementary and secondary schools that were closed for 19 days or more from august 29 , 2005 , through december 31 , 2005 .

p.l .

110-28 provided $30 million for these purposes .

funds were provided to louisiana and mississippi only .

this program is no longer authorized .

homeless education disaster assistance p.l .

110-329 provided $15 million to leas whose enrollment of homeless students increased as a result of hurricanes , floods , or other natural disasters that occurred during 2008 and for which the president declared a major disaster under title iv of the stafford act .

ed was required to distribute the funds through the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act based on demonstrated need .

these funds provided assistance to leas in gulf coast states affected by hurricanes gustav and ike , as well as leas affected by natural disasters in other parts of the nation , such as flooding in the midwest .

of the $15 million provided , $13.5 million was provided to florida , louisiana , and texas .

this program is no longer authorized .

gulf coast recovery initiative p.l .

111-117 provided $12 million for competitive awards to leas located in counties in louisiana , mississippi , and texas that were designated by fema as counties eligible for individual assistance as a result of damage caused by hurricanes katrina , rita , or gustav .

the funds had to be used to improve education in areas affected by these hurricanes and had to be used for activities such as replacing instructional materials and equipment ; paying teacher incentives ; modernizing , renovating , or repairing school buildings ; supporting charter school expansion ; and supporting extended learning time activities .

the majority of the funds were provided to leas in louisiana .

this program is no longer authorized .

temporary flexibilities under the esea p.l .

109-148 provided the secretary with the authority to grant leas certain temporary flexibilities and waivers from fiscal requirements under the esea .

these included the temporary authority to waive or modify any requirements related to maintenance of effort ( moe ) ; the use of federal funds to supplement , not supplant , nonfederal funds ; and any nonfederal share or capital contribution required to match federal funds provided under programs administered by the secretary .

the waivers could be provided at the secretary's discretion to ease the fiscal burdens of entities in an affected state in which a major disaster has been declared in accordance with section 401 of the stafford act .

it is important to note that the waivers of moe did not reduce the level of effort required for the subsequent year .

it should also be noted that this additional authority to waive fiscal accountability requirements did not permit the secretary to waive or modify any provision under idea .

in response to multiple disasters , congress has required the secretary to hold affected leas harmless at 100% of their prior - year grant amount under title i - a of the esea .

it appears that these provisions may have been enacted as a means of preventing affected leas from experiencing a decrease in funding due to the displacement of students .

temporary flexibilities under the idea p.l .

109-148 also provided the secretary with the temporary authority to extend certain administrative deadlines under the idea , such as the deadline for submission of an annual report on the progress of the state and of children with disabilities in the state for the 2005-2006 academic year .

in addition , the secretary was authorized to extend the deadline for the initial evaluation of children to determine their eligibility for services under idea .

in providing the secretary with the authority to extend these deadlines , congress also included statutory language that clarified that this new authority should not be interpreted as granting the secretary waiver authority over key idea provisions , such as the right to a free appropriate public education or procedural safeguards granted under the act .

higher education appropriations to support ihes following the gulf coast hurricanes of 2005 ( i.e. , hurricanes katrina and rita ) were provided in 2005 through p.l .

109-148 ( $200 million ) , in 2006 through p.l .

109-234 ( $50 million ) , and in 2007 through p.l .

110-28 ( $30 million ) .

p.l .

110-329 subsequently provided another $15 million for ihes in areas affected by hurricanes , floods , or other natural disasters in 2008 .

table a - 1 details the amount of funding allocated to states under these provisions .

hurricane education recovery of the $200 million provided under p.l .

109-148 for higher education , $95 million was specifically appropriated for the louisiana board of regents , and $95 million was specifically appropriated for the mississippi institute of higher learning for hurricane recovery .

subsequently , p.l .

109-234 and p.l .

110-28 provided additional funds for hurricane recovery under the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education ( fipse ) , authorized by title vii of the higher education act ( hea ) , to assist ihes adversely affected by the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes .

under both laws , funds were provided to help defray the expenses incurred by ihes that were forced to close , relocate , or reduce their activities due to hurricane damage .

under p.l .

110-28 , ihes also were permitted to use funds to make grants to students enrolled at such institutions on or after july 1 , 2006 .

a total of $80 million was provided for ihes affected by hurricane katrina or rita under fipse for hurricane recovery .

the majority of funds appropriated for hurricane education recovery were provided to mississippi and louisiana .

these activities are no longer authorized .

funds to assist ihes enrolling displaced students under p.l .

109-148 , $10 million was appropriated to assist ihes with unanticipated costs associated with the enrollment of students displaced as a result of hurricane katrina or rita .

overall , 99 ihes in 24 states and the district of columbia received funds related to the enrollment of displaced higher education students .

louisiana and texas received the largest state grants .

this program is no longer authorized .

higher education disaster relief p.l .

110-329 provided an additional $15 million for ihes that were located in an area affected by hurricanes , floods , and other natural disasters that occurred during 2008 and for which the president declared a major disaster under title iv of the stafford act .

funds provided through the higher education disaster relief program could be used to defray the expenses incurred by ihes in affected areas that were forced to close or relocate or whose operations were adversely affected by the natural disaster and to provide grants to students who attended such ihes for academic years beginning on or after july 1 , 2008 .

the majority of these funds were provided to louisiana and texas for hurricane - related education disaster assistance .

this program is no longer authorized .

modified uses of funds under various grant programs under p.l .

109-148 , upon request by an affected institution or other grantee located in an area affected by a 2005 gulf hurricane disaster ( i.e. , hurricane katrina or rita ) , the secretary was given the authority to modify the required and allowable uses of funds under the trio programs ( hea title iv , part a , subpart 2 , chapter 1 ) , gaining early awareness and readiness for undergraduate programs ( gear up ; hea title iv , part a , subpart 2 , chapter 2 ) , programs authorized under strengthening institutions ( hea title iii , part a ) or strengthening historically black colleges and universities ( hea title iii , part b ) , and any other competitive grant program .

the secretary was not authorized to permit any new construction , renovation , or improvement of classrooms , libraries , laboratories , or other instructional facilities that was not previously authorized under the institution's grant award under part a or b of title iii .

modified requirements under the title iii - a and title iii - b programs congress authorized the secretary to waive certain requirements under the title iii , part a and title iii , part b programs related to institutional eligibility , data submissions , and funding allocations .

the waivers were intended to ensure that ihes affected by either hurricane katrina or rita did not lose funding as a result of the disasters .

the waivers were required for fy2009-fy2011 and permitted for fy2012 and fy2013 .

modification of teacher quality enhancement grants for states and partnerships at the request of the grantee , the secretary may modify the requirements for teacher quality enhancement grants for states and partnerships authorized under hea title ii , part a .

modifications could be made to aid states and leas in recruiting and retaining highly qualified teachers in an lea in an area affected by a hurricane katrina or rita , and to aid ihes , located in such an area , in recruiting and retaining faculty needed to prepare teachers and provide professional development .

additional capital financing for historically black colleges and universities congress helped historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) affected by the gulf coast hurricanes gain access to low - cost capital financing to assist their recovery efforts through the historically black college and university ( hbcu ) capital financing program ( title iii - d of the hea ) .

p.l .

109-234 authorized the secretary to waive or modify statutory or regulatory provisions to ensure that the calculation of financing for an hbcu reflected changes in the financial condition of the institution as a result of the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes and to ensure that those affected institutions that were not receiving assistance under the program before the gulf hurricane disasters were eligible to apply .

the law also relaxed several program financing requirements .

the secretary's authority to waive or modify statutory or regulatory requirements of this program is no longer authorized .

in 2018 , the further additional supplemental appropriations for disaster relief act , 2018 ( division b , subdivision 1 of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) authorized the secretary to forgive any outstanding loan balance owed to ed by institutions that secured funding under this program in the wake of the gulf cost hurricanes .

waiver of vocational rehabilitation state grant matches the assistance to individuals with disabilities affected by hurricane katrina or rita act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-82 ) provided the secretary with the authority to waive the nonfederal match requirements for disaster - affected states .

the law also gave disaster - affected states preference in claiming vr state grant funds that were made available for reallocation if a state did not meet its full nonfederal match .

the law defined an affected state as "a state that contains an area , or that received a significant number of individuals who resided in an area , in which the president has declared that a major disaster exists. .

