the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l .

109-58 ) established a renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) , requiring the use of biofuels ( such as ethanol ) in the nation's fuel supply .

the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) significantly expanded this mandate .

the rfs mandate has been a major impetus to the development of u.s. biofuels industries , especially the ethanol and biodiesel industries .

in 2005 , the united states produced 3.9 billion gallons of ethanol and 0.1 billion gallons of biodiesel .

by 2013 , production had increased to roughly 14 billion gallons of ethanol and over 1 billion gallons of biodiesel .

covered parties meet their obligations under the rfs by surrendering renewable fuel credits to epa equal to the number of gallons in their annual obligation .

these credits , known as renewable identification numbers ( rins ) , are generated when a batch of biofuel is produced , and separated from the fuel by obligated parties ( generally gasoline and diesel fuel refiners or blenders ) .

once separated , these rins may be traded like other commodities .

recent civil and criminal action against parties accused of registering and selling fraudulent rins has raised questions about the integrity of the rin market and epa's oversight of the market .

further , some stakeholders have argued that recent rin market volatility indicates that obligated parties are facing challenges in complying with the mandates .

this report outlines the rfs and the current rin system , discusses the current market for various rins , and outlines policy considerations to address rin fraud going forward .

for 2013 , the rfs required the blending of 16.55 billion gallons of renewable fuel in transportation fuels , including at least 1.28 billion gallons of biomass - based diesel substitutes ( bbd ) .

the rfs increases to 36 billion gallons by 2022 with an increasing share coming from "advanced biofuels" — biofuels produced from feedstocks other than corn starch — including cellulosic biofuel and bbd fuels .

as was the case in previous years , in 2013 the vast majority of the mandate was met with u.s. corn ethanol ( and a smaller amount of biodiesel , as well as sugarcane ethanol from brazil ) .

by 2015 corn ethanol's share of the rfs is effectively capped at 15 billion gallons per year .

the eisa amendments to the rfs specifically mandate the use of cellulosic biofuel ( 16 billion gallons by 2022 ) and biomass - based diesel fuel ( at least 1.0 billion gallons annually by 2012 ) .

however , advanced biofuels , especially cellulosic fuels , have been slow to develop and fuel production lags the eisa's mandate schedule .

within the overall rfs mandate , there are sub - mandates for specific types of fuel .

for example , for 2013 eisa required the use of 16.55 billion gallons of biofuels , of which 2.75 billion must be "advanced biofuels. .

within the advanced biofuel carve - out for 2013 , at least 1.28 billion gallons were to be biomass - based diesel ( bbd ) fuels 6 million gallons were required for cellulosic biofuels .

in the early years of the program , the lion's share of the mandate is unspecified , and the vast majority of this unspecified portion has been — and is expected to be — supplied by corn - based ethanol largely produced in the midwest .

at the beginning of each year , epa determines a percentage standard that all suppliers must meet , which is based on expected total u.s. gasoline and diesel demand for the prior year .

for example , for 2013 , the overall biofuel standard was 9.74% , the advanced biofuel standard was 1.62% , the bbd standard was 1.13% , and the cellulosic biofuel standard was 0.004% .

the sub - mandates for advanced biofuels are nested together ( figure 1 ) .

as noted by the arrows in the figure , fuel qualifying as one type of biofuel in the rfs qualifies for all levels above it .

for example , a gallon of cellulosic biofuel may be used to meet the cellulosic mandate , the advanced biofuel mandate , and the overall rfs .

a gallon of other advanced biofuel ( eg , sugarcane ethanol ) may be used to meet the advanced biofuel mandate and the overall mandate , but may not be used to meet the cellulosic or bbd mandates .

corn starch ethanol — the most widely used biofuel in the united states — may only be used to meet the overall rfs .

compliance with the rfs is measured using rins .

when qualifying biofuels are produced , each gallon is assigned a rin .

until the biofuels are sold as fuel or blended into conventional fuels , the rins are "attached" to the fuel .

once the biofuel has been blended or sold , the rins are detached , and can then be bought and sold like other commodities .

at the end of each year , fuel suppliers must multiply the above percentage standards by their total gasoline and diesel sales to calculate their renewable volume obligations ( rvo ) , which indicate the total number of each type of rin that the suppliers must submit to epa .

to the extent that a supplier has excess rins , that supplier may sell them to others who may be short , or save them for use in the following year .

as noted above , in late 2011 and early 2012 , epa issued notices of violations ( novs ) to three companies ( clean green fuels , llc , absolute fuels , llc , and green diesel , llc ) that the agency alleges fraudulently generated a combined 140 million biodiesel rins in 2010 and 2011 .

subsequently , individuals representing two of these companies have also faced criminal prosecution .

in december 2013 epa issued another nov to imperial petroleum , inc. ( and its subsidiary , e - biofuels , llc ) , and in january 2014 two men were indicted for rin - related violations .

because these investigations involve potentially criminal actions , epa has limited the amount of information available to traders and obligated parties who may have purchased fraudulent rins .

thus , it is unclear whether any other novs will be issued in the future .

the 140 million fraudulent rins from the first three novs represent roughly 11% of the biodiesel rins generated between mid - 2010 and the end of 2011 , but less than 1% of the total rins generated — as noted above , ethanol produced from corn starch currently dominates the rfs .

however , biodiesel rins traded at considerably higher prices than ethanol rins at that time .

the establishment of the renewable fuel standard has created a market for rins that has grown both in volume and in value over time and is expected to continue to grow over the next decade .

however , cases of fraud in the early years of the biodiesel rin market raise questions about the integrity of rin markets , as well as epa's oversight of the markets .

a dramatic increase in corn ethanol rins in 2013 has raised additional questions about the rin system and the overall rfs .

various policies have been proposed to address these concerns , and the details of those policies will affect rin markets as well as the relative benefits to different market players .

