various water supply shortages and greater demand for water supply related to energy development projects have brought increased attention to disputes over the control of water resources across the country .

for example , new applications of energy extraction technologies have increased oil and gas production from shale formations in various regions of the united states .

one method of extraction , known as hydraulic fracturing , typically injects a pressurized freshwater - based liquid mixture into wells to fracture shale formations containing the oil or gas .

in particular , the demand for water supply to develop energy in the northern plains states has raised controversy over water use in the missouri river basin .

access to water for energy development purposes has created tension between federal and state interests when stakeholders seek access to freshwater from federal water projects .

this issue has been of particular interest at lake sakakawea , a reservoir created by the federal garrison dam along the missouri river in north dakota .

in recent years , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , which controls lake sakakawea and five other mainstem missouri river reservoirs , has identified surplus water in these reservoirs and considered how it would contract with industrial and municipal users interested in the temporary use of this water .

in 2012 , the corps announced plans to provide access to surplus water at lake sakakawea for municipal and industrial ( m&i ) use under surplus water agreements and ultimately to charge a fee for access to water stored at the project .

state interests have opposed the corps' plan , arguing that the corps should not charge for access to water that would be available for state allocation if the river were flowing freely .

according to this argument , the corps' plan infringes on state authority to administer water rights .

although the federal government has fairly broad authority related to water resources management , water allocation has traditionally been a matter left to the states , which administer their own water rights systems .

this dual exercise of authority over water resources has led to questions over the corps' proposed actions at its missouri river reservoirs .

using lake sakakawea as an example , this report analyzes the legal authority of the corps to charge for stored surplus water .

it examines the relevant constitutional and statutory authority of the corps to operate federal water projects , including the water supply act of 1958 ( wsa ) and the flood control act of 1944 ( 1944 fca ) .

it also analyzes state authority over water within state boundaries and discusses the relationship between federal and state authority , including examples of congressional actions that have addressed competing federal and state roles regarding water resources .

federal water projects may be operated for a variety of authorized purposes , typically identified by congress at the time of the project authorization .

project purposes may include navigation , flood control , hydropower , m&i use , irrigation , etc .

the federal agency authorized to operate the project may do so for any purpose identified by the project legislation , or for any purpose otherwise generally authorized by law .

the corps has broad constitutional authority for its water projects .

the supreme court historically has held that the corps' authority derives from the commerce clause and the significant interest in promoting navigation throughout the nation's waterways .

the breadth of this authority regarding various purposes of corps' operations has been recognized repeatedly .

in 1899 , the court explained that the states' control of the appropriation of their waters was subject to "the superior power of the general government to secure the uninterrupted navigability of the all navigable streams within the limits of the united states. .

citing this principle , the court later held that a state could not enjoin the corps from constructing a dam and reservoir , even if the water impounded within the reservoir was controlled by the state .

the court rejected the state's argument that the project would interfere "with the state's own program for water development and conservation … [which] must bow before the 'superior power' of congress. .

the court has indicated that the constitutional "authority is as broad as the needs of commerce. .

it has explained that maintaining the navigability of waterways is only one of the various purposes for which the government may claim authority over water .

the court has stated that if a particular project serves a purpose of navigation , "it is constitutionally irrelevant that other purposes may also be advanced. .

it has cited other valid purposes such as flood control , watershed development , and "recovery of the cost of improvements through utilization of power" as examples of the breadth of federal authority over waters .

thus , a state's authority over its waters is "subject to the power of congress to control the waters for the purpose of commerce. .

accordingly , if congress authorizes the corps to impound water at one of its projects for purposes related to commerce , the federal authority over the water supersedes the state's authority for those purposes .

notwithstanding this broad authority , congress historically has deferred to states' authority regarding allocation , as discussed in later sections of this report .

in addition to the corps' general constitutional authority , congress has provided statutory authority for specific actions by the corps related to m&i water supplied at its projects .

under the wsa , the corps may include permanent storage space at its projects for municipal and industrial use , even if such a purpose was not originally authorized .

under the 1944 fca , the corps may contract with other government or private parties for the temporary use of surplus water from its projects .

states in the missouri river basin have objected to the corps' plan to charge a fee for surplus water stored at its reservoirs .

states have argued that maintaining surplus water supply in the federal reservoir and charging citizens for the right to access that water which otherwise would be available through natural flow of the river violates their legal right to state waters .

north dakota , in which lake sakakawea is located , has asserted ownership of the waters flowing within the state boundaries , claiming that charging for access to that water while it is stored in a corps' project violates that legal right .

the u.s. supreme court has long held that a state owns the navigable waters within its borders .

in 1842 , the court explained that when the united states was formed , "the people of each state became themselves sovereign ; and in that character hold the absolute right to all their navigable waters and the soils under them for their own common use , subject only to the rights since surrendered by the constitution to the general government. .

under the constitutional equal footing doctrine , states that later joined the union acquired the same rights granted to the original states , and therefore also acquired ownership of their state's navigable waters upon achieving statehood .

thus , the missouri river basin states may claim the right to waters within their state boundaries since their admission to the union .

it is notable that , although the court recognized state ownership of water within state boundaries , it also indicated that the state's interest in its waters could be limited by superseding rights assigned under the constitution to the federal government .

in other words , the state may not claim absolute ownership to navigable waters if the federal government has constitutional authority to act with respect to those waters .

although the federal government has broad authority to regulate water , it historically has deferred to the states' authority regarding allocation of water resources within each state .

in some cases , it explicitly has recognized the states' power to assign water rights , though it has done so on a limited basis .

at other times , congress has noted the competing roles of federal and state governments with respect to water resources management and included general statements recognizing the interests of a state related to specific legislation .

it is unclear what the corps' obligations are with respect to state water rights for surplus water at lake sakakawea .

on one hand , the corps' constitutional authority to manage its projects for a variety of authorized purposes is broad ; it has been delegated authority from congress to store water for m&i purposes ; and it has been authorized to charge for surplus water stored at the project .

on the other hand , it may also be argued that the corps' constitutional authority over water stored at its projects extends only to the amount of water necessary to meet the purposes of that project and not to any surplus water .

likewise , it may be argued that , although congress provided statutory authorizations to the corps related to storage and sale of water stored in a corps' project , it also indicated a certain degree of deference to state uses of the water , particularly in western states like north dakota , when exercising that authority .

