the relatively rapid expansion of u.s. natural gas resources over the last five years , particularly from shale gas , has been coupled with slower demand growth by natural gas consumers .

the result has been low prices not seen for over a decade and , equally important , prices that are projected to stay low for decades .

u.s. natural gas prices have also been comparatively lower than those observed in international markets .

the projected persistence of rising supply and low prices has raised the question of how the united states will take advantage of its natural gas resources .

because of low prices , there have been requests by some producers to export natural gas in liquefied form ( lng ) , hoping to sell at higher world prices .

some consumer groups argue that exports will raise domestic prices , which will hurt businesses and households .

some businesses believe the low prices can spur a resurgence in u.s. manufacturing , particularly petrochemicals and other industries using large amounts of natural gas .

some environmentalists view natural gas as a key component for decreasing carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions and other greenhouse gases , while other environmentalists believe that it is as polluting as coal , especially when derived from shale formations .

some analysts believe natural gas can enhance u.s. energy security if it can be used in transportation to replace gasoline .

all these questions highlight the tremendous changes that have taken place in the u.s. energy landscape over the last few years and portend future changes .

there have been over 150 bills introduced in the 112 th congress that would affect both supply of natural gas ( h.r .

840 , s. 302 , s. 706 , and s. 1007 , among others ) and demand , with some targeting specific sectors such as lng exports ( h.r .

3913 and h.r .

4024 , among others ) and transportation ( s. 734 and h.r .

970 , among others ) .

legislation has also been introduced that would affect environmental issues associated with natural gas ( h.r .

1084 , h.r .

4322 , and h.r .

6235 , among others ) .

this report examines what has changed in the natural gas industry and focuses on the demand side and ancillary benefits to the u.s. economy .

this report does not address negative consequences to other economic sectors due to a shift to natural gas .

if natural gas were able to replace oil and coal in the fuel mix , it would require almost 77 tcf of natural gas per year ; approximately tripling current u.s. consumption and production ( see figure 10 ) .

at that rate , even the current estimated resource base of 1,809 tcf would be exhausted in about 23 years .

the amount of investment that would be required to undertake this change would be enormous , probably in the trillions of dollars , and new technologies and infrastructure would be needed to make the changes economical and practical , particularly in the transportation sector for natural gas vehicles .

almost 24 tcf of natural gas would be required in the transportation sector alone , which is approximately the amount the united states consumed in total in 2011 .

less than 1% of u.s. natural gas was consumed in the transportation sector in 2011 .

although this scenario is beyond what could be achieved realistically , it highlights the central questions of this report as to how much natural gas the united states can produce and what sectors of the economy can use it .

market forces in conjunction with a dynamic regulatory environment have the potential to raise the role natural gas contributes to the u.s. economy .

optimistic outlooks for rising supply and low prices have sparked interest in expanding the role of natural gas even further .

congress has expressed interest in a variety of the issues of this debate .

members and committees have introduced legislation , held hearings , and offered opinions and inquiries with government agencies .

many producers and consumers of natural gas seem confident that abundant supplies of natural gas will be produced regardless of the risks still outstanding .

some companies on both the supply and demand side of natural gas have made , or have announced plans for large investments to confirm their positions .

other companies are waiting to see how various dimensions of the debate unfold .

a key component of this discussion is how domestic prices will react under different market conditions .

as demand rises so does the pressure on prices to rise , which signals more production is needed , or that consumption should be curtailed .

the beneficial economic effects of expanded natural gas supplies are not pre - ordained .

market and regulatory factors could come into play , having the effect of reducing positive economic benefits for the united states .

the prospect of increasing u.s. lng exports has become encumbered by concerns of higher domestic prices and increased volatility of prices .

as required by the energy policy act of 2005 , the department of energy ( doe ) must issue a permit to export natural gas to countries with which the united states does not have a free trade agreement ( fta ) .

doe must also determine that export to non - fta countries is in the public interest .

as part of that determination doe has undertaken a two - part study to examine the impact of lng exports on domestic prices , which is expected to be completed in early 2013 .

it is not anticipated that any additional permits for export to non - fta countries will be approved before part two is completed , and outside of south korea , the fta countries do not import a significant amount of lng .

exports of energy - related resources have not been a big part of u.s. trade so increasing them would likely improve the overall u.s. trade balance .

nevertheless , the rise in u.s. natural gas production has already benefitted the u.s. trade position by dramatically decreasing imports , the other component of the trade balance .

increasing u.s. lng exports would also expand the role of the united states in international natural gas markets .

asian countries , in particular , and some european countries have called for more u.s. lng exports .

if all the proposed lng exports came to fruition , which is unlikely , the united states could become the world's largest lng exporter .

the united states is already the largest producer and consumer of natural gas and has the most storage capacity of any country in the world .

these factors , coupled with proposed construction of lng export terminals on the east coast , gulf coast , and west coast , could propel the united states into the center of the global natural gas trade , benefiting the u.s. balance of trade .

unlike some other countries , where the government controls natural resources , the private sector controls u.s. natural gas resources and is driven mostly by market forces .

however , becoming a significant global supplier could enhance certain u.s. national security priorities , such as contributing to european natural gas supply diversification from russia and providing a counter to the nascent gas cartel , the gas exporting countries forum , which includes russia and iran .

other effects beyond national security could include market and price reforms , technology transfers , greater transparency , and environmental benefits .

the domestic situation may also have an effect on the rest of the world as major u.s. companies with large international portfolios , in particular , continue to buy into shale gas assets .

these companies are becoming more natural gas oriented .

many have already started looking for opportunities to use the experience they have gained in the united states in other countries .

additionally , many foreign companies have bought into u.s. shale gas areas to gain experience in producing these formations and eventually bring the technology back to their respective countries .

before the expansion of u.s. lng exports occurs , a decision is likely to be made concerning whether energy security means relying primarily on captive domestic , or regional , supplies , or whether it means participating in a well - supplied , open world market .

a large expansion of lng exports means that the domestic demand for natural gas will increase .

if that extra demand is not met with additional supply increases , prices are likely to rise .

if prices rise , the economic advantage of u.s. lng will diminish somewhat .

additionally , the natural gas consuming industries that forecasted low prices and , as a result , increased their capital investment will likely not experience returns that meet expectations .

consumers in all categories will likely face higher costs .

if exports of lng are not permitted , or permitted at a low rate , most of the potential foreign trade benefits outlined in this report may not materialize .

prices could , nevertheless , rise if production is curbed .

with the advent of shale gas development , natural gas has been touted as a bridge fuel to a low carbon , renewable energy - based economy .

natural gas is cleaner burning than its hydrocarbon rivals — emitting less co 2 , particulate matter , sulfur dioxide , and nitrogen oxides , on average , than either coal or oil ( see table 2 ) .

but the use of new technologies and drilling practices , as well as the gas drilling boom they have engendered , has led to other environmental concerns and controversies .

these concerns centered initially on water quality issues , including the substantial use of water during hydraulic fracturing activities as well as the potential contamination of water by hydraulic fracturing chemicals and wastewater disposal .

concerns have since incorporated other issues , such as land use changes , potential for induced seismicity from produced water injection , infrastructure requirements , and emissions of air pollutants from extraction operations and transport .

the spectrum of concerns over hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs has led , in part , to various grassroots movements , some political opposition , and calls for regulatory actions and moratoria at the local , state , and federal levels .

major oil and gas producing states have been reviewing and revising their oil and gas rules in response to technological changes in the industry , and specifically to advances in hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling .

although oil and gas exploration and production is regulated primarily at the state level , several regulatory developments are occurring at the federal level as well .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has pursued initiatives related to hydraulic fracturing under three federal environmental statutes .

in august 2012 , epa promulgated regulations under the authority of the clean air act ( caa ) that establish new air emissions standards for hydraulically fractured gas wells and other oil and gas production activities .

the new rules entered into effect on october 15 , 2012 .

under the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) , epa has issued draft underground injection control ( uic ) program guidance for permitting hydraulic fracturing with diesel fuels .

this guidance is being developed in response to a provision of the energy policy act of 2005 which revised the sdwa definition of underground injection to explicitly exclude the underground injection of fluids ( other than diesel fuels ) used in hydraulic fracturing operations .

final guidance is expected in spring 2013 .

under the clean water act ( cwa ) , epa is developing regulations governing the discharge of wastewater produced in natural gas extraction from shale formations and coal beds .

the regulations will be established under epa's effluent guidelines program , which sets national standards for the discharge of pollutants from industrial activities directly to surface waters and municipal wastewater treatment facilities .

epa plans to propose regulations for the coalbed methane effluents in 2013 , and for the shale gas extraction regarding wastewater pollutants in 2014 .

in may 2012 , the bureau of land management ( blm ) , department of the interior , proposed revisions to its oil and gas development rules in response to the increased use of hydraulic fracturing on federal and indian lands .

the proposal would require public disclosure of chemicals used during hydraulic fracturing , tighten requirements related to well - bore integrity , and add requirements for managing water used and produced in hydraulic fracturing operations .

the public comment period closed september 10 , 2012 , and the blm is now reviewing comments .

a tighter regulatory environment for natural gas exploration and production , if it raises costs significantly , would likely result in slower supply growth , and in the extreme could reduce some of the economic benefits described in this report .

if demand increases as the result of expectations of rising supply and low prices , but then regulation slows supply growth , a price spike is the likely result .

a price spike could reduce market confidence and set back the use of natural gas , especially in the industrial sector .

some companies in the industrial demand sector , as mentioned earlier , have made significant investments predicated on the supply being available and prices remaining low .

however , in the past several years , a number of states have adopted stricter production regulations , yet production has continued to grow in those states ( eg , colorado , north dakota , ohio , pennsylvania , and wyoming ) .

in contrast , new york state essentially has a moratorium on high - volume hydraulic fracturing while regulations are revised .

overall , it is difficult to generalize regarding the potential effect of regulations .

for example , epa projects that the capture of natural gas required under its new air rules could have a net positive benefit for natural gas producers because of the value of the gas that could be saved and sold .

the ability of u.s. industry to be positively affected by the evolving position of the united states with respect to natural gas supply depends not only on the low current price , but the expectation that prices will remain low into the future .

the expectation of low and non - volatile prices for natural gas is not easy to relate to the historical price data shown in figure 3 .

in the recent era of high prices , the assumption of many analysts was that prices were likely to remain high and increasing well into the future .

this pessimistic conclusion was reached by considering the upward trend of consumption coupled with a declining resource base .

earlier , it was believed that natural gas was so abundant it could be treated as essentially a good with little value .

these earlier failed expectations suggest that what appears to be a clear future path for natural gas markets can quickly reverse itself .

considerable uncertainty exists regarding the size of the economically recoverable u.s. shale gas resource base and the cost of producing those resources .

across four shale gas resource scenarios from the annual energy outlook 2012 ( aeo2012 ) , natural gas prices vary by about $4 per million british thermal units ( mmbtu ) in 2035 , demonstrating the significant impact that shale gas resource uncertainty has in determining future natural gas prices .

this uncertainty exists primarily because shale gas wells exhibit a wide variation in their initial production rate , rate of decline , and estimated ultimate recovery per well ( or eur , which is the expected cumulative production over the life of a well ) .

natural gas demand has not exhibited dramatic changes to correspond with its price volatility .

for many of the final consuming sectors , households , commercial uses , and electric power generation the demand has been relatively price inelastic , insensitive to changes in price .

this is because of the nature of natural gas use , primarily heating in households and commercial uses .

only in the industrial demand sector is there significant price elasticity as shown by the reductions in demand and plant closures associated with the last period of high prices .

the inelasticity of natural gas demand also means that relatively small variations in the quantity available can have surprisingly large effects on price .

this is because , with inelastic demand , any shortage or surplus of supply requires a disproportionate variation in price to ration people out of or bring consumers into the market .

price is also important to the potential expansion of the supply of natural gas .

if prices fall , and remain , too low to provide an adequate return for producers , exploration and development will stagnate and future supply projections will prove to be optimistic .

however , if the price of natural gas rises , and returns to producers rise , demand might be discouraged .

the market must price natural gas in such a way that consumers are drawn to use more natural gas and that producers are encouraged to produce more natural gas .

consumers must also be incentivized to undertake the expense of changing fuels .

maintaining the status quo is a powerful force and overcoming it requires motivation beyond short - term gains because of prices .

the market has not generated such razor - edged prices in the past .

not only the price of natural gas will determine the state of the market .

the price of oil and coal are also likely to play an important role .

if the price gap between crude oil narrows , natural gas will become a less attractive source of energy than oil .

the reason is likely to be habit and infrastructure .

consumers are used to using oil - based products and the infrastructure to supply them is well established .

if the incentive of cost savings disappears , it is likely that the mass of consumers will continue using established products .

similarly , the cost of a new supply infrastructure is likely to be avoided if the anticipated demand growth of natural gas becomes more uncertain .

for coal , electric power plants may be idled for some time while fuel prices give natural gas an advantage .

but , if natural gas prices rise because of increased demand , coal may regain market share .

enthusiasm over the state of natural gas markets has led to plans of increased consumption in all demand categories .

however , demand expansion differs among the eia's demand segments .

one characteristic that is common is that expanded demand only occurs after a lag .

low prices increase interest in expanding consumption , but then investments must take place before growth in consumption is realized .

once the investments are in place , which can take years , in many parts of the market it is hard to reverse them and go back to previously used fuels .

expansion of household and commercial demand usually means natural gas for use in space heating .

conversion from other fuels is minimal , because of inadequate supply infrastructure , so the main source of new demand is new construction .

once a heating system in new construction is in place it is unlikely to be replaced by a different fuel .

as a result , demand increases from these sectors are likely to be incremental and long - term .

similarly , while the demand for natural gas in transportation is likely to exhibit sharp percentage increases relative to its small base , its overall effect on demand is likely to be incremental and permanent .

once vehicle conversions or vehicles with dedicated power plants are on the road and the natural gas supply infrastructure is in place , demand growth is likely to continue .

after buying a home , a car is probably the next largest investment for most households and not likely to be changed because of short - term price changes .

electric power generation and industrial use of natural gas are different .

much more rapid demand expansion can occur in these segments .

each consumer uses large quantities of gas and total demand can increase sharply .

if the export of lng expands , it would exhibit similar characteristics .

industrial demand is also likely to be price sensitive .

industrial demand has contracted in periods of high prices .

the combination of trend growth generated by household and commercial demand coupled with periodic large increases in demand associated with investment by power generators and industrial users could , if all planned expansions come to fruition , lead to a demand level which is too large relative to supply growth after the period of low prices .

the result would likely be upward price volatility which could destabilize the market and reduce expected economic benefits .

other legislative or regulatory policies could impact the natural gas market .

for example , if legislation or regulation required tight carbon emission limits for electric power generators and the price of natural gas was low , a large increase in demand might be expected .

increases in demand from any source tend to raise prices .

however , the price increases would tend to lead to increased development of natural gas resources and increased supply .

if offshore drilling opportunities were expanded , as oil and natural gas were discovered , domestic supplies would increase , causing the price of natural gas to fall .

falling prices would benefit consumers in the short - term , but would likely reduce the development of on - shore shale resources in the longer term , depending upon which sources had lower costs .

these two examples show that unintended consequences of policy decisions could affect natural gas markets .

the results could upset the calculation of net economic benefits that the united states might expect to experience from development of the expanded shale gas resource base .

given existing data , most indications point to the changes in the natural gas industry as positive to the overall u.s. economy .

industries that use natural gas as an input have seen prices fall .

producers have expanded the u.s. resource base tremendously , including for oil .

low prices have forced producers to be innovative and drive down production costs .

similarly , environmental concerns are prompting companies to be more proactive in addressing these issues .

also responding to environmental concerns , a number of major natural gas and oil producing states have revised their rules , which has not appeared to have inhibited production in those states .

the next five years will be telling as proposed projects will either come to fruition , be postponed , or be cancelled .

investment decisions are being made given existing realities and future perceptions of the market .

many of the environmental concerns may be addressed by industry , federal , state , and local governments , and the market .

production efficiencies and extraction improvements , particularly in regards to water use , are likely to be made in this time period .

congress may act on a variety of issues that would affect natural gas .

legislation has been introduced that could increase the supply of natural gas by opening up more federal lands and offshore areas to exploration , by providing direct incentives for natural gas production , and by limiting federal regulations on federal lands .

other legislation may inhibit natural gas production by eliminating incentives , increasing regulatory requirements on companies , or limiting access to potential areas of development .

legislation has also been introduced that could increase demand for natural gas by vehicles and in aviation .

although some members have expressed support for lng exports , legislation has been introduced that would delay lng exports , thereby limiting a potential source of demand .

still other legislation has been introduced that would promote natural gas infrastructure in some areas and other legislation has been introduced to limit the environmental effects of natural gas production .

similarly , rules and regulations are being proposed at different federal agencies , for example the departments of energy and interior , and the environmental protection agency , which may require or elicit congressional input .

appendix a .

appendix b .

appendix c .

