the united states maintains approximately 285 diplomatic facilities worldwide .

attacks on such facilities , and on u.s. diplomatic personnel , are not infrequent .

u.s .

ambassador christopher stevens and three other u.s. personnel were killed in benghazi , libya on september 11 , 2012 , after armed individuals attacked and burned buildings on the main mission compound and subsequently attacked a second annex site where u.s. personnel had been evacuated .

five other u.s .

ambassadors have died by violent acts in the line of duty , although none since 1979 .

since 1977 , 66 american diplomatic personnel have been killed by terrorists .

these events , along with recent attacks on u.s. embassies in egypt , sudan , tunisia , yemen , and turkey , have drawn renewed attention to the challenges facing u.s. diplomats abroad , as well as to the difficulty in balancing concerns for their security against the outreach required of their mission .

under reciprocal treaty obligations , host nations are obligated to provide security for the diplomatic facilities of sending states .

however , instances in which host nations have been unable or not fully committed to fulfilling this responsibility have sometimes left u.s. facilities vulnerable , especially in extraordinary circumstances .

u.s. facilities therefore employ a layered approach to security including not only the measures taken by a host country , but also additional , u.s. - coordinated measures , to include armed diplomatic security agents , hardened facilities , u.s. - trained and / or contracted local security guards , and sometimes u.s. marine security guard detachments .

the inability to provide perfect security , especially against the evident threat of mob violence , has led some observers to question the deployment of personnel in high - threat environments .

the department of state's assistant secretary for diplomatic security , testifying in november 2009 , underlined that "the department currently operates diplomatic missions in locations where , in the past , we might have closed the post and evacuated all personnel when faced with similar threats. .

the rapid growth in the number of u.s. civilians deployed in the high - risk environments of iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan spurred significant investment in recent years in the department of state's capacity to provide security in dangerous areas through its bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) .

the challenges of providing security in these war - related areas may have also strained ds's capability to provide security for deployed diplomats in other hardship posts around the world .

observers have suggested that funding for embassy security follows a "boom and bust" cycle , in which major attacks are followed by a sudden influx of resources that may be difficult to expend in a well - planned manner .

an influx of security - related resources in the 1980s , in response to the 1983 / 1984 bombings in beirut , lebanon , was followed by a lull in the 1990s when diplomatic security funding was greatly reduced prior to the 1998 attacks in kenya and tanzania .

the subsequent state department accountability review board suggested that the preceding years of reduced spending for embassy security was a contributing factor to the vulnerability of the targeted embassies .

this report provides background information on the authorities , regulations , and procedures in place at the department of state regarding diplomatic security .

it also describes several areas of potential congressional interest , including the accountability review board process , whose conclusions the secretary of state is required to report to congress , and discussion of embassy security funding trends .

it also examines the september 11 , 2012 , attack in benghazi , libya .

the report may be updated to reflect ongoing developments .

under the 1963 vienna convention on consular relations and the 1961 vienna convention on diplomatic relations , nearly all countries around the world participate in reciprocal obligations regarding the diplomatic facilities of other countries in their territory .

the united states is a state party to these conventions .

section 3 of article 31 of the 1963 vienna convention on consular relations , "inviolability of the consular premises," states that , other than in the case of fire or other disaster requiring prompt protective action , "the receiving state is under a special duty to take all appropriate steps to protect the consular premises against any intrusion or damage and to prevent any disturbance of the peace of the consular post or impairment of its dignity. .

article 40 of the same convention further states that "the receiving state shall treat consular officers with due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to prevent any attack on their person , freedom or dignity. .

an attack on an ambassador is also covered under article 29 of the 1961 convention on diplomatic relations , which states "the person of a diplomatic agent shall be inviolable .

he shall not be liable to any form of arrest or detention .

the receiving state shall treat him with due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to prevent any attack on his person , freedom or dignity. .

the grounds of diplomatic missions are protected under the 1961 vienna convention on diplomatic relations .

article 22 ( section 1-3 ) of the convention states: 1 .

the premises of the mission shall be inviolable .

the agents of the receiving state may not enter them , except with the consent of the head of the mission .

2 .

the receiving state is under a special duty to take all appropriate steps to protect the premises of the mission against any intrusion or damage and to prevent any disturbance of the peace of the mission or impairment of its dignity .

3 .

the premises of the mission , their furnishings and other property thereon and the means of transport of the mission shall be immune from search , requisition , attachment or execution .

the protection of u.s. government employees and facilities under chief of mission ( com ) authority overseas from terrorist , criminal , or technical attack is the responsibility of the secretary of state , as designated under the omnibus diplomatic security and antiterrorism act of 1986 , as amended .

the act specifies that the secretary of state must develop and implement ( in consultation with the heads of other federal agencies having personnel or missions abroad where appropriate and within the scope of the resources made available ) policies and programs , including funding levels and standards , to provide for the security of u.s. government operations of a diplomatic nature and foreign government operations of a diplomatic nature in the united states .

within the department , the secretary has delegated these responsibilities to the assistant secretary for diplomatic security .

the assistant secretary , who heads the bureau for diplomatic security ( ds ) , is responsible for , among other tasks: 1 .

establishing and operating post security and protective functions abroad ; 2 .

emergency planning abroad ; 3 .

establishing and operating local guard services abroad ; 4 .

supervising the u.s. marine corps security guard program ; 5 .

liaising with u.s. private - sector security interests abroad ; 6 .

developing and coordinating counterterrorism planning , emergency action planning abroad , threat analysis programs , and liaison with other federal agencies to carry out these functions ; 7 .

developing and implementing technical and physical security programs , including security - related construction , radio , and personnel security communications , armored vehicles , computer and communications security , and research programs necessary to develop such measures .

the mission of developing and implementing security policies and programs that provide for the protection of all u.s. government personnel ( including accompanying dependents ) on official duty abroad is executed through the ds , also established by the omnibus diplomatic security and antiterrorism act of 1986 , as amended .

the ds provides protection to personnel , information , and facilities at over 273 embassies and consulates , and over 100 domestic department of state locations .

according to its website , "every diplomatic mission in the world operates under a security program designed and maintained by diplomatic security. .

the bureau is staffed by more than 34,000 employees worldwide — with roughly 90% of them contractors .

out of a total force of special agents of approximately 2,000 , ds has nearly 800 special agents posted in regional security offices at over 250 posts worldwide .

its reach to diplomatic missions in 157 countries makes it the most widely represented american security and law enforcement organization around the world , according to its website .

the bureau of diplomatic security's workforce , excluding contractors , more than doubled between september 2000 and august 2012 , as shown in figure 1 .

when serving abroad , ds special agents are referred to as regional security officers ( rsos ) .

rsos' responsibilities include not only managing security programs and formulating emergency contingency plans , but also providing the first line of defense for u.s. personnel and dependents , as well as facilities and sensitive information .

rsos are the primary advisor to the chief of mission ( usually the ambassador ) on all security matters .

in performing their functions , rsos work closely with other groups including marine security guards , surveillance detection teams , local guards , cleared american guards , local investigators , and host government officials .

ds also provides mobile security teams , dispatched from washington , dc , to high - threat posts to conduct training for embassy personnel , their dependents , and local guards in protective tactics , as well as providing emergency security support , including protective security for coms , surveillance detection operations , and assistance with post evacuations .

ds also provides specially trained agents to lead contractor - provided personal protection teams and guard services in areas of ongoing conflict , where the host nation is unable or unwilling to provide the required level of security .

in extreme situations , u.s. military assistance can be provided to the rsos in the form of combat - equipped fleet anti - terrorism security teams ( fast ) provided by regional commanders .

while security arrangements for specific locations or individuals are not made public by the department of state , diplomatic facilities typically rely on a combination of an outer layer of host nation - provided and / or contract guard forces , physical perimeter security , and state department agents or contractors .

these arrangements are overseen by the department's bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) and the deployed regional security officer ( rso ) .

reporting to the director of diplomatic security , the u.s. marine security guard posted detachments to 152 u.s. diplomatic facilities around the world as of september 2012 ; 35 new marine guard detachments were requested by the department after the benghazi attacks .

still , marine corps guards are thus present at many , but not all u.s. diplomatic facilities .

until recently , the primary mission of these specially trained marines was primarily to prevent the compromise of classified u.s. government information and equipment .

a secondary role was the protection of u.s. citizens at those facilities during crises .

however , after the benghazi attack , the memorandum of agreement between the department of state and the marine corps was renegotiated , and the new mandate emphasizes protection of personnel as a primary mission of the marine corps security guards .

the detachments , when deployed , are under civilian authority at all times , under a chain of command which includes the rso and ultimately the chief of mission .

some observers have suggested that while any number of physical threats are taken into consideration by state department planners , the threat of mob violence over a sustained time period is one that no facility , no matter how well fortified , can defeat in the absence of protection from the host nation's security forces .

when faced with a deteriorating security environment or in the aftermath of a major security incident , a number of measures are at the disposal of department of state officials to protect u.s. personnel and u.s. citizens more broadly .

these range from travel warnings , to the temporary evacuation of americans ( diplomatic personnel , their dependents , and u.s. citizens as a whole ) , to closure of a post .

the appropriation of funds for embassy security is one area in which congress is particularly active .

title i , section 2 ( k ) of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 states that the secretary of state "may use funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the secretary to provide maximum physical security in government - owned and leased properties and vehicles abroad. .

the original authorization to use appropriated funds designated for embassy security in the department of state's embassy security construction and maintenance ( escm ) account is derived from the secure embassy construction and counterterrorism act of 1999 .

the foreign relations authorization act of 2003 increased the authorization levels of the original legislation .

because congress has not passed subsequent foreign relations authorization legislation , the authorization of appropriations for embassy security purposes is derived from appropriating funds for "worldwide security upgrades" in the department of state , foreign operations appropriations legislation and in provisions in the same annual appropriation stating that "funds appropriated by this act ... may be obligated and expended notwithstanding" provisions in the department of state basic authorities act of 1956 requiring an authorization of funding before appropriations can be obligated or expended .

within the department of state budget , virtually all of the embassy and diplomatic security funding is within five subaccounts: worldwide security protection ( wsp ) , within the diplomatic and consular programs ( d&cp ) account ; worldwide security upgrades within the embassy security , construction , and maintenance ( escm ) account ; diplomatic security ( ds ) ; counterterrorism within the diplomatic and consular programs account ( d&cp ) ; and diplomatic security within the border security program ( bsp ) .

wsp , the largest component of security - related funding within the department of state , provides for a safe and secure environment overseas for personnel promoting the interests of the united states .

it provides for the security of life , property , and information .

wsp supports numerous security programs including a worldwide guard force protecting overseas diplomatic missions and residences , as well as domestic facilities .

as part of what the department calls a security realignment initiative , many ds - related salaries and related costs from ds and other bureaus have been requested under wsp ( rather than d&cp ) for the first time in fy2015 .

the worldwide security upgrades ( wsu ) subaccount within escm provides funding for bricks and mortar - type of security needs .

it funds the department of state's portion of the capital security cost sharing that combines with funds from other agencies represented overseas for planning , design , and construction of secure new embassy compounds .

it also funds ongoing security activities and security - related maintenance .

the bureau of diplomatic security , funded under d&cp , is the law enforcement and security arm of the department of state .

ds protects people , property , and information .

it conducts international investigations , provides threat analysis , and focuses on cybersecurity , counterterrorism , personnel security , and security technology .

the bureau of counterterrorism ( ct ) , funded within d&cp , leads the u.s. government in counterterrorism diplomacy and provides an on - call capability to respond to terrorist incidents worldwide .

the diplomatic security subaccount within the border security program ( bsp ) guards domestic consular affairs facilities .

it also coordinates and investigates security issues related to u.s. visas and passports .

table 1 below provides base funding ( also referred to as regular or enduring appropriations ) that is available to all overseas facilities , and total security funding requested and enacted for the five security - related accounts from fy2008 to the fy2015 funding request .

total security includes the base funding plus supplemental and / or overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funding for embassy security that is available primarily for iraq and other frontline states .

supplemental funds were requested and enacted for fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2010 .

oco funds were requested and enacted for fy2012 , fy2013 , fy2014 , and requested for fy2015 .

supplemental and oco security money has been temporary funding largely for war - related security measures in iraq .

the base total is for diplomatic security activities in the rest of the u.s. facilities around the world , but may also include some ongoing security funding for iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan .

following are some observations derived from the data shown in that table: the fy2013 request represents the largest request for total security funding at $4.96 billion .

more than half was designated as oco funding .

that year , congress appropriated $4.76 billion for total embassy security , more than half as oco funds .

at $3.71 billion , fy2014 was the peak year for state department base security requests .

the highest level of base embassy security funding passed by congress ( $3.78 billion ) also was in fy2014 .

for total security funding , congress provided less than was requested every year except fy2009 .

for base funding , congress only provided more in fy2014 .

total security funding as a percentage of administration of foreign affairs expenditures was highest ( 40% ) in fy2014 and also was the highest ( 32% ) as a percentage of total state department funding that same year .

the benghazi accountability review board report , released on december 19 , 2012 , said , "the solution requires a more serious and sustained commitment from congress to support state department needs , which , in total , constitute a small percentage both of the full national budget and that spent for national security .

one overall conclusion in this report is that congress must do its part to meet this challenge and provide necessary resources to the state department to address security risks and meet mission imperatives. .

the arb also recommended that the department of state work with congress to restore the capital security cost sharing program to its full capacity , adjusted for inflation , of $2.2 billion in 2015 , for up to a 10-year period .

additionally , the arb recommended that state work with congress to make oco funds available for security at high risk / high threat posts , and seek greater flexibility for obo to use its funds for security threats at temporary facilities in high threat environments .

as congress examines funding levels for the purpose of properly securing american personnel , embassies , and information around the world , it continues to do so in a climate of shrinking budgets ; proposed funding increases might be met with calls for offsetting cuts elsewhere or co - locating overseas facilities .

a recent example of cost - saving considerations was the department of state's plans to co - locate the u.s. embassy to the holy see within the u.s. embassy to italy compound in rome .

this plan was decided in keeping with the general arb recommendations about co - locating multiple u.s. missions in the same city , as well as a specific 2008 inspector general report that cited security concerns and leasing costs .

on its completion in 2015 , the move is expected to improve security and save an estimated $1.4 million a year , according to the department of state .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , allowed funds to be used for this purpose , under the condition that the secretary of state reports to congress in writing that it will remain independent from other u.s. missions in rome and that the relocation will not increase annual operating costs , will not reduce staff , and will enhance overall security of the u.s. embassy to the holy see .

of continuing concern is the possible effect , barring the enactment of a new budget deal , that the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) could have on diplomatic security funding in fy2014 and beyond .

fy2013 across - the - board spending reductions were implemented at an estimated 5% reduction with an additional 0.032% rescission , according to section 3004 , division g , p.l .

113-6 .

meeting bca spending caps set through fy2021 by reducing embassy security funds could undermine future security funding needs .

adding to the difficulty of meeting future security needs around the world is the unpredictability in the timing of funding bills being passed by congress .

fiscal years may not be in sync with new increasing needs or with contracts .

when congress passes funding bills well into the new fiscal year , or passes continuing resolutions in place of spending bills for the remainder of the fiscal year , the agency is left to guess what annual funding it can expect and has fewer months to spend the funds once received .

a broader aspect of the funding debate is whether the united states can afford to maintain facilities and adequate security everywhere , especially in nascent democracies that are often unstable and unpredictable .

if embassy security is the responsibility of the local government , but that government does not have the capability required to keep american personnel safe , the u.s. government must weigh the security risks and costs of keeping a u.s. presence in such environments .

