when congress enacts a statute , it often delegates rulemaking authority to federal agencies to implement the statute .

when issuing regulations , agencies are required to follow certain procedures .

the first and arguably most significant requirements of the rulemaking process were established by the administrative procedure act ( apa ) of 1946 .

the apa set up the basic framework for rulemaking: agencies are required to publish a notice of rulemaking in the federal registe r , take comments on the proposed rule , and publish a final rule in the federal register .

since the passage of the apa , additional procedures have been established in various statutes , executive orders , and guidance documents .

potential additional changes to the rulemaking process have been discussed and proposed , including many proposals in the 112 th congress .

this report discusses one potential change to the rulemaking process that has been discussed over the past three decades and proposed in legislation in the 112 th congress: extension of the requirements of executive order ( e.o. ) .

12866 to the independent regulatory agencies , also known as independent regulatory commissions ( hereafter referred to as ircs ) .

e.o .

12866 contains two major requirements: first , it requires that agencies complete cost - benefit analysis ( cba ) of "economically significant" rules , considering the potential costs , benefits , and feasible alternatives to proposed and final rules .

second , the order requires centralized review of "significant" rules in the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) .

historically , the ircs have been exempted from requirements for cba and centralized review .

senator rob portman introduced a bill in the 112 th congress , s. 3468 , which would authorize the president to extend to the ircs , through the issuance of an executive order , e.o .

12866's requirements for cba and oira review .

if the requirements of e.o .

12866 were extended to the ircs , there could be significant implications for those agencies .

proponents of extending the requirements argue that subjecting the ircs to cba requirements and oira review could improve the quality of regulations issued by those agencies .

on the other hand , extending cba requirements and oira review to the ircs could grant oira ( and by extension , the president ) the potential authority to influence or delay rulemaking proceedings , and such a requirement could potentially decrease the independence of the ircs .

this report begins with a brief overview of e.o .

12866 and the ircs .

the report then provides a detailed discussion of the two major requirements of the order and analyzes the potential changes to the order that have been proposed in the 112 th congress .

president william clinton issued e.o .

12866 in 1993 .

the executive order , which still remains in place today , replaced e.o .

12291 , which was issued by president ronald reagan in 1981 .

e.o .

12291 had similar requirements for agencies to conduct cba and send their rules to oira for review , but its requirement for centralized review applied to all rules , not just "significant" rules .

the parts of e.o .

12866 that require agencies to complete cba and to submit their rules to oira for review do not currently apply to statutorily designated "independent regulatory agencies," nor did they under president reagan's order .

the details of these two requirements are discussed more below ( see sections entitled " cost - benefit analysis requirements under executive order 12866 " and " oira review of regulations under executive order 12866 " ) .

the exemption of ircs from various requirements provides them with an element of independence from presidential control .

e.o .

12866 uses the definition of an independent regulatory agency established in 1980 by the paperwork reduction act ( pra ; 44 u.s.c .

§3502 ( 5 ) ) .

the independent regulatory agencies listed are as follows: the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the commodity futures trading commission , the consumer product safety commission , the federal communications commission , the federal deposit insurance corporation , the federal energy regulatory commission , the federal housing finance agency , the federal maritime commission , the federal trade commission , the interstate commerce commission , the mine enforcement safety and health review commission , the national labor relations board , the nuclear regulatory commission , the occupational safety and health review commission , the postal regulatory commission , the securities and exchange commission , the bureau of consumer financial protection , the office of financial research , office of the comptroller of the currency , and any other similar agency designated by statute as a federal independent regulatory agency or commission .

the current exemption for the ircs from presidential review of agency rulemaking is one of the indicia of agency independence .

other elements of independence that provide various degrees of insulation from presidential intrusion into the budgetary , regulatory , and litigation processes are ( 1 ) "for cause" removal protections for the agency heads ; ( 2 ) structural designs ; ( 3 ) exemptions from omb clearance requirements for legislative proposals , testimony , and comments ; ( 4 ) authority to bypass omb when submitting the agency's budget , or to submit the agency's budget to omb and congress concurrently ; and ( 5 ) independent litigation authority .

the remainder of this report discusses the two main requirements of e.o .

12866 in greater detail and analyzes the possible implications of extending those requirements to the ircs .

the primary cross - cutting requirement for agencies to consider costs and benefits when issuing rules is found in e.o .

12866 , which requires agencies to assess costs and benefits for "significant" rules , both at the proposed rule and final rule stage .

"significant" rules are defined in the executive order as follows: any regulatory action that is likely to result in a rule that may ( 1 ) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy , a sector of the economy , productivity , competition , jobs , the environment , public health or safety , or state , local , or tribal governments or communities ; ( 2 ) create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency ; ( 3 ) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements , grants , user fees , or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof ; or ( 4 ) raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates , the president's priorities , or the principles set forth in the executive order .

rules falling into the first category of this definition are considered "economically significant" rules .

when issuing "economically significant" rules , section 6 ( a ) of e.o .

12866 requires agencies to perform a much more detailed cba , assessing the costs , benefits , and "reasonably feasible alternatives" to the planned rule .

other provisions of e.o .

12866 also make reference to the consideration of costs and benefits during the rulemaking process for all rules , not just "significant" rules .

section 1 ( b ) ( 5 ) requires an agency to "design its regulations in the most cost - effective manner to achieve the regulatory objective" and to "consider incentives for innovation , consistency , predictability , the costs of enforcement and compliance ( to the government , regulated entities , and the public ) , flexibility , distributive impacts , and equity. .

section 1 ( b ) ( 6 ) requires agencies to "assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and , recognizing that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify , propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended regulation justify its costs. .

finally , section 1 ( b ) ( 11 ) requires agencies to "tailor [their] regulations to impose the least burden on society," while "obtaining the regulatory objectives , taking into account , among other things , and to the extent practicable , the costs of cumulative regulations. .

the ircs are exempt from many of the analytical requirements and guidance documents that are applicable to executive agencies , including e.o .

12866 , e.o .

13563 , and omb circular a - 4 .

however , the ircs may be required to conduct cba or other regulatory analyses under cross - cutting statutes , such as the regulatory flexibility act of 1980 ( rfa ) , or under the underlying statutes that provide them with rulemaking authority .

in addition , the ircs may conduct cba or similar analyses as part of their internal rulemaking process , even if they are not statutorily or otherwise required to do so .

the following section summarizes select statutory provisions that require the ircs to analyze the potential effects of their rules .

this section covers nine ircs: the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , the national labor relations board ( nlrb ) , and the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) .

the main argument in favor of extending e.o .

12866's cba requirements to the ircs is generally that such review would encourage agencies to produce higher - quality rules .

proponents have argued that through the executive orders establishing such review , presidents have encouraged the executive branch agencies to consider more carefully the burdens associated with regulations ; extending the requirements to the ircs may bring those considerations to those agencies as well .

a previously mentioned proposal in the 112 th congress , s. 3468 , would authorize the president to extend cba requirements through the issuance of an executive order .

some advocates for extending the executive order's cba requirements maintain that it may lead the agencies to produce higher quality rules .

for example , former oira administrator sally katzen has suggested that extending the requirements for cbas to the ircs and having oira review of those cbas would provide incentives to agencies to produce high - quality analyses , since "nothing focuses the mind like knowing that someone will be reading" their analyses .

susan dudley , another former oira administrator , expressed disappointment in congressional testimony that president obama has not extended the requirement for analytical requirements or oira review to the ircs .

among the reasons she identified for this concern was that most financial regulations , including regulations issued by the new consumer financial protection bureau , will not be "constrained by the sound principles and procedures outlined by the president. .

indeed , many of the regulations that have been and will be issued pursuant to the dodd - frank act will be issued by ircs .

it is not entirely clear how and whether extending e.o .

12866's cba requirements to the ircs would change their current practices , given that many of the ircs already have statutory requirements for various forms of cba , even if they are not subject to e.o .

12866 .

to the extent that the agencies are already fulfilling statutory requirements for cba , extending the e.o .

's requirements may create duplicative requirements for some of those agencies .

the following section of this report examines more closely the potential effects of extending cba requirements to the ircs .

the second major requirement of e.o .

12866 , in addition to the requirement for agencies to conduct cbas for "economically significant" rules , is centralized oira review of regulations .

under the order , agencies are required to submit proposed and final "significant" regulations to oira , at which time oira has up to 90 days to complete its review .

during the review process , oira examines each regulation to ensure that the agency followed the principles and procedures outlined in e.o .

12866 , including the applicable requirements for conducting cba , and that the regulation is consistent with the policy preferences of the president .

as former oira administrator nominee james blumstein discussed in an article on centralized regulatory review , e.o .

12866 made very clear that one of its main objectives was to make agency regulations consistent with presidential policy .

according to blumstein , this was illustrated by the frequent usage of the phrase "the president's priorities," which appears ten times in the order .

e.o .

12866's requirements for oira review of "significant" regulations supplanted and somewhat scaled back the requirements of president reagan's e.o .

12291 , which required that agencies submit all proposed and final rules to oira for review .

since president reagan issued e.o .

12291 , scholars of the administrative process have expressed both support for and concern over oira's role , and by extension , the role of the president , in the rulemaking process .

some of this discussion , especially in recent years , has focused on the issue of whether rules by the ircs should be subjected to oira review .

s. 3468 would authorize the president to extend the requirements for oira review to the ircs .

many administrative law scholars and other observers of the rulemaking process have expressed support for oira review , and some have spoken directly in support of extending the requirement for review to the ircs .

much of this support for oira review relies on the underlying premise that increased presidential control , through oira review , of rulemaking could improve the both rulemaking process within agencies and the quality of the regulations themselves .

sally katzen has suggested that centralized review of regulations "facilitat[es] political accountability ( the president takes the credit and gets the blame for what his agencies decide ) " and can "enhance regulatory efficacy ( that is , decisions that take into account the multitude of disciplines and the multitude of perspectives that can and should be brought to bear in solving problems in our complex and interdependent society ) . .

others have suggested that the white house is in a unique position to identify rules under development that may conflict with a rule or rules under development in another agency ; centralized oversight may provide a mechanism for coordination between and among agencies .

some organizations have also expressed support for the extension of oira review to the ircs .

the administrative conference of the united states ( acus ) has supported presidential review of irc rulemaking .

in 1988 , acus expressed its opinion that presidential review should apply generally to federal rulemaking: "as a matter of principle , presidential review of rulemaking should apply to independent regulatory agencies to the same extent it applies to the rulemaking of executive branch departments and other agencies. .

the american bar association ( aba ) has also endorsed extending presidential review to the ircs .

in 1990 , the aba house of delegates adopted a recommendation endorsing acus's guidelines president reagan's executive orders establishing presidential review of agency rulemaking .

the resolution declared that "presidential review should apply generally to all informal federal rulemaking , including that by independent regulatory agencies. .

in 2009 , the section of administrative law and regulatory practice of the aba provided comments to oira regarding presidential supervision of agency rulemaking and declared that the "white house should extend executive oversight to independent agencies. .

in october 2011 , the aba also submitted comments on h.r .

3010 , the regulatory accountability act of 2011 ( raa ) .

various provisions of the raa would have extended oira oversight to irc rulemaking .

the aba declared that it "strongly support[s] this feature of the bill" and noted that it has "long favored extension of the oversight orders to independent agency rulemaking. .

while many administrative law scholars and other students of the regulatory process support the extension of some oira review of regulations to the ircs , other individuals and organizations have expressed hesitation or opposition .

many of the criticisms echo those that arose immediately following the establishment of centralized oira review under president reagan in 1981 .

the main concerns of critics of reagan's initial decision to establish centralized oira review of regulations were two - fold .

first , some critics felt that oira review was a mechanism through which president reagan would institute a deregulatory agenda .

however , that concern has largely receded , in part because every president since reagan has continued the practice of oira review .

second , critics charged that reagan was asserting too much power , potentially violating the u.s. constitution's separation of powers doctrine by asserting too much control over executive agencies' regulations .

that objection has also largely receded since the 1980s .

however , a similar concern has recently been raised over the possible extension of e.o .

12866's requirements to the ircs , which have been considered at times to be quasi - legislative in function .

because the ircs generally possess elements of independence such as "for cause" removal protection for their commission members and agency heads , it has been widely interpreted that congress intended to insulate the agencies from presidential control .

perhaps the most primary current concern about the possible extension of presidential review to the ircs is that such a practice could compromise the independence of those agencies , and that it may give the president an inappropriate amount of power or influence over the rulemaking decisions of the ircs .

because oira is part of omb and is , by extension , an agent of the president , the concern is that subjecting regulations to oira review may politicize the rulemaking process .

as explained by katzen and others , "past presidents have been reluctant to extend oira's role to the ircs out of deference to congress. .

sunstein has also written in strong support of presidential review of regulations .

in one article , for example , sunstein and administrative law scholar peter strauss argued that "time has not undermined the aba's conclusion in roads to reform that greater presidential control over the regulatory process is desirable" and that there was a "growing professional consensus" on the matter .

strauss and sunstein identified three factors in support of oira review: first , the president is in a good position to centralize and coordinate the regulatory process… .

second , the president is electorally accountable… .

third , the president , by virtue of his accountability and capacity for centralization , is able to energize and direct regulatory policy in a way that would be impossible if that policy were to be set exclusively by administrative officials .

based upon those three premises , strauss and sunstein argued that oira review should be expanded to the ircs: from the standpoint of sound regulatory policy , fashioned in a process of informal rulemaking , we believe that there is no meaningful difference between the "independent" agencies and those agencies to which the executive orders are currently applicable .

the two categories of agencies engage in regulatory activities that are , from a functional standpoint , indistinguishable .

indeed , often those activities concern the same or similar subject areas ; consider the overlapping work of the department of justice and the federal trade commission in the area of antitrust .

the same considerations that justify a coordinating presidential role with respect to "executive" agencies apply with full force to those characterized as "independent. .

for these reasons , we believe that executive orders 12291 and 12498 should be applied to the latter set of agencies .

were centralized oira review of regulations instituted , the question arises as to what the consequences of that review should be .

many scholars have offered suggestions as to how to extend the requirements and protect the independence of the agencies by limiting the ability of oira to stop an irc from issuing a rule .

for example , katzen has said that presidential review should be extended to the ircs , but it should be done cautiously: while the way the executive branch agencies and ircs conduct rulemaking is for all practical purposes the same , the differences between the two types of agencies in terms of their structure and their relationship to the president suggests that the review process of the "enforcement" of any requirement for economic analysis should not — possibly , cannot — be the same without compromising the independence of the ircs when they do not acquiesce in oira's assessment .

in a 2002 article , two administrative law scholars suggested that while subjecting ircs to oira review would be a beneficial change to the nation's regulatory system , none of this suggests that the president , or oira , should be permitted to displace the decisions of the independent regulatory agencies .

but it does suggest that a supervisory rule , leaving the ultimate decision to those agencies , would be entirely acceptable .

to those who are skeptical of this conclusion , it might make sense to create a special , weaker system of oversight for the independent agencies , limited to procedural matters ( and hence allowing no room for return letters ) .

but we think that it would be desirable to keep a single system in place for all agencies , retaining the idea that if an independent agency ultimately seeks to issue a regulation notwithstanding oira objection , it is entitled to do so .

the establishment of limited oira oversight of agency cbas , through means such as allowing non - binding feedback from oira that can only be advisory , may assuage some concerns , particularly if the authority is clearly delineated .

this appears to be the approach taken by sponsors of s. 3468 .

if enacted , the bill would authorize the president to issue an executive order requiring ircs to submit their rules to oira review .

oira would have the opportunity to provide a non - binding statement assessing the agency's compliance with the relevant cba requirements .

the statement would be placed into the administrative record for the rule and could be reviewed by a court if the rule , once promulgated , were ever to be challenged .

oira would not have the authority to stop an irc from issuing a rule with which the president does not agree .

furthermore , the bill explicitly states that compliance or noncompliance with the executive order's requirements for cba or oira review would not be subject to judicial review .

another question that arises is whether it is appropriate for the president to assert a requirement for oira review , as the past several presidents have clearly been hesitant to do , or whether it would be more appropriate for congress to institute centralized review .

katzen has suggested that while presidents have been reluctant to extend oira's influence over the ircs out of deference to congress and over concerns about the independence of those agencies , congressional authorization of such an extension would "go a long way to ameliorate any concerns in that regard. .

through enacting a statutory requirement or authorization for oira review of rules and / or cbas , congress would be giving its explicit approval .

in a similar argument about the desirability for congressional authorization of the president to make such a change , one administrative law scholar said in testimony before congress that presidents have not brought the commissions fully into the tent of their executive orders , on my understanding , only because they fear that the political costs to their relationship with congress would exceed the benefits of their doing so .

in the paperwork reduction act , congress can be thought to have drawn that line .

you can , and perhaps should , erase it .

while the main criticism of the potential of subjecting ircs to oira review is that the independence of the agencies could be compromised , other criticisms have been raised as well .

a separate issue that has at times frustrated critics of oira review is that the oira review process may actually favor the interests of industry .

immediately after the issuance of e.o .

12291 , critics expressed apprehension that oira review would serve as a "conduit" for private industry's interests .

some studies and media reports have suggested that industry plays a significant role in the outcome of regulations .

the extension of that argument would suggest that oira could potentially serve as another access point for industry to influence rulemaking at the ircs .

a final concern that has been raised over the idea of subjecting irc rules to oira review is that oira may lack the technical expertise that is often considered to be a strength of regulatory agencies , and that increasing the number of regulations to come under oira's purview could put a strain on its resources .

regulatory agencies have individuals who become subject matter experts in very narrow areas in which they regulate .

given the size and scope of oira's responsibilities , officials at oira tend to be issue generalists , not necessarily specialists .

on the other hand , oira may not have substantive expertise in a particular regulatory field , but its general understanding and focus on regulations makes employees at oira properly suited to distinguish between regulations that "may lead to unintended and undesirable consequences. .

while s. 3468 would authorize the president to make the two changes discussed and analyzed above , there are additional points worth emphasizing .

the scope of the rules that could be covered by an executive order issued pursuant to s. 3468 is slightly different that the scope of what e.o .

12866 currently covers .

the bill has a narrower definition for "significant" rules .

the definition of "significant" in s. 3468 omits two categories that are included in the definition of "significant" in e.o .

12866 .

those categories are rules that "materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements , grants , user fees , or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof ; " or rules that "raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates , the president's priorities , or the principles set forth in the executive order. .

in other words , rules that fall into those categories that are issued by ircs would not be authorized by s. 3468 to be subject to oira review .

however , the definition of "rule" in s. 3468 is broader than the definition of "rule" in e.o .

12866 , and could possibly include some guidance documents .

s. 3468 references the definition of a rule as defined in section 551 of title 5 ( the administrative procedure act ) , rather than the definition used in 553 , which is the section that defines "rule" for the purposes of notice and comment requirements .

furthermore , as mentioned above , the bill clearly states that the compliance or noncompliance of an irc with the requirements of an executive order issued pursuant to the bill could not be subject to judicial review .

the potential consequences of what could occur if an irc and oira disagree on the analysis or substance of a particular rule also are unclear .

