this report provides an overview of the federal response to domestic violence — defined broadly to include acts of physical and nonphysical violence against spouses and other intimate partners — through the family violence prevention and services act ( fvpsa ) .

fvpsa programs are carried out by the u.s. department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) administration for children and families ( acf ) and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

acf administers most fvpsa programming , including grants to states , territories , and indian tribes to support local organizations that provide immediate shelter and related assistance for victims of domestic violence and their children .

acf also provides funding for a national domestic violence hotline that responds to calls , texts , and web - based chats from individuals seeking assistance .

the funding for acf also supports state domestic violence coalitions that provide training for and advocacy on behalf of domestic violence providers within each state , as well as multiple resource centers that provide training and technical assistance on various domestic violence issues for a variety of stakeholders .

the cdc funds efforts to prevent domestic violence through a program known as domestic violence prevention enhancement and leadership through allies ( delta ) .

the house committee on education and labor and the senate health , education , labor and pension ( help ) committee have exercised jurisdiction over fvpsa .

the report begins with background on the definitions of domestic violence and related terms .

this background section also describes the risk factors for domestic violence and estimates of the number of victims .

the next section of the report addresses the history leading up to the enactment of fvpsa , and the major components of the act: a national domestic violence hotline , support for domestic violence shelters and nonresidential services , and community - based responses to prevent domestic violence .

the report then discusses efforts under fvpsa to assist children and youth exposed to domestic violence , including teen dating violence .

finally , the report provides an overview of fvpsa's interaction with other federal laws , including the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) and the violence against women act of 1994 ( vawa , p.l .

103-322 ) .

fvpsa was the first federal law to address domestic violence , with a focus on providing shelter and services for survivors ; however , since the enactment of vawa in 1994 , the federal response to domestic violence has expanded to involve multiple departments and activities that include investigating and prosecuting crimes and providing additional services to victims and abusers .

fvpsa also includes provisions that encourage or require program administrators to coordinate fvpsa programs with related programs and research carried out by other federal agencies .

the appendices provide further detail about fvpsa - related definitions and funding , and statistics related to domestic violence victimization .

early marriage laws in the united states permitted men to hit their wives , and throughout much of the 20 th century family violence remained a hidden problem .

victims , mostly women , often endured physical and emotional abuse in silence .

these victims were hesitant to seek help because of fear of retaliation by their spouses / partners and concerns about leaving their homes , children , and neighborhoods behind .

women were worried that they would be perceived as deviant or mentally unstable or would be unable to get by financially .

in addition , victims were often blamed for their abuse , based on stereotypical notions of women ( eg , demanding , aggressive , and frigid , among other characteristics ) .

in the 1960s , shelters and services for victims of domestic violence became available on a limited basis ; however , these services were not always targeted specifically to victims per se .

social service and religious organizations provided temporary housing for displaced persons generally , which could include homeless and abused women .

in addition , a small number of organizations provided services to abused women who were married to alcoholic men .

beginning in the 1970s , the "battered women's movement" began to emerge ; it sought to heighten awareness of women who were abused by spouses and partners .

the movement developed from influences both abroad and within the united states .

in england , the first battered women's shelter , chiswick women's aid , galvanized support to establish similar types of services .

in addition , the feminist movement in the united states increasingly brought greater national attention to the issue .

as part of the battered women's movement , former battered women , civic organizations , and professionals opened shelters and began to provide services to victims , primarily abused women and their children .

shelters were most often located in old homes , at young women's christian association ( ywca ) centers , or housed in institutional settings , such as motels or abandoned orphanages .

in addition to providing shelter , groups in the battered women's movement organized coalitions to combine resources for public education on the issue , support groups for victims , and services that were lacking .

for example , the ywca and women in crisis can act formed a hotline for abused women in chicago .

these and other groups convened the chicago abused women's coalition to address concerns about services for battered women .

the coalition spoke to hundreds of community groups and professional agencies about battered women's stories , explained the significance of violence , detailed how violence becomes sanctioned , dispelled common myths , and challenged community members to provide funding and other support to assist abused women .

the coalition mobilized around passage of a state law to protect women and require police training on domestic violence , among other accomplishments .

based on a survey in the late 1970s , 111 shelters were believed to be operating across all states and in urban , suburban , and rural communities .

these shelters generally reported that they provided a safe and secure environment for abused women and their children , emotional support and counseling for abused women , and information on legal rights and assistance with housing , among other supports .

approximately 90 of these shelters fielded over 110,000 calls for assistance in a given year .

around this same time , the public became increasingly aware of domestic violence .

in 1983 , time magazine published an article , "wife beating: the silent crime," as part of a series of articles on violence in the united states .

the article stated: "there is nothing new about wife beating… .

what is new is that in the u.s. wife beating is no longer widely accepted as an inevitable and private matter .

the change in attitude , while far from complete , has come about in the past 10 to 15 years as part of the profound transformation of ideas about the roles and rights of women in society. .

in 1984 , then - u.s. attorney general benjamin civiletti established the department of justice task force on family violence , which issued a report examining the scope and impact of domestic violence in america .

the report also provided recommendations to improve the nation's law enforcement , criminal justice , and community response to offenses that were previously considered "family matters. .

as originally enacted , fvpsa included both a social service and law enforcement response to preventing and responding to domestic violence .

grants were authorized for states , territories , and indian tribes to establish and expand programs to prevent domestic violence and provide shelter for victims .

in addition , the law authorized grants to provide training and technical assistance to law enforcement personnel , and this funding was ultimately used to train law enforcement personnel throughout the country .

from fy1986 through fy1994 , funding for these grants was transferred from hhs to doj , which carried out the grants under the office for victims of crime ( ovc ) .

doj funded 23 projects to train law enforcement officers on domestic violence policies and response procedures , with approximately 16,000 law enforcement officers and other justice system personnel from 25 states receiving this training .

the training emphasized officers as participants working with other agencies , victims , and community groups in a coordinated response to domestic violence .

over time , fvpsa was expanded to include support of other activities , including state domestic violence coalitions and grants that focus on prevention activities ; however , authorization of funding for fvpsa law enforcement training grants was discontinued in 1992 , just before the violence against women act of 1994 authorized a similar purpose .

specifically , vawa authorizes training and support of law enforcement officials under the services , training , officers , and prosecutors ( stop ) grant program .

as outlined in figure 1 , fvpsa currently authorizes three major activities: domestic violence prevention activities under a program known as delta ; the national domestic violence hotline ; and domestic violence shelters , services , and program support .

the cdc administers the delta program .

the family and youth services bureau ( fysb ) in hhs / acf administers funding for the hotline and the domestic violence shelters and support .

authorization of funding under fvpsa has been extended multiple times , most recently through fy2015 by the capta reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-320 ) .

congress has appropriated funding in subsequent years .

table 1 includes actual funding from fy1993 to fy2018 , which includes reductions in some years , and appropriated funding for fy2019 for the three major fvpsa activities .

congress appropriated just over $180 million for fy2019 , the highest total to date .

since 1994 , fvpsa has authorized the hhs secretary to award cooperative agreements to state domestic violence coalitions that coordinate local community projects to prevent domestic violence , including such violence involving youth .

congress first awarded funding for prevention activities in fy1996 under a pilot program carried out by the centers for disease control and prevention .

the pilot program was formalized in 2002 under a program now known as the domestic violence prevention enhancement and leadership through alliances ( delta ) program .

the focus of delta is preventing domestic violence before it occurs , rather than responding once it happens or working to prevent its recurrence .

the program has had four iterations: delta , which was funded from fy1996 through fy2012 and involved 14 states ; delta prep , which extended from fy2008 through fy2012 and involved 19 states that had not received the initial delta funds ; delta focus , which extended from fy2013 through fy2017 and involved 10 states , all of which had previously received funding under delta or delta prep ; and delta impact , which began with fy2018 and involves 10 states , all of which except one has previously received delta funding .

as originally implemented , the program provided funding and technical assistance to 14 state domestic violence coalitions to support local efforts to carry out prevention strategies and work at the state level to oversee these strategies .

local prevention efforts were referred to as coordinated community responses ( ccrs ) .

the ccrs were led by domestic violence organizations and other stakeholders across multiple sectors , including law enforcement , public health , and faith - based organizations .

for example , the michigan coalition against domestic and sexual violence supported two ccrs — the arab community center for economic and social services and the lakeshore alliance against domestic and sexual violence — that focused on faith - based initiatives .

both ccrs held forums that provided resources and information about the roles of faith leaders in preventing the first - time occurrence of domestic violence .

the 14 state domestic violence coalitions developed five - to eight - year domestic violence prevention plans known as intimate partner violence prevention plans .

these plans were developed with multiple stakeholders , and they discuss the strategies needed to prevent first - time perpetration or victimization and to build the capacity to implement these strategies .

the cdc issued a brief that summarizes the plans and identifies the successes and challenges for state domestic violence coalitions in supporting and enhancing intimate partner violence prevention efforts .

overall , the report found that states improved their capacity to respond to intimate partner violence through evidence - based planning and implementation strategies .

as amended by the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 , fvpsa directs the hhs secretary to award a grant to one or more private entities to operate a 24-hour , national , toll - free hotline for domestic violence .

since 1996 , hhs has competitively awarded a cooperative agreement to the national council on family violence in texas to operate the national domestic violence hotline ( hereinafter , hotline ) .

the agreement was most recently awarded for a five - year period that extends through the end of fy2020 .

fvpsa requires that the hotline provide information and assistance to adult and youth victims of domestic violence , family and household members of victims of such violence , and "persons affected by victimization. .

this includes support related to domestic violence , children exposed to domestic violence , sexual assault , intervention programs for abusive partners , and related issues .

as required under fvpsa , the hotline carries out multiple activities: it employs , trains , and supervises personnel to answer incoming calls ; provides counseling and referral services ; and directly connects callers to service providers .

in fy2018 , the hotline received about 23,000 calls each month and responded to 74% of all calls .

it also had an average of nearly 4,000 online chats on a monthly basis .

hhs reported that some calls were missed due to increased media coverage of domestic violence , increased spanish chat services , and forwarding of calls from local domestic violence hotlines due to severe weather .

it maintains a database of domestic violence services for victims throughout the united states , including information on the availability of shelter and services .

it provides assistance to meet the needs of special populations , including underserved populations , individuals with disabilities , and youth victims of domestic violence and dating violence .

the hotline provides access to personnel for callers with limited english proficiency and persons who are deaf and hard of hearing .

since 2007 , the hotline has operated a separate helpline for youth victims of domestic violence , the national dating abuse helpline ( known as loveisrespect.org ) , which is funded through the appropriation for the hotline .

this helpline offers real - time support primarily from peer advocates trained to provide support , information , and advocacy to those involved in abusive dating relationships , as well as others who support victims .

in fy2018 , the helpline received a monthly average of about 2,400 calls ; 4,000 online chats ; and nearly 1,300 texts .

a 2019 study of these two lines examined a number of their features , including who contacts the lines , the study needs and demographic characteristics of those contacts , how contacts reach the lines , and the type of support they receive .

the study found that nearly half ( 48% ) the contacts were victims / survivors and another 39% did not identify themselves .

the remaining contacts were from family / friends , abusers , and service providers .

according to the study , the service most commonly provided to contactors was emotional support and contactors valued this support highly .

the national domestic violence hotline has collaborated with the national indigenous women's resource center to develop and fund the stronghearts native helpline for native american survivors of domestic abuse .

the helpline uses the technology and infrastructure of the hotline , and draws from the national indigenous women's resource center to provide native - centered , culturally appropriate services for survivors and others .

funding for shelter , support services , and program support ( hereinafter , shelter and services ) encompasses multiple activities: formula grants to states and territories ; grants to tribes ; state domestic violence coalitions ; national and special issue resource centers , including those that provide technical assistance ; specialized services for abused parents and children exposed to domestic violence ; and program support and administration .

figure 2 shows fy2018 allocations for activities included as part of shelter , support services , and program support .

the following sections of the report provide further information about grants to states , territories , and tribes ; and state domestic violence coalitions .

in addition , the report provides information about national and special issue resource centers .

the section of the report on services for children and youth exposed to domestic violence includes information about fy2018 and earlier support for specialized services for abused parents and children exposed to domestic violence .

in addition to the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) , fvpsa has been reauthorized by vawa and shares some of that law's purposes .

in addition , fvpsa interacts with the victims of crime act ( voca ) because some fvpsa - funded programs receive voca funding to provide legal and other assistance to victims .

further , fvpsa includes provisions that encourage or require hhs to coordinate fvpsa programs with related programs and research carried out by other federal agencies .

both fvpsa , which is administered within hhs , and vawa , which is largely administered within doj , require federal agencies to coordinate their efforts to respond to domestic violence .

for example , fvpsa authorizes the hhs secretary to coordinate programs within hhs and to "seek to coordinate" those programs "with programs administered by other federal agencies , that involve or affect efforts to prevent family violence , domestic violence , and dating violence or the provision of assistance for adults and youth victims of family violence , domestic violence , or dating violence. .

in addition , fvpsa directs hhs to assign employees to coordinate research efforts on family and related violence within hhs and research carried out by other federal agencies .

similarly , vawa requires the attorney general to consult with stakeholders in establishing a task force — comprised of representatives from relevant federal agencies — to coordinate research on domestic violence and to report to congress on any overlapping or duplication of efforts on domestic violence issues .

in 1995 , hhs and doj convened the first meeting of the national advisory council on violence against women .

the purpose of the council was to promote greater awareness of violence against women and to advise the federal government on domestic violence issues .

since that time , the two departments have convened subsequent committees to carry out similar work .

in 2010 , then - attorney general eric holder rechartered the national advisory committee on violence against women , which had previously been established in 2006 under his predecessor .

as stated in the charter , the committee is intended to provide the attorney general and the hhs secretary with policy advice on improving the nation's response to violence against women and coordinating stakeholders at the federal , state , and local levels in this response , with a focus on identifying and implementing successful interventions for children and teens who witness and / or are victimized by intimate partner and sexual violence .

separately , the director for fvpsa programs and the deputy director of hhs's office on women's health provide leadership to the hhs steering committee on violence against women .

this committee supports collaborative efforts to address violence against women and their children , and includes representatives from the cdc and other hhs agencies .

the members of the committee have established links with professional societies in the health and social service fields to increase attention on women's health and violence issues .

in addition to these collaborative activities , multiple federal agencies participate in the federal interagency workgroup on teen dating violence , which was convened in 2006 to share information and coordinate teen dating violence program , policy , and research activities to combat teen dating violence from a public health perspective .

the workgroup has funded a project to incorporate adolescents in the process for developing a research agenda to address teen dating violence .

finally , the office of the vice president ( under joe biden ) coordinated federal efforts to end violence against women , including by convening cabinet - level officials to address issues concerning domestic and other forms of violence against women .

appendix a. definitions appendix b .

prevalence and effects of domestic violence appendix c. state and territory funding for selected fvpsa service .

