the federal government is the largest buyer of goods and services in the world , and executive branch agencies — particularly the department of defense — make most of these purchases .

many ( although not all ) acquisitions by executive branch agencies are subject to the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , which can make the far a topic of interest to members and committees of congress and their staff .

in particular , members , committees , and staff may find themselves considering or drafting legislation that would prompt amendment of the far to save money , promote transparency , or further other public policies ; conducting oversight of executive agencies' performance in procuring goods and services , including their compliance with the far ; and responding to questions from constituents regarding executive branch procurement activities .

in addition , in 2012 , the defense business board recommended "zero - bas[ing]" the entire acquisition system , apparently including the far , to "restor[e] the management of the requirements , acquisition , and budget processes back to the state envisioned by the packard commission. .

the packard commission is the name commonly given to president reagan's 1986 blue ribbon commission on defense .

the commission is generally credited with seeking to "link and streamline" the requirements , acquisition , and budget processes , thereby "reducing complexities , regulations , and processes , and enhancing accountability as well as recruiting experienced personnel with strong management credentials. .

this report provides answers to 25 frequently asked questions regarding the far .

these questions and their answers are organized into six broad categories , including ( 1 ) what the far is and what it covers ; ( 2 ) promulgation of the far ; ( 3 ) the relationship between the far and other authorities governing federal procurement ( eg , statutes , agency far supplements , other regulations , policies ) ; ( 4 ) the far in relation to congress and judicial and other tribunals ; ( 5 ) the relationship between the far and federal procurement contracts ; and ( 6 ) other topics .

this section includes questions and answers that broadly address what the far is and what it covers , including where the text of the far can be found ; what agencies are subject to the far ; what purchases are subject to the far ; and what transactions fall outside the far's coverage .

the questions and answers in this section address the promulgation of the far , including the origins of the far ; the process by which the far is amended ; who typically promulgates regulations amending the far ; the roles of the office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) and the office of management and budget ( omb ) in revising and implementing the far ; and how long it generally takes to amend the far .

this section addresses the relationship between the far and other authorities governing federal procurement , including statutes , agency far supplements , other regulations , and executive branch policies and guidance .

this section includes questions and answers that address what congress can do to prompt amendment of the far ; what congress can do if it disapproves of a potential amendment to the far ; and the deference given to far provisions by judicial and other tribunals .

this section includes questions and answers addressing the relationship between the far and a federal contract ; whether far amendments apply to pre - existing contracts ; and what happens if a contract clause which is required by the far is not included in a particular contract .

this section addresses agency deviations from the far ; the ability of third parties to enforce the terms of the far against a government contractor ; the use of procurement techniques not expressly mentioned in the far ; and whether agencies or transactions not subject to the far could be subject to requirements like those in the far .

agencies are authorized to deviate from the far under certain circumstances .

a deviation involves agency noncompliance with a mandatory procurement regulation ( eg , using a solicitation provision or contract clause that is inconsistent with the far ) , in the absence of a statute expressly requiring or authorizing such noncompliance .

only those deviations authorized by the far are permitted .

contracting officers must use the authorized deviations in provisions clause and the authorized deviations in clauses clause to notify offerors and contractors when a solicitation or contract contains a deviation .

deviations may be granted ( as discussed below ) when necessary to meet the agency's specific needs and requirements , so long as not precluded by law , executive order , or regulation .

the far recognizes two types of deviations: individual and class .

individual deviations affect only individual contract actions .

they may generally be authorized by the agency head , with the contracting officer required to document the justification and agency approval in the contract file .

class deviations affect multiple contract actions .

for civilian agencies ( other than nasa ) , deviations may generally be authorized by agency heads or their designees after consultation with the civilian agency acquisition council ( caac ) .

additionally , a copy of each class deviation must be provided to the far secretariat .

for dod , the far provides that class deviations will be done in accordance with dfars , which generally grants the director of defense procurement and acquisition policy the authority to issue them .

if any agency requires a permanent class deviation , then it should propose a far revision when appropriate .

an example of a recent notable class deviation was the one that dod issued regarding the system for award management ( sam ) shortly after this database came into use .

in anticipation of sam's completion , the far and dfars were amended to require contractors to use the database to meet initial registration and annual certification requirements .

however , once sam began to be used , people reported "performance issues ... [that] affected the timely processing of awards. .

these issues prompted dod to issue a class deviation permitting contractors to use alternative measures to meet their registration and certification requirements until the problems with sam were resolved .

dod rescinded this deviation once sam's "performance issues ... [had] been corrected. .

the far authorizes acquisition team members to use any "specific strategy , policy , or procedure" not addressed by the far so long as the strategy , policy , or procedure is in the best interests of the government , and is not prohibited by statute , regulation , executive order , or case law .

this means that agencies are not necessarily limited to the strategies or procedures expressly mentioned in the far , but rather may exercise some discretion in structuring procurements to meet agency circumstances and needs .

for example , although the far nowhere mentions the use of reverse auctions , agencies' use of reverse auctions in source selection has been upheld on the grounds that "a procurement procedure is permissible where not specifically prohibited. .

the ability of third parties to enforce the requirements of the far — or the terms of a government contract — against a contractor is generally limited , particularly if the third party is not a subcontractor under the federal contract .

in some cases , persons harmed by the actions ( or inaction ) of a government contractor have alleged that the harm would not have occurred had the contractor complied with the requirements of the far ( as incorporated in the contract , or otherwise ) , or that they should be entitled to recover for this harm because of the provisions of the far .

for example , the plaintiffs in one case seeking to hold a federal contractor liable for the death of a third party , baragona v. kuwait & gulf link transportation company , alleged that they were "third party beneficiaries" of a far provision requiring government contractors to obtain insurance against certain liability claims by third parties , and that this clause "effectively waive[d] a [foreign] contractor's ability to assert a personal jurisdiction defense. .

however , such allegations generally fail , as they did in baragona , because plaintiffs who are not parties to a contract are generally seen to lack standing to enforce the contract's terms .

agencies and / or transactions that are not themselves subject to the far could potentially be subject to requirements like those in the far for several reasons .

in some cases , the far implements , in part , a more broadly applicable statute , and the requirements of this underlying statute could be found to pertain to agencies and / or transactions that are not themselves subject to the far .

for example , in a 2012 decision , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) small businesses must be accorded a price evaluation preference when the general services administration ( gsa ) acquires certain leasehold interests in real property even though such acquisitions are not subject to the far ( see " what purchases are subject to the far ? .

" ) .

gao reached this conclusion because the small business act , which governs price evaluation and other preferences for hubzone small businesses , "does not limit the type of contract to which it applies" ( unlike the far , which applies only to procurement contracts ) .

because the small business act "broadly applies to all federal contracts that involve full and open competition," and a lease of real property is a contract , gao rejected gsa's assertion that price evaluation preferences for hubzone small businesses are required only in procurements of goods and services ( i.e. , procurements subject to the far ) .

in other cases , statutes impose requirements like those implemented , in part , by the far on entities or transactions that are not subject to the far .

the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 , for example , imposed "buy american" requirements upon certain grant recipients , and "davis bacon" requirements upon certain loan recipients , who would not have been subject to these requirements pursuant to the far or the statutes that the far , in part , implements .

in yet other cases , an agency adopts regulations or guidance with provisions modeled on or akin to those in the far , as noted previously ( see " what agencies are subject to the far ? .

" ) .

for example , gsa has adopted certain far provisions "as a matter of policy" in its regulations regarding leases of real property .

similarly , the procurement guidelines of the u.s .

postal service include a "suspensions and delay" clause like that in the far , while the senate procurement regulations include provisions on the ratification of unauthorized commitments like those in the far .

