lifeline is a federal program , established in 1984 , that assists eligible individuals in paying the recurring monthly service charges associated with either wireline or wireless telephone usage .

the program is part of the low income program supported by the universal service fund .

eligible households can receive up to $9.25 per month in lifeline discounts .

additional state support may be available .

approximately 2,000 telephone companies are eligible to provide these discounts .

a household applies for the discounts through their designated telecommunications service provider .

support is not given directly to the subscriber , but to the service provider .

the provider is reimbursed through the lifeline program and in turn passes the discount on to the subscriber .

the universal service administrative company ( usac ) , an independent not - for - profit organization , is the designated administrator of the universal service fund ( usf ) , of which the lifeline program is a part .

usac administers the usf programs for the federal communications commission and does not set or advocate policy .

the lifeline program covers the minutes of use for the eligible subscriber .

depending on the package selected the subscriber is allocated a set number of usage minutes per month .

once the allocation is used the subscriber may choose to pay for additional minutes of use .

although not required , most providers that offer a prepaid wireless option provide a wireless phone to the subscriber for free .

the cost of this phone is not covered under the lifeline program but is borne by the designated provider .

although the prepaid wireless option is growing in popularity the lifeline program also covers a wireline option or a postpaid wireless option .

as with the case of the prepaid wireless option the program solely covers the minutes of use , not the device .

the lifeline program is available to eligible low - income consumers in every state , territory , and commonwealth , and on tribal lands .

to participate in the program , consumers must either have an income that is at or below 135% of the federal poverty guidelines or participate in one of the following assistance programs: medicaid ; supplemental nutrition assistance program ( food stamps or snap ) ; supplemental security income ( ssi ) ; federal public housing assistance ( section 8 ) ; low - income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) ; temporary assistance to needy families ( tanf ) ; national school lunch program's free lunch program ; bureau of indian affairs general assistance ; tribally - administered temporary assistance for needy families ( ttanf ) ; food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) ; head start ( if income eligibility criteria are met ) ; or state assistance programs ( if applicable ) .

the lifeline pre - screening tool ( http: / / www.lifelinesupport.org / ls / eligibility / default.aspx ) provided by usac can help determine whether a household is eligible for lifeline assistance .

at least once each year , beginning in 2012 , consumers who are receiving lifeline service must recertify their eligibility and that no one else in their household has a lifeline discounted service .

a failure to recertify eligibility will result in removal from the program .

consumers apply for lifeline through their local telephone company or designated state agency .

the companies in my state ( http: / / www.lifelinesupport.org / ls / companies.aspx ) provided by usac can help locate a lifeline provider in your state .

the national association of regulatory utility commissioners ( naruc ) provides a listing and links to state utility commissions ( http: / / www.naruc.org / commissions / commissionslist.cfm ) .

telecommunications carriers that provide interstate service and certain other providers of telecommunications services are required to contribute to the federal usf based on a percentage of their end - user interstate and international telecommunications revenues .

these companies include wireline telephone companies , wireless telephone companies , paging service providers , and certain voice over internet protocol ( voip ) providers .

the usf receives no federal monies .

some consumers may notice a "universal service" line item on their telephone bills .

this line item appears when a company chooses to recover its usf contributions directly from its customers by billing them this charge .

the fcc permits , but does not require , this charge to be passed on directly to customers .

each company makes a business decision about whether and how to assess charges to recover its universal service obligations .

the charge , however , cannot exceed the amount owed to the usf by the company .

no .

federal rules prohibit eligible low - income consumers from receiving more than one lifeline discount per household .

an eligible consumer may receive a discount on either a wireline or wireless service , but not both .

if a household is currently receiving more than one monthly lifeline service , it must select one provider to provide lifeline service and it must contact the other provider to de - enroll from their program .

subscribers found to be violating this rule will be de - enrolled and may also be subject to criminal and / or civil penalties .

