the protection of lawful commerce in arms act ( plcaa ) was passed in 2005 .

the act generally shields federally licensed manufacturers , dealers , and sellers of firearms or ammunition , as well as trade associations , from any civil action "resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse" of a firearms or ammunition .

the act lists six exceptions where civil suits may be maintained but otherwise requires that lawsuits , pending at the time of enactment , brought by shooting victims and municipalities "be immediately dismissed by the court in which the action was brought or is currently pending. .

the plcaa was considered and passed at a time when victims of shooting incidents , as well as municipalities with high incidences of firearms - related crimes , brought civil suits seeking damages and injunctive relief against out - of - state manufacturers and sellers of firearms as one tactic to inhibit the flow of firearms into illegal markets .

the statute's findings state that the lawsuits seeking to hold "an entire industry for harm that is solely caused by others is an abuse of the legal system," and that the businesses targeted should not be liable for the harm caused by third parties who criminally or unlawfully misuse firearms products that function as designed and intended .

senator larry e. craig , sponsor of the legislation , said that the bill "will put an end to politically - motivated lawsuits against the firearms industry," and added , "[t]hese outrageous lawsuits attempting to hold law - abiding industry responsible for the acts of criminals are a threat to jobs and the economy , jeopardize the exercise of constitutionally - protected freedoms , undermine national security , and circumvent congress and state legislatures. .

in contrast , opponents of the legislation , like dennis henigan of the brady legal action project , countered , "the gun lobby is trying to radically change the rules , to make irresponsible gun dealers and the makers of defective guns the only business[es] in america exempt from longstanding principles of negligence , nuisance and product liability. .

the main provision of the plcaa provides: "a qualified civil liability action may not be brought in any federal or state court. .

whether the plcaa bars a civil suit depends on if the action brought is a "qualified civil liability action," which is defined as: a civil action or proceeding or an administrative proceeding brought by any person against a manufacturer or seller of a qualified product , or a trade association , for damages , punitive damages , injunctive or declaratory relief , abatement , restitution , fines , or penalties , or other relief , resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a qualified product by the person or a third party... .

although a qualified civil liability action , by its own definition , appears to bar administrative proceedings , it is unclear whether the statute actually does so because the main provision of the plcaa prohibits civil suits from being brought in courts .

notably , administrative proceedings are not brought in courts although appeals of them may be .

if the statute is meant to cover administrative proceedings , then the effect of its doing so is not clear .

many civil lawsuits against federal firearms licensees have been dismissed since the enactment of the plcaa .

it may be the case that entities or individuals have been deterred from bringing suit due to the federal provision or from other plaintiffs' lack of success under the statutory exceptions .

in the past year , however , at least one court has permitted a lawsuit to proceed under the predicate exception , finding that provisions of the gun control act are "applicable to the sale or marketing of guns," and therefore may be used as the underlying predicate statute to assert a state tort law claim against a federal firearms licensee .

yet , whether the plaintiffs are able to prove their claims will likely depend on their success in the discovery process , in which case they may face other procedural obstacles to obtaining information .

