congressional interest in stimulating innovation within the pharmaceutical industry has been reflected in legislative activity in the areas of patent law and regulatory exclusivities .

in particular , the 112 th congress enacted the leahy - smith america invents act , p.l .

112-29 , which made numerous changes to the nation's patent laws .

the 112 th congress also enacted the food and drug administration safety and innovation act , p.l .

112-144 .

that statute in part addressed so - called pediatric exclusivity and also allowed a "qualified infectious disease product" to be eligible for an extended period of regulatory exclusivity .

in combination , patents and regulatory exclusivities create a relatively complex landscape of intellectual property rights intended to encourage firms to develop and market new drugs .

patents , which are administered by the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) , provide firms with exclusive rights to an invention for a limited time in exchange for disclosure of the invention to the public .

in contrast , regulatory exclusivities are administered by the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

they consist of a period of time during which the fda affords an approved drug protection from competing applications for marketing approval .

although regulatory exclusivities have been available within the healthcare industry for three decades , commentators have raised a number of innovation policy issues in this context .

some observers question the need for innovators to obtain both regulatory exclusivities and patents .

others have expressed concern over the duration of particular regulatory exclusivities .

issues have also arisen with respect to the use of regulatory exclusivities to encourage specific sorts of innovation and with the obligations of other nations to grant regulatory exclusivities in the manner of u.s. law .

this report introduces and analyzes innovation policy issues concerning intellectual property rights in pharmaceutical innovation .

it begins with a review of the policy and procedures relating to both patents and regulatory exclusivities .

the report then discusses current domestic and international issues that exist at the intersection of these two proprietary rights .

the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and potential alternatives .

the patent act of 1952 ( also known as the patent act ) requires innovators to prepare and submit applications to the uspto if they wish to obtain patent protection .

uspto officials known as examiners then assess whether the application merits the award of a patent .

in deciding whether to approve a patent application , a uspto examiner considers whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention .

the examiner will also determine whether the invention itself fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

to be patentable , an invention must consist of a process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter that is useful , novel , and nonobvious .

the requirement of usefulness , or utility , is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit .

to be judged novel , the invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other knowledge within the public domain .

a nonobvious invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan at the time the invention was made .

if the uspto allows the patent to issue , the patent proprietor obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell or importing into the united states the patented invention .

the term of the patent is ordinarily set at twenty years from the date the patent application was filed .

once a patent issues , its proprietor bears responsibility for monitoring its competitors to determine whether they are using the patented invention or not .

patent owners who wish to compel others to observe their intellectual property rights must usually commence litigation in the federal district courts .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( "federal circuit" ) possesses exclusive national jurisdiction over all patent appeals from the district courts , while the u.s. supreme court possesses discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

the u.s. government regulates the marketing of pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals in the interest of public health .

under this regime , the developer of a new drug — known as its "sponsor" — must demonstrate that the product is safe and effective before it can be distributed to the public .

this showing requires a sponsor to conduct both preclinical and clinical investigations of drugs that have not been previously tested .

in deciding whether to issue marketing approval or not , the fda evaluates the test data that the sponsor submits in a so - called new drug application ( nda ) .

the fda maintains the test data incorporated into an nda in confidence .

in addition , because the required test data is usually quite costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals ordinarily do not disclose them to the public .

otherwise the sponsor's competitors could file their own ndas using that test data , and thereby avoid the expenses of developing the information themselves .

until 1984 , federal law contained no separate provisions addressing generic versions of brand - name drugs that the fda had previously approved for marketing .

the result was that a would - be generic drug manufacturer had to file its own nda in order to market its drug .

some generic manufacturers could rely on published scientific literature demonstrating the safety and efficacy of the drug .

because these sorts of studies were not available for all drugs , however , not all generic firms could file these so - called "paper ndas. .

further , at times the fda would request additional studies to address safety and efficacy questions that arose from experience with the drug following its initial approval .

the result was that some generic manufacturers were forced to prove independently that their pharmaceuticals were safe and effective , even though their products were chemically identical to those of previously approved drugs .

some commentators believed that the approval of a generic drug was a needlessly costly , redundant , and time - consuming process under this system .

these observers noted that although patents on important drugs had expired , manufacturers were not moving to introduce generic equivalents for these products due to the level of resource expenditure required to obtain fda marketing approval .

as the introduction of generic equivalents often causes prices to decrease , the interest of consumers was arguably not being served through these observed costs and delays .

in response to these concerns , congress enacted the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , more commonly known as the hatch - waxman act .

this legislation created a new type of application for market approval of a generic drug .

this application , termed an "abbreviated new drug application" ( anda ) , may be filed at the fda .

an anda may be filed if the active ingredient of the generic drug is the bioequivalent of the approved drug .

an anda allows a generic drug manufacturer to rely upon the safety and efficacy data of the original manufacturer .

the availability of the anda mechanism often allows a generic manufacturer to avoid the costs and delays associated with filing a full - fledged nda .

andas also allow a generic manufacturer , in many cases , to place its fda - approved bioequivalent drug on the market as soon as any relevant patents expire .

the hatch - waxman act placed certain limits upon the ability of generic competitors to reference the data generated by the manufacturers of brand - name drugs .

these limitations — termed regulatory exclusivities — consist of a period of time during which a competitor's ability to obtain fda permission to sell a generic version of a previously approved brand - name drug is restricted .

the federal food and drug laws establish several different sorts of regulatory exclusivities relating to new chemical entities , new clinical studies , orphan drugs , pediatric studies , generic drugs , and biologics .

this report will describe each of these regulatory exclusivities below .

in combination , patents and regulatory exclusivities provide the fundamental framework of intellectual property incentives for pharmaceutical innovation in the united states .

due to the trips agreement's obligation of technological neutrality with respect to the patent system , regulatory exclusivities provide congress with a more adaptable option for stimulating specific sorts of hoped - for private activity than do patents .

as such , regulatory exclusivities have been , and likely will continue to be , the most widely used option for encouraging the development of discrete classes of products regulated by the fda .

the potential for expanded use of regulatory exclusivities in turn raises a number of innovation policy issues .

in the united states , regulatory exclusivities are viewed primarily as supplementing patent protection , in that they provide more limited protections for inventions that do not meet patent act requirements , or effectively delay the onset of patent litigation for inventions that do .

expanding the availability of regulatory exclusivities , in addition to lengthening their term , increases the possibility that regulatory exclusivities will trump patents as the primary form of intellectual property protection for certain fda - regulated products .

the decision to supplant the primacy of the current regime of uspto - procured and judicially enforced patent rights with a system of automatic , fda - administered regulatory exclusivities presents a number of trade - offs that policy makers may wish to consider .

among them are the impact of the contemplated exclusivity periods upon incentives for pharmaceutical innovation ; the cost and availability of medications to consumers ; the desirability of individualized determinations about the technical merits of the pharmaceutical invention ; the expense and uncertainty of patent enforcement proceedings ; and whether the uspto or fda is the better institution for awarding proprietary rights to pharmaceutical innovators .

international harmonization provides another significant issue with respect to regulatory exclusivities .

while some observers have expressed concerns over the use of free trade agreements to encourage trading partners to establish longer regulatory exclusivity periods , others believe that doing so lies in the best interest of the united states .

future dialogue may concern setting global regulatory exclusivity standards in view of national goals and priorities .

