every 10 years , through the apportionment and redistricting processes within each state , congress and the states attempt to create a u.s. house of representatives that reflects a fair representation of the people of the united states .

it is , generally , a complex , volatile , and highly political process , but one that , with a single exception , has occurred in various forms for over 200 years ( since 1790 ) , and , for some , represents , along with free elections , the clearest indication that the united states is a representative democracy .

u.s. congressional districts ( currently set at 435 ) are reallocated among the 50 states based on population counts from the national census taken at the beginning of each decade .

once the reapportionment of seats among the states is complete , congressional district boundaries are subject to change by state governments in all states with more than one district .

the goals of the redistricting process within states are that each congressional district shall be represented by a single member ; nearly equal in population within each state ; and moderately unequal in population among states .

the u.s. constitution ( article 1 , section 2 as amended by the 14 th amendment , section 2 ) requires that "representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers , counting the whole number of persons in each state , excluding indians not taxed. .

the requirement that districts must be apportioned among states means district boundaries cannot cross state lines .

the constitution , also in article 1 , section 2 , sets a minimum size for the house of representatives ( one representative for each state ) and a maximum size for the house ( one representative for every 30,000 persons ) .

congress is free to choose a house size ( with the concurrence of the president ) within these boundaries .

the single - member district is now the norm in the united states house of representatives .

states with more than one representative are divided into districts that are each represented by one member .

there have been exceptions to this practice , especially prior to 1842 , when a number of states elected representatives on a "general ticket" or "at - large" basis by having them listed on a statewide ballot .

the united states has also implicitly rejected the concept of proportional representation by party for congress by adopting the single - member district standard .

once districts are allocated among the states based on population ( apportionment ) , the actual redrawing of district lines ( redistricting ) is carried out by each state .

this process is usually completed by the state legislatures , but a number of states provide for nonpartisan or bipartisan commissions to draft the plans .

although the technology has changed , the process of redistricting in the 21 st century is likely to be much the same as it was in the 20 th century .

line - drawers use information from the census ( and other data , such as voting patterns and voter registration figures ) to plot district boundaries on maps .

as legal requirements have changed and technology has improved for analyzing data , many districts are created using smaller and more complicated geographic units or entities .

rather than using whole counties , cities , towns , or other natural geographic features to delineate districts as in the past , line - drawers now use geographic units created by the census bureau for statistical purposes .

these "census tracts" and the smaller "blocks" are used because , as very small geographical units , they facilitate the precision necessary to make districts absolutely equal in population .

during the 1980s and 1990s the redistricting process moved from calculators and paper maps to computerized databases and mapping software .

whereas pre - 1980s technology limited the number of competing plans that could be drawn , computerized redistricting often increased the number of plans that were presented to districting bodies in the states .

during this period , however , the immense size of computerized map and census data files tended to limit participation of groups outside state government to those with relatively sophisticated computer technology .

today , with the advancement of personal computer technology as well as access to relatively inexpensive advanced geographic information systems ( gis ) computer software , a variety of groups and individuals are capable of producing sophisticated district maps and participating in the redistricting process depending on state laws and procedures .

congressional redistricting traditionally has been a state function , but the federal government has intervened in the process through statutory law and judicially imposed rules stemming from challenges to state - crafted plans .

currently , the redistricting process is dictated by a set of federal court rulings , federal statutory laws , state constitutions , state laws , and state court rulings .

the following "rules" may constrain the drawing of the boundaries of congressional districts ( and , to a large extent , state legislative district boundaries as well ) : 1. equality of population size for districts within each state with two or more districts — u.s .

constitution , article i , section 2 ; 2. protection of the rights of racial and language minorities against vote dilution — voting rights act of 1965 as amended , 42 u.s.c .

section 1973c ; 2a .

race cannot be only factor used in districting — u.s .

constitution , 14th amendment , section 1 , the "equal protection clause" ; 3. geographic compactness of districts — ( 17 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 4. contiguity of districts — ( 22 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 5. preservation of the boundaries of political subdivisions ( minimize the splitting of county and towns boundaries between congressional districts ) — ( 18 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 6. maintenance of "communities of interest" — ( 13 states require this in congressional districting ) ; 7. protection of political incumbents — ( 7 states allow for this in congressional districting , but 5 states prohibit this .

 ) ; 8. maintenance of current political representation by preserving the "core" of congressional districts — ( 7 states require and 3 states allow for this in congressional districting ) ; and 9. the promotion of electoral competition or prohibition of partisan considerations within congressional districts — ( 7 states require this in congressional districting ) .

 .

as noted above , the responsibility for redistricting congressional districts is in the hands of the states , and , in most states , this authority lies with the state legislatures .

however , in a few instances , usually due to the efforts of reform groups , the role of drawing the congressional , state legislative , and other local boundaries has been , seemingly , taken out of the hands of the politicians in the state legislature and given over to an "independent" commission .

there is little question that the u.s. congress has the authority to pass federal legislation affecting the redistricting standards of congressional districts .

as noted above , there is a long history of such legislation .

the apportionment process determines the number of seats in the house of representatives that will be assigned each state , based on population counts .

the redistricting process determines where those seats are geographically located within each state .

redistricting draws the maps .

redistricting is a state process that is governed by federal law .

much of this law is judicially imposed because , in 1929 , congress let lapse its standards requiring districts to be made up of "contiguous and compact territory and containing as nearly as practicable an equal number of inhabitants. .

if congress chooses to legislate again in this area , its mandate will come from article i , section 4 of the constitution , granting the authority to congress to change state laws pertaining to congressional elections .

the goal of redistricting is to draw boundaries around geographic areas such that each district results in "fair" representation .

an effort to favor one group of interests over another by using the redistricting process to distort this fairness is referred to as gerrymandering .

aside from distorting representation , it is believed by some that such gerrymandering diminishes electoral responsiveness by minimizing political competition among the parties .

many of the "rules" or criteria for drawing congressional boundaries are meant to enhance fairness and minimize the impact of gerrymandering .

these rules , standards , or criteria include assuring population equality among districts within the same state , protecting racial and language minorities from vote dilution while at the same time not promoting racial segregation , promoting geographic compactness and contiguity when drawing districts , minimizing the number of split political subdivisions and "communities of interest" within congressional districts , and preserving historical continuity in the cores of previous congressional districts .

most redistricting is currently done by state legislatures .

some believe that allowing redistricting to be the purview of state legislators promotes , at best , status quo districts protecting incumbents and , at worst , blatant partisan gerrymandering , which can lead to a decade of one - party dominance .

reform efforts mostly have aimed at taking the redistricting task from state legislatures and assigning it to independent redistricting commissions .

efforts at creating these commissions have been successful at the state level .

however , efforts to enact federal legislation to create such commissions within all states have proved less successful .

