the passenger airline industry in the united states has gone through significant changes since deregulation in 1978 .

in domestic operations , airlines now have almost total freedom to determine which markets to serve and what airfares to charge .

competitive forces , as well as higher fuel prices and changing travel patterns , have placed the industry under financial pressure , as evidenced by numerous mergers and bankruptcies .

to stay competitive and profitable , many airlines have joined alliances to expand their global reach and achieve economies of scale .

at the same time , price competition has forced airlines to contain costs .

one of the practices aimed at keeping costs competitive is the outsourcing of aircraft maintenance , repair , and overhaul ( mro ) , either domestically or to foreign countries .

the practice of outsourcing aircraft maintenance is not restricted to u.s. passenger airlines .

many foreign airlines and cargo carriers also send maintenance work to outside service providers .

this report focuses on u.s. passenger airlines because their outsourcing of maintenance , especially to foreign countries such as china and el salvador , has generated specific concern among members of congress .

this report analyzes trends in mro outsourcing and explains the major factors contributing to them .

it then considers safety consequences , employment effects , and regulatory implications of increased foreign maintenance of u.s. passenger aircraft .

there are multiple factors behind airlines' use of foreign maintenance providers .

the most commonly mentioned is cost savings from sending mro work to lower - wage countries such as china and el salvador .

while this is generally true , there are other factors influencing airlines' decision to perform mro in other countries , including changes in route structures and the increasing availability of mro services in emerging economies .

foreign repair stations have been the subject of safety concerns at least since 1995 , when the crash of a u.s. passenger plane was attributed to faulty repair work undertaken abroad ( see text box ) .

the issues raised have included quality control procedures ; the level of regulatory oversight ; mechanic pay , skill , training , and experience ; the degree of qualified supervision ; the lack of english language skills or requirements to read and comprehend maintenance manuals ; and the absence of drug and alcohol testing programs on par with those required at u.s. repair stations .

airlines have an interest in making sure that outsourced maintenance is of the highest quality to avoid costly delays and cancellations .

moreover , airlines and aircraft repair service providers assert that the high economic value placed on safety in the airline industry is by itself sufficient incentive to promote high - quality performance among foreign repair stations that maintain u.s. air carrier aircraft .

airlines for america , the advocacy organization for major u.s. air carriers , cited ntsb data showing that , as u.s. airlines have increased their maintenance outsourcing to global providers , "maintenance as a probable cause [of accidents] declined from 0.05 per 100,000 departures to absolute zero in recent years .

the industry's safety record remains unmatched ; no evidence indicates that offshore mro services are unsafe or insecure. .

the group has released data showing that maintenance - related accidents have declined since 1997 despite increased outsourcing of maintenance ( see figure 5 ) .

this position is supported by a comprehensive research study that failed to find any relationship between airline maintenance outsourcing rates and aircraft accident and incident rates from 1996 to 2008 , although the study did not specifically differentiate between domestic outsourcing and offshoring .

however , some safety experts caution that the absence of a link between outsourced maintenance and safety is not conclusive evidence that offshoring maintenance work does not have safety implications .

experts point out that faa does not track in detail where airline aircraft are maintained and exercises limited oversight of foreign repair stations .

former ntsb board member john goglia , a long - time critic of cost cutting in airline maintenance , recently expressed particular concern that much critical maintenance work continues to be performed with little faa review , particularly unannounced inspector review , and this is especially the case at foreign repair facilities .

statistical analysis of the relationship between airline service reliability and maintenance outsourcing also is inconclusive .

in 2007 , consumer reports magazine reported a steady increase in both outsourced maintenance and the number of airline flight cancellations from 2002 through 2004 , but did not specifically differentiate between domestic outsourcing and offshoring .

the report also provided data pointing toward a correlation between outsourced maintenance and airline - caused delays among 14 major u.s. air carriers in 2005 .

based on these data alone , it is not possible to assess whether maintenance outsourcing was a direct cause of cancellations and delays , as airlines may have implemented other cost - cutting measures , such as reducing ground crews , which also may have contributed to delays .

in contrast , airlines for america points to boeing data showing that u.s. airlines' operations utilizing boeing commercial jets have improved their mechanical dispatch reliability , an indicator of the effectiveness of airline maintenance programs , from about 98.1% in 1991 , to between 98.9% and 99.0% in 2008 and 2009 ( see figure 6 ) .

while the data show relatively consistent improvement in airline maintenance reliability over the past three decades , the exact relationship between outsourcing practices and maintenance dispatch reliability over time is unclear because of cyclical fluctuations in the data that are most likely attributable to the aging of the fleet and the somewhat periodic or cyclical nature of airline fleet replacement programs .

moreover , improved reliability of newer aircraft may be the primary factor influencing dispatch reliability and may mask any trends related to outsourcing practices .

maintenance of u.s. air carrier aircraft at both foreign and domestic locations is subject to regulation and oversight by faa .

repair stations are regulated under title 14 code of federal regulations , part 145 , and thus , faa - certificated repair stations are sometimes referred to as part 145 repair stations .

to be certified under part 145 , a repair station must develop faa - approved documentation and processes , including quality control procedures and training programs .

faa may also approve foreign repair stations based on a foreign certification issued by a country that has a bilateral aviation safety agreement with the united states .

from a regulatory standpoint , faa reviews and recertifies foreign repair stations annually , or in some cases every two years , whereas domestic repair stations can retain their certification indefinitely unless faa is prompted to suspend or revoke it based on specific safety concerns .

while faa establishes requirements for foreign repair stations , much of the direct oversight to ensure compliance is conducted by foreign regulatory entities under bilateral agreements and a multilateral agreement with the european union .

a summary of key differences in faa regulatory requirements for domestic and foreign repair stations is presented in table 1 .

thus , regulatory requirements for foreign repair station certification are somewhat more stringent than those for domestic repair stations , although foreign repair stations do not have the same requirements as u.s. repair stations with respect to certification of supervisors and individuals authorized to sign off on work performed and return aircraft to service .

moreover , there are concerns that faa's resources and capabilities to inspect foreign repair stations are spread thin .

faa has 10 international field offices and units , although only 2 ( frankfurt and singapore ) are physically located outside the united states .

collectively , these 10 offices house about 100 inspectors who have primary oversight responsibility for almost 700 foreign repair stations in addition to overseeing foreign air carriers that operate flights to the united states .

in total , faa employs about 4,100 inspectors , so the number of inspectors dedicated full time to oversight of foreign entities , including foreign repair stations , constitutes only a small percentage of the total faa inspector workforce .

faa inspectors who oversee air carrier maintenance are also responsible for ensuring that work contracted to third parties , including foreign repair stations , adheres to applicable regulations and faa - approved air carrier procedures .

in 2008 , the dot oig found that faa's system for determining where to target inspections was inadequate , relying too heavily on incomplete voluntary air carrier reporting of maintenance outsourcing and air carrier audits that varied considerably in their quality and completeness .

in particular , the dot oig found that faa was over - reliant on air carriers' initial audits of repair stations to approve substantial maintenance providers for use by air carriers .

the dot oig found that , in some cases , more than five years passed from the time a facility was first approved for air carrier use until inspectors responsible for overseeing a specific carrier's maintenance programs conducted an inspection .

with regard to maintenance work sent to foreign repair stations , the dot oig also raised concerns regarding logistical challenges and procedural and cultural barriers that may limit the effectiveness of faa inspector oversight activities in foreign countries .

the dot oig noted that the time - consuming process of obtaining visas and other clearances to travel to foreign facilities often gives these facilities several months' advance notice of an upcoming inspection , thus giving foreign repair stations considerable forewarning and thus making it impossible to conduct surprise inspections .

the dot oig specifically highlighted concerns over the imbalance in faa inspector staffing , particularly in light of the increasing trend among airlines to outsource maintenance , often to overseas facilities .

in 2007 , the dot oig concluded that faa still needed to develop an effective process for placing its inspector workforce where it is most critically needed , despite language in the 2003 faa reauthorization act directing faa to revamp its inspector staffing model .

in april 2012 , the dot oig reported that , while faa had implemented a new risk - based system for targeting its repair station surveillance activities following the dot oig's 2007 report , the system is being applied inconsistently by faa inspectors , and surveillance at foreign repair facilities lacked the rigor needed to identify deficiencies and subsequently verify that corrective actions had been taken .

the dot oig also found that systematic problems it previously identified still persist , including inadequacies in mechanic training , outdated tool calibration checks , and inaccurate work documentation .

these concerns are not unique to foreign repair stations , as they were observed at domestic repair stations as well .

congress has shown interest in the oversight of foreign repair stations for more than a decade .

vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) directed faa to develop an oversight plan and implementation schedule to strengthen oversight of domestic and foreign repair stations and to ensure that faa - certified foreign repair stations are subject to an equivalent level of safety , oversight , and quality control as domestic repair stations .

as noted in this report , reviews of faa's progress toward meeting these objectives have found that several concerns remain .

reflecting these concerns , congress included provisions related to the oversight of foreign repair stations in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) , which was enacted in february 2012 .

specifically , section 308 of the act requires faa to establish and implement a safety assessment system for all repair stations approved under 14 c.f.r .

part 145 by february 14 , 2013 , with assessments based on the type , scope , and complexity of work performed ; faa to ensure that foreign repair stations are subject to appropriate inspections consistent with existing u.s. requirements ; that agreements with foreign aviation authorities or other foreign government agencies provide an opportunity for faa to conduct independent inspections of foreign repair stations when warranted by safety concerns ; faa to notify congressional oversight committees within 30 days of initiating formal negotiations with foreign governments on new maintenance safety or maintenance implementation agreements ; faa to issue an annual report describing improvements to identify and track where air carrier ( 14 c.f.r .

part 121 ) maintenance is performed ; a staffing model regarding the number and geographic placement of faa inspectors ; inspector training ; and a quality assessment of faa and foreign authority inspections performed under existing agreements ; faa to request that all member countries of the international civil aviation organization establish drug and alcohol testing programs encompassing all safety - sensitive maintenance workers that perform work on commercial air carrier aircraft ; faa to publish a proposed rule by february 14 , 2013 , to require drug and alcohol testing programs at all part 145 repair stations that service part 121 aircraft , consistent with the laws of the country where the work is performed ; and faa to conduct annual inspections at all foreign repair stations consistent with obligations under international agreements .

while u.s. airlines are increasingly sending aircraft overseas for major repairs and overhauls , highly skilled maintenance workers in the united states working on foreign aircraft have helped the united states retain a positive trade balance of aircraft maintenance work in the globalized mro industry .

increasing competition in this field coupled with growing opportunities for advanced technical training overseas may reduce this advantage in the future .

at the same time , however , the trend of maintenance offshoring may be offset to some degree by rising labor costs in developing countries that could diminish their comparative cost advantage .

in this regard , improved data reporting and collection by faa and bts would assist in analyzing mro outsourcing and understanding the movements and trends .

although policymakers often raise the prospect of restrictive safety measures and additional inspections as a means to curtail the loss of american jobs to offshoring , applying such approaches to the aviation mro industry could lead to reciprocal actions that could affect both maintenance work performed on foreign aircraft within the united states and u.s. companies that operate or have a stake in mro facilities outside the united states .

arsa noted that many u.s. companies have repair stations internationally , estimating that about 80 foreign repair stations are either wholly or partly owned by u.s. firms .

additionally , arsa points out that several international companies have mro facilities within the united states .

thus , globalization of the mro industry makes it increasingly difficult to apply effective trade actions as a means to protect u.s. jobs .

no solid evidence exists that the use of foreign repair stations to maintain u.s. air carrier aircraft has eroded airline safety .

safety concerns raised regarding work performed by foreign repair stations over the past decade have largely been anecdotal , and detailed studies have not identified specific indications that outsourcing maintenance to foreign mros has increased risk .

nonetheless , examination of maintenance offshoring practices reveals several potential policy implications both for u.s. jobs and for airline safety .

with regard to implications for domestic jobs , it appears that the united states has maintained a positive balance of trade in aircraft mro largely as a result of its superior technological skills and training , positioning it as a global leader in high - skill , high - value maintenance and repair .

as such , the united states potentially stands to gain from increasing globalization of the mro industry .

the greatest threat to such standing does not appear to be primarily from the offshoring of heavy maintenance , but rather from the possibility that other countries may invest heavily in advanced training and technical capabilities to compete more directly with the united states on high - value engine and component repair and overhaul operations .

with regard to safety , faa has limited resources to allocate to oversight and inspection of foreign repair stations , thus necessitating reliance on foreign regulators and airline auditors to conduct routine oversight of foreign repair facilities .

realigning the faa inspector workforce to allow for increased oversight of repair stations located in foreign countries may help respond to the increased utilization of foreign repair facilities by u.s. air carriers .

this may involve selecting and assigning faa inspectors based on proficiency in specific foreign languages and familiarity with foreign cultures .

despite a congressionally mandated examination of faa's inspector staffing model by the national research council , which was completed in 2007 , further action may be needed to more specifically address realignment of the faa inspector workforce to better reflect changes in airline maintenance practices .

the lack of english - language proficiency among foreign repair station workers is a particularly complex issue which may deserve more detailed study .

most discussion of this issue has focused broadly on aviation maintenance without looking in detail at the types of jobs , the skills performed , and the resource requirements , including written reference materials , needed to complete these tasks .

such detailed analysis could determine where additional english language skills may be most acutely needed among foreign repair station personnel and possibly lay the groundwork for faa regulations .

setting regulatory standards regarding the total numbers and ratios of faa - certified mechanics and repairman to uncertified maintenance workers as a condition of 14 c.f.r .

part 145 approval may be a means to address concerns about the lack of faa - certificated mechanics at some foreign repair facilities .

such standards might need to take into consideration both the overall volume and the percentage of repair station work that is performed on u.s. airline aircraft to ensure that any additional regulatory requirements are appropriately directed at those repair stations where extensive work on u.s. air carrier aircraft is performed .

this and other regulatory considerations may require more extensive reporting requirements for air carriers to allow faa to better assess where the numbers of faa - approved mechanics may be insufficient as well as where regulatory oversight activities may need to be targeted .

