the 113th congress , in exercising both its legislative and oversight responsibilities , faces numerous international trade and finance policy issues .

they are important to congress because they can affect the health of the u.s. economy , the success of u.s. businesses and their workers , and the standard of living of americans .

a list of crs reports covering in detail each of the issues addressed is provided at the end of the report .

international trade and finance issues are complex , and policy deliberation is often made more challenging by developments in the global economy .

first , the world continues to recover unevenly from the 2008 global financial crisis , with many developed countries experiencing weak growth and the large emerging economies , such as china , india , and brazil experiencing slower growth .

the sovereign debt crisis in europe and increased vulnerability of the eurozone are among the most visible examples .

second , developing country influence and role in the global economy are growing , as witnessed by changing trade and investment patterns , as well as the ascendance of the group of 20 ( g - 20 ) economies as a major forum for international economic cooperation .

the rise of brazil , india , and china , among other emerging economies , presents new challenges in u.s. trade policy and in developing global trade and finance agreements .

third , economic tensions emanating from large international imbalances have not eased .

the u.s. economy is recovering slowly from its worst recession in eight decades .

although the economy is experiencing productivity gains and moderate expansion in output , it nonetheless continues to struggle with declining , but still high unemployment and a large federal debt .

these domestic imbalances are connected to international ones , including the large u.s. trade deficit , rising holdings of u.s. debt by foreign countries , and downward pressure on the dollar .

the united states has long consumed more than it has produced , giving rise to the expanding trade deficit , which is financed by capital inflows .

the counterpart is large saving balances , trade surpluses , and capital outflows in other countries , including china , japan , and germany .

the call for "global rebalancing" implies a reversal of these trends , which would require national and foreign responses .

for the united states , this would involve increased saving ( less spending ) relative to investment that would produce a rise in net exports ( reduction in trade deficit ) .

implicit in this mix , particularly given steady de - leveraging of u.s. firms and households since 2008 , is a reduction of the fiscal deficit , the major source of u.s. dissaving since 2000 .

for trade surplus countries , it implies the opposite — an increase in domestic demand and decrease in saving relative to investment that would lead to a fall in net exports ( reduction in trade surplus ) .

rebalancing also implies changes in relative exchange rates , including a likely depreciation of the dollar against major u.s. trade partner currencies , and appreciation of china's currency .

on the trade policy side , the 113th congress during the second session will likely exercise its oversight responsibilities and possibly take up legislation that would lead to reauthorization of trade promotion authority .

it may also take up implementing legislation for reciprocal trade agreements including the negotiations for the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement , with the european union for the proposed transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) agreement , and the trade in services agreement ( tisa ) .

some of these agreements address new issues , such as cross - border data flows , state - owned enterprises , and international supply chains .

president obama's national export initiative ( nei ) continues to promote the goal of doubling u.s. exports in five years , which given that 95% of the world's population lives outside u.s. borders , some view as one solution to the challenge of generating faster economic and employment growth .

in addition to supporting u.s. economic growth , the rationale for promoting exports is based on the view that foreign demand is needed to supplement an american consumer still dealing with a residual debt overhang and a federal government facing persistently large fiscal deficits .

u.s. exports have recovered briskly since 2009 .

meeting the goal of doubling exports , however , will be difficult because trade policy by itself is limited in its ability to affect the trade deficit and aggregate output , which will require vibrant global economic growth , a competitive dollar , and changes in domestic and foreign macroeconomic policies .

in addition , after decades of increasing , global trade has slowed recently .

foreign country policies , however , may not align easily with u.s. priorities .

the european union continues to wrestle with its own financial crisis and economic downturn , while japan is mired in persistent slow growth , although prime minister abe's government launched a program of immediate and long - term initiatives — dubbed "abenomics" — designed to place japan on a path to more sustainable economic growth .

rising economic powers , whose strong growth represents expanding markets for u.s. goods , may also be turning to less expansionist macroeconomic policies .

many countries , including many g - 20 and emerging economies , have returned to industrial policies , backtracking on trade liberalization .

so despite u.s. policies directed at opening markets , export promotion and encouraging macroeconomic changes abroad , u.s. economic recovery still depends on a balance of increased domestic investment and demand , which could worsen the trade deficit if increased saving is not also part of the mix .

on the international finance side , policy - driven currency misalignments and the specter of "currency wars" point to the other side of the global imbalances problem .

some countries are discussing the need for more coordinated and equitable exchange rate policies , if not a broader rethinking of the international monetary system .

attention has also turned to the relevance of the international monetary fund ( imf ) and other multilateral economic institutions in this process , such as the world bank , including reevaluating their role , structure , and governance ( i.e. , increased role of emerging economies ) .

a current concern is the potential threat of competitive devaluations , particularly from china , that could increase trade tensions , hinder the rebalancing of the global economy , and undermine international economic stability .

china is not alone in this behavior , but receives the most attention because of its closed capital account and large holdings of u.s. treasury securities .

u.s. international economic policy must also contend with "globalization," or the increasing integration of markets and production , and supply chain networks brought about by advances in technology , communications , transportation , and lower barriers to trade .

these transformative changes in the global economy have led to large decreases in transaction costs that have spurred tremendous growth in trade , particularly of intermediate goods , which now account for over 60% of the world's commercial exchange .

it has also contributed to rising incomes .

in the united states , jobs are supported by u.s. exports to foreign affiliates and u.s. production abroad , as well as foreign firms operating in the united states .

these complex production networks further complicate the trade and employment policy debates , and raise other questions such as what constitutes an "american - made" product and how will innovation and production strategies continue to change the economic landscape .

at the same time , while global economic integration has increased trade and economic growth , it has also exposed u.s. firms and workers to greater competition from lower - cost and more efficient producers in certain sectors and increasingly , from state - owned - enterprises ( soes ) .

globalization and the larger volume of imports of goods and services , therefore , may force some u.s. firms to make costly adjustments to remain competitive .

in some cases this may take the form of worker dislocation and shifts to production abroad , and may raise concerns in congress over distributional issues of global production and trade .

in sum , u.s. costs and benefits linked to an increasingly interconnected global economy may run in many directions .

the discussion is no longer simply about free trade versus protectionism .

the debate involves domestic and foreign macroeconomic policies , the participation of foreign states in markets , the competitiveness of u.s. firms and workers , implications of value - chain and cross - country production , and the financial stability of the international economy .

for the united states , an overarching goal is to maintain its high standard of living by remaining innovative , productive , and internationally competitive , while safeguarding those stakeholders who otherwise may be left behind in a fast - changing global economy , suggesting a strong supporting role for complementary domestic policies .

these changes have also raised new trade policy issues , some of which are being discussed in current u.s. free trade agreement negotiations .

congress is in a unique position to address these issues , particularly given its constitutional mandate for legislating and overseeing international trade and financial policy .

in addition to broader congressional oversight of the economic and political context of the current u.s. participation in the global economy , this report highlights major international trade and finance issues that the 113th congress may address .

the u.s. constitution assigns express authority over foreign trade to congress .

article i , section 8 , gives congress the power to "regulate commerce with foreign nations" and to "lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts , and excises. .

for roughly the first 150 years of the united states , congress exercised its authority over foreign trade by setting tariff rates on all imported products .

congressional trade debates in the 19th century often pitted members from northern manufacturing regions , who benefitted from high tariffs , against those from largely southern raw material exporting regions , who gained from and advocated for low tariffs .

a major shift in u.s. trade policy occurred after congress passed the highly protective "smoot - hawley" tariff act of 1930 ( p.l .

71-361 ) , which , by raising u.s. tariff rates to an all - time high level , led u.s. trading partners to respond in kind .

in response , world trade declined rapidly , exacerbating the impact of the great depression .

since passage of this tariff act , congress has delegated certain trade authority to the executive branch .

first , congress enacted the reciprocal trade agreements act ( rtaa ) of 1934 ( p.l .

73-316 ) , which authorized the president to enter into reciprocal agreements to reduce tariffs within congressionally preapproved levels , and to implement the new tariffs by proclamation without additional legislation .

congress has renewed this authority periodically .

second , congress enacted the trade act of 1974 aimed at opening markets and establishing non - discriminatory international trade for nontariff barriers as well .

because changes in nontariff barriers in reciprocal bilateral , regional , and multilateral trade agreements usually involve amending u.s. law , the agreements require congressional approval and implementing legislation .

congress has renewed and amended the 1974 act many times , which includes fast - track trade negotiating authority , now called trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

congress also exercises trade policy authority through its oversight responsibilities and the enactment of laws authorizing trade programs and governing trade policy generally .

these include such areas as u.s. trade agreement negotiations ; tariffs ; nontariff barriers ; trade remedies ; import and export policies ; economic sanctions ; and the trade policy functions of the federal government .

in addition , congress oversees the implementation of trade policies , programs , and agreements .

congress has an important role in international investment and finance as well .

it has authority over bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) and the level of u.s. financial commitments to the multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) , including the world bank , and to the international monetary fund ( imf ) .

it also authorizes the activities of such agencies as the export - import bank and the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) .

congress has oversight responsibilities over these institutions , as well as the federal reserve and the treasury department , whose activities affect international capital flows .

congress also closely monitors developments in international financial markets that could affect the u.s. economy , such as the eurozone sovereign debt crisis .

during the first session of the 113th congress , while overshadowed by other legislative priorities , including federal budget issues , trade and trade policy issues were the subject of active congressional interest , including through oversight committee hearings , if not direct legislative action .

that may change during the second session as at least some of these issues may come to a head in the form of legislation or congressional consideration .

they include: renewal of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) ; potential trade agreements including the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) , and the trade in services agreement ( tisa ) , and also expanded agreements in information technology products and trade facilitation under the wto ; u.s. - china trade relations ; international finance issues ; review of the u.s. export control regime ; reauthorization of the export - import bank ; and reauthorization of u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) and expiring trade preference programs .

congress confronts these issues against the backdrop of a rapidly globalizing economy and the growing importance of emerging economic powers that have increased the role of global supply or value production chains , state - owned enterprises , and cross - border data flows , among other factors .

these and other issues are discussed in more depth below .

crs report rl33743 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) and the role of congress in trade policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21004 , trade promotion authority and fast - track negotiating authority for trade agreements: major votes , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 97-896 , why certain trade agreements are approved as congressional - executive agreements rather than treaties , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33944 , trade primer: qs and as on trade concepts , performance , and policy , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42694 , the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42344 , trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) countries: comparative trade and economic analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42676 , japan joins the trans - pacific partnership: what are the implications ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42448 , pivot to the pacific ? .

the obama administration's "rebalancing" toward asia , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34330 , the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement ( korus fta ) : provisions and implications , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34470 , the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42965 , nafta at 20: overview and trade effects , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31356 , free trade agreements: impact on u.s. trade and implications for u.s. trade policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32060 , world trade organization negotiations: the doha development agenda , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22154 , world trade organization ( wto ) decisions and their effect in u.s. law , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20088 , dispute settlement in the world trade organization ( wto ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33536 , china - u.s. trade issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33534 , china's economic rise: history , trends , challenges , and implications for the united states , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21625 , china's currency policy: an analysis of the economic issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34314 , china's holdings of u.s. securities: implications for the u.s. economy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41748 , china and the united states — a comparison of green energy programs and policies , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41929 , boosting u.s. exports: selected issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r41495 , u.s. government agencies involved in export promotion: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41829 , reauthorization of the export - import bank: issues and policy options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42472 , export - import bank: background and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-567 , the overseas private investment corporation: background and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41202 , agricultural export programs: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41916 , the u.s .

export control system and the president's reform initiative , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33948 , state and local economic sanctions: constitutional issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20871 , iran sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43311 , iran: u.s. economic sanctions and the authority to lift restrictions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41336 , u.s. sanctions on burma , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34524 , international trade: rules of origin , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33867 , miscellaneous tariff bills: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32371 , trade remedies: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41429 , trade preferences: economic issues and policy options , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33663 , generalized system of preferences: background and renewal debate , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22541 , generalized system of preferences: agricultural imports , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43173 , african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) : background and reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34687 , the haitian economy and the hope act , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22548 , atpa renewal: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43014 , u.s. customs and border protection: trade facilitation , enforcement , and security , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41922 , trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) and its role in u.s. trade policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42012 , trade adjustment assistance for workers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20210 , trade adjustment assistance for firms: economic , program , and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40206 , trade adjustment assistance for farmers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34292 , intellectual property rights and international trade , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41107 , the proposed anti - counterfeiting trade agreement: background and key issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22880 , intellectual property rights protection and enforcement: section 337 of the tariff act of 1930 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43052 , u.s. international investment agreements: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33984 , foreign direct investment: current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32462 , foreign investment in u.s. securities , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33388 , the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32461 , outsourcing and insourcing jobs in the u.s. economy: evidence based on foreign investment data , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41170 , multilateral development banks: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs20792 , multilateral development banks: u.s .

contributions fy2000-fy2014 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42019 , international monetary fund: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42844 , imf reforms: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42377 , the eurozone crisis: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40977 , the g - 20 and international economic cooperation: background and implications for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

