israeli electoral outcomes for congress and other u.s. policymakers may have important ramifications for many issues , including the following: overall u.s. - israel relations : actual and perceived costs and benefits of close u.s. cooperation on specific policies or issue areas with the new israeli government , as well as on the long - term direction of the bilateral relationship .

addressing iran's nuclear program : imminence and urgency of major u.s. decisions regarding the use of diplomatic and / or military means to address iran's nuclear program , based on calculations of a potential israeli willingness to unilaterally attack iranian nuclear facilities .

u.s. policy in the middle east : u.s. priorities and substantive approaches to a wide range of foreign policy issues , especially with regard to issues of ongoing israeli - palestinian dispute , the civil war in syria , and domestic political developments in egypt , jordan , and elsewhere in the region .

as maneuvering within and among parties continues in preparation for the 2013 israeli elections , a few key questions have emerged that could have a substantial impact on voting results and the new government's composition .

these , in turn , could have significant implications for israeli leaders' future policies and actions , including their conduct of relations with the united states .

israeli electoral outcomes may have major implications for u.s. - israel relations and security cooperation .

if the likud / yisrael beiteinu partnership emerges with the largest knesset representation , binyamin netanyahu would primarily shape the new coalition and government , but would need support from key israeli constituencies outside his political support base .

as part of this process , he would weigh a number of domestic and international considerations — including the lack of a clear rival to his immediate leadership — within an overall political , demographic , and regional security context .

the strategic challenge of iran's nuclear program and the potential for key short - term decision points on unilateral israeli military action is paramount among these concerns .

however , the concerns also include questions about growing threats in ungoverned spaces at israel's borders ; a seemingly more intractable palestinian situation with increasing potential for west bank instability and international isolation of israel ; and the future nature and extent of relations with a more islamist egypt , a potentially fragile jordan , a war - scarred syria vulnerable to extremism , and a conflicted , powerful , and less friendly turkey .

to the extent that netanyahu's choices of coalition partners and ministers reveal his priorities and constraints as to policy initiatives , members of congress and other u.s. policymakers can use this information to assess the status and trajectory of u.s. - israel relations and evaluate possible political , economic , and military options in the middle east .

