with the 113 th congress divided like the 112 th into a republican - controlled house and a majority - democratic senate , and the president having been re - elected , environmental issues , including those related to air quality , remained stalemated in congress .

congressional interest in air quality issues was dominated by efforts to prevent the environmental protection agency ( epa ) from promulgating and implementing new emission control requirements .

often under court order , epa has used authorities congress gave it in the clean air act amendments of 1970 , 1977 , and 1990 to address long - standing issues posed by emissions from various sources .

epa's regulations on greenhouse gas emissions from both mobile and stationary sources and on conventional and hazardous air pollutants emitted by electric power plants , cement kilns , and boilers have been of particular interest , as have the agency's efforts to revise ambient air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter .

particularly in the house , efforts to restrain agency regulatory actions have occupied a prominent place .

the house also considered broader legislation designed to address regulation in general — bills such as the reins act ( h.r .

367 / s. 15 in the 113 th congress ) , which would require congressional approval before regulations classified as major rules could take effect , or the energy consumers relief act ( h.r .

1582 / s. 1363 in the 113 th congress ) , which would prohibit epa from promulgating energy - related regulations estimated to cost more than $1 billion if the secretary of energy determines that the regulations will cause significant adverse effects to the economy .

if enacted , such legislation would affect new rules under the clean air act as well as other statutes ; but given the broad nature of the bills' purpose , they are not discussed here .

a continuing focus of congressional interest under the clean air act ( caa ) has been epa regulatory actions to limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions using existing caa authority .

epa actions have focused on six gases or groups of gases that multiple scientific studies have linked to climate change .

of the six gases , carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , produced by combustion of fossil fuels , is by far the most prevalent , accounting for nearly 85% of annual emissions of the combined group when measured as co 2 equivalents .

members from both sides of the aisle , including a majority of the house in the 112 th and 113 th congresses , have expressed concerns about epa proceeding with ghg regulations that could have major economic impacts .

some argue that the case for ghg controls has not been proven .

others maintain that epa should delay taking such action until congress more explicitly authorizes it .

issues related to emissions other than ghgs from electric power plants — principally sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and mercury — have been another focus of interest .

bush administration regulations addressing these emissions were vacated by the d.c .

circuit court of appeals in two 2008 decisions ( north carolina v. epa and new jersey v. epa ) .

as a result , epa has developed new regulations to address the court's concerns .

it promulgated regulations addressing so 2 and nox on august 8 , 2011 , and for power plant emissions of mercury and other hazardous air pollutants on february 16 , 2012 .

coal - fired power plants are among the largest sources of air pollution in the united states .

in 2005 , they accounted for 10.2 million tons of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) emissions ( 70% of the u.s. total ) , 52 tons of mercury emissions ( 46% of the u.s. total ) , and 3.6 million tons of nitrogen oxides ( 19% of the u.s. total ) .

power plants are considered major sources of fine particles ( pm 2.5 ) , many of which form in the atmosphere from emissions from a wide range of stationary and mobile sources .

in addition , they account for about one - third of u.s. anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases , in the form of carbon dioxide .

under the clean air act , however , power plants have not necessarily been subject to stringent requirements: emissions and the required control equipment has varied depending on the location of the plant , when it was constructed , whether it has undergone major modifications , the specific type of fuel it burns , and , to some extent , the vagaries of state and epa enforcement policies .

more than half a dozen separate clean air act programs could potentially be used to control emissions , which makes compliance strategy complicated for utilities and difficult for regulators .

because the cost of the most stringent available controls , for the entire industry , could range into the tens of billions of dollars , utilities have fought hard and rather successfully to limit or delay regulations affecting them , particularly with respect to plants constructed before the clean air act of 1970 was passed .

this group , which includes about one - third of coal - fired capacity , are generally referred to as "grandfathered" plants .

as discussed below under " air quality standards ," new ambient air quality standards for ozone , fine particles , and so 2 will be taking effect in the next few years .

emissions of nox and so 2 will have to be reduced further to meet these standards .

 ( nox contributes to the formation of ozone and fine particles ; so 2 , besides being a regulated pollutant in its own right , is among the sources of fine particles. ) .

a long - running controversy over the interpretation of new source review requirements for existing power plants ( which require the installation of best available control technology whenever an existing power plant undergoes major modifications ) has exerted pressure for a more predictable regulatory structure , as well .

thus , some in industry , environmental groups , congress , and the last three administrations have said that legislation addressing power plant pollution in a comprehensive ( multi - pollutant ) fashion would be desirable .

such legislation would have addressed the major pollutants on a coordinated schedule and would have relied , to a large extent , on a system such as the one used in the acid rain program , where national or regional caps on emissions are implemented through a system of tradable allowances .

despite many hearings , introduced bills , and a few markups , neither the house nor the senate has considered such legislation .

this has led both the george w. bush and obama administrations to consider what could be done under existing caa authority .

in february 2011 , epa began to scope out new emissions standards for conventional pollutants ( i.e. , non - greenhouse gases ) from passenger cars and light trucks , pursuant to a may 2010 memorandum from the white house that directed the agency to review the adequacy of the current "tier 2" emission standards for these vehicles .

the tier 2 standards were finalized in february 2000 , and they were phased in between model years 2004 and 2009 .

having determined that further emission reductions from motor vehicles are essential to attainment of ambient air quality standards in numerous areas , epa proposed tier 3 standards may 21 , 2013 .

final standards were signed on march 3 , 2014 , and were published in the federal register on april 28 .

as with the tier 2 standards , the tier 3 standards include changes to both vehicle emission limits and fuel formulation rules , lowering the allowable sulfur content of gasoline .

removing sulfur from gasoline improves the performance of existing emission controls and facilitates the use of new technology .

the tier 3 standards lower allowable sulfur from 30 parts per million ( ppm ) to a maximum of 10 ppm , and would require reductions in light duty vehicle emissions of 70% - 80% .

requirements are to be phased in generally between model years 2017 and 2025 .

in addition to the light duty vehicle emission and gasoline standards , the rule extends the required useful life of emission control equipment from 120,000 miles to 150,000 miles , and sets standards for heavier duty gasoline - powered vehicles .

in letters to the president before the standards' proposal , several senators of both parties asked that the administration delay the epa rulemaking over concerns that the new fuel standards would raise the price of gasoline ; but epa maintains that the rule as promulgated will add less than a penny to the price of a gallon .

the cost estimate is disputed by petroleum refiners: they argue that some refineries will find it more difficult than others to reduce sulfur to the 10 ppm standard , and could face cost increases of as much as nine cents a gallon .

to address these concerns , the final rule allows a three - year delay in compliance for small refiners .

it also includes averaging , banking , and trading programs that will give the refining industry flexibility in meeting the standards .

other stakeholders , including the auto industry , are generally in support of the new standards .

auto manufacturers already face more stringent requirements in california , and fear having to meet a patchwork of standards in different states .

they also note that lower sulfur fuel is needed to support the lean - burn technologies that they will use to meet already promulgated fuel efficiency and ghg standards .

the tier 3 standards are also supported by environment and public health groups , and by a number of governors and other state and local officials , because they will help nonattainment areas comply with ambient air quality standards .

without tighter standards on vehicles and gasoline , ozone nonattainment areas in about half the states might have to impose more controls on local sources of ozone precursors and particulates .

for additional information on the tier 3 standards , see crs report r43497 , tier 3 motor vehicle emission and fuel standards .

on january 3 , 2014 , epa released proposed emission standards for new residential wood heaters , the most common of which are wood stoves , pellet stoves , hydronic heaters , and forced air furnaces .

the proposal , which would revise standards for wood stoves and pellet stoves and for the first time establish standards for other types of wood heaters , appeared in the federal register on february 3 .

this began a public comment period that ran until may 5 .

according to epa , smoke from wood heaters contributes "hundreds of thousands of tons" of fine particles to the air throughout the country each year , accounting for nearly 25% of all area source air toxics cancer risks and 15% of non - cancer respiratory effects .

in many areas , in wintertime , wood heaters are the largest source of particulate air pollution ; yet many heater types are not currently subject to any federal emission standard .

the proposed rule would only gradually reduce this pollution , because it would apply only to new heaters ( not those already in use ) and it would give the industry a five - year grace period before its most stringent standards would take effect .

wood heaters can last for 40 years or more , so it will be decades before the full health benefits of the rule would be attained .

nevertheless , the rule would eliminate an estimated 210 to 470 premature deaths annually in the 2014-2022 period , according to epa , as well as reduce hospital admissions and lost work days due to respiratory illness .

epa quantifies these benefits at $1.8 billion to $4.2 billion per year during the 2014-2022 period , more than 100 times the agency's estimate of the annualized cost to manufacturers , $15.7 million .

trade associations representing the affected industries and companies in the industry have mixed views of the proposed standards .

while supporting revision of the current standards and the inclusion of additional heater types , they express concern that the standards as proposed will impose too great a cost .

facing higher costs for new units , homeowners will continue to use current , highly polluting equipment , rather than replace it , the industry maintains .

many have also expressed concerns regarding the process to be used in certifying compliance and the short period of time in which currently available units could be tested and certified .

these concerns , as well as the widely acknowledged health effects , have generated substantial interest in the proposed rule in areas where wood stoves are used as heating sources , and members of congress from those areas have written epa to express concerns regarding the proposed rule's possible impacts .

the subject has also been raised during hearings on epa's fy2015 appropriation request , and legislation ( h.r .

4407 ) was introduced in the 113 th congress to place limits on epa's authority to set the standards .

no action was taken on the bill .

 ( for additional information on the wood heater proposal , see crs report r43489 , epa's proposed wood stove / wood heater regulations: frequently asked questions . ) .

the obama administration's epa has also reviewed several national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) , as it is required to do by section 109 of the clean air act .

naaqs do not directly regulate emissions from sources of pollution ; rather , they represent epa's formal judgment regarding how clean the air must be to protect public health and welfare .

the standards set in motion monitoring and planning requirements , which in turn can lead to designation of "nonattainment areas" and the imposition of emission controls .

since 2009 , epa has proposed and promulgated numerous regulations implementing the clean air act ( and other pollution control statutes that it administers ) .

critics of the administration , both within congress and outside of it , have accused the agency of reaching beyond the authority given it by congress and ignoring or underestimating the costs and economic impacts of these rules .

at least seven bills that would have overturned specific regulations or limited the agency's authority ( h.r .

1 , h.r .

910 , h.r .

1633 , h.r .

2250 , h.r .

2401 , h.r .

2681 , and h.r .

3409 ) passed the house in the 112 th congress .

in addition to the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions , power plants , and naaqs , discussed above , two of the epa regulations that attracted the most attention were the maximum achievable control technology standards for cement kilns and boilers ( referred to as the "portland cement mact," and the "boiler mact," respectively ) .

in both cases , epa agreed to reconsider rules that it had promulgated .

on december 20 , 2012 , epa administrator jackson signed revised rules for both , giving the affected industries additional time to comply , and making the final standards less stringent than those originally promulgated .

while epa has been widely criticized by industry groups and many in congress for overreaching , the agency maintains that in promulgating these and other rules , it is complying with statutory mandates placed on the agency by congress .

the agency states that its critics' focus on the cost of controls obscures the benefits of new regulations , which , it estimates , far exceed the costs ; and it maintains that pollution control is an important source of economic activity , exports , and american jobs .

environmental groups generally disagree that the agency has overreached in setting clean air act standards .

these groups often maintain that the agency's standards are not stringent enough , do not meet statutory requirements , or disregard the findings of the agency's science advisors .

the result is that epa clean air act standards generally are challenged in court both by industry and by environmental groups , with various states supporting each side .

the resulting court decisions often set epa's agenda as much as congress or the administration .

confirmation of a new epa administrator as well as oversight hearings gave the 113 th congress early venues to revisit these issues .

a confirmation hearing for gina mccarthy , president obama's nominee to lead the agency , was held by the senate environment and public works committee on april 11 , 2013 .

she was confirmed as epa administrator on july 18 , 2013 .

for additional discussion of epa's regulatory actions , under the clean air act and other statutes , see crs report r41561 , epa regulations: too much , too little , or on track ? .

