choice and mobility are key aspects of the of the nation's largest federal housing assistance program , the section 8 housing choice voucher ( hcv , or voucher ) program .

the choice aspect of the program — that eligible families can use their federal subsidies to rent the housing they choose in the private market — differentiates it from the other major federal housing assistance programs , including public housing and project - based section 8 rental assistance .

it is , in part , because of the choice and mobility aspects of the program that it has grown to largely replace other forms of housing assistance .

congress has been considering reforms of the hcv program for the past decade , although legislation has not been enacted .

thus far , choice and mobility have not been the centerpiece of these efforts .

however , these aspects of the program may be of greater interest to policymakers going forward , as new research findings have questioned the effectiveness of current policies in promoting mobility and improving family well - being .

this report explores the concept of choice and mobility in federal housing policy , particularly in the section 8 hcv program .

it begins by describing the origins of choice and mobility in federal housing policy , followed by a discussion of choice and mobility in today's section 8 hcv program .

the report then provides an overview of relevant research on the effects of choice and mobility policies .

it concludes with a discussion of considerations for policymakers .

originally , federal housing assistance programs did not offer families much choice about where they were to live if they wished to receive assistance .

families seeking assistance would apply to the local public housing authorities ( phas ) that administered federal housing assistance programs ( i.e. , public housing ) and if a subsidized unit became available , it would be offered to the family .

it is well documented that for the first several decades of the public housing program , families were directed to specific public housing developments based on their race .

the housing developments to which black families were directed were generally in less - desirable geographic areas and of poorer physical condition than those to which white families were directed .

this systematic racial segregation was eventually outlawed and several large phas were subject to court - ordered desegregation strategies ( eg , the gautreaux fair housing program , discussed later in this report ) .

however , many public housing developments , particularly in urban areas , remained racially segregated .

these same housing developments have been characterized by severe distress , both physical and social , offering challenging circumstances and limited opportunities for the families that reside in them .

the problems have been most acute in urban areas , where public housing helped contribute to the concentration of extreme poverty in inner - city , primarily black communities , and where joblessness , crime , and myriad other social problems were growing .

it is against the backdrop of this history that "choice" has come to be considered a critical component in today's assisted housing policy .

the concept of choice in federal housing policy is driven by two policy goals , neither of which the traditional public housing program appeared to have accomplished .

one is to support the autonomy of individual families and their right to choose where they wish to live .

the other is to promote racial desegregation and poverty deconcentration , by providing low - income families with the option to move to low - poverty and racially integrated areas .

both implicit and explicit in this goal is the desire to improve families' well - being , particularly their economic well - being .

encouraging moves to low - poverty neighborhoods is premised on the idea that low - poverty neighborhoods create better life outcomes , particularly for children .

the disparities in health , education , exposure to violence , and employment outcomes between high - poverty and low - poverty neighborhoods are well documented .

however , beyond a general agreement that individuals benefit from living in low - poverty neighborhoods , there are many unresolved questions .

researchers have not concluded why , how , and how much neighborhoods matter , and researchers continue to debate which differences in neighborhoods ( eg , differences in resources , social networks , role models , civic engagement , etc. ) .

lead to differences in neighborhood features ( eg , school quality or crime levels ) .

congress included among the stated goals of today's largest federal housing assistance program , the housing choice voucher program , the promotion of choice and mobility and the deconcentration of poverty .

the quality housing and work opportunity act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-276 ) , which created the modern hcv program , identified public housing as plagued by a series of problems , including the concentration of extremely poor people in extremely poor neighborhoods , and it included among its purposes: "facilitating mixed income communities and decreasing concentrations of poverty in public housing" ; and creating the voucher program as "a market - driven program that will assist in making tenant - based rental assistance under such section more successful at helping low - income families obtain affordable housing and will increase housing choice for low - income families. .

while few observers argue against the concept of providing low - income families with housing choice , there have been criticisms of the way that choice is provided through the housing choice voucher program .

similarly , while there is little disagreement that systematic segregation is untenable and that areas of highly concentrated poverty with limited economic opportunity are undesirable , there is disagreement about how necessary racial and / or economic integration is to individual and family well - being .

while the hypotheses and research discussed in the previous section of this report consider what choices families make given the options and constraints of the hcv program , another set of studies have considered what happens when families' choices are explicitly constrained for the purpose of promoting poverty deconcentration and racial desegregation .

in these initiatives , families must generally move to low - poverty or more racially integrated areas as a condition of receiving housing vouchers .

the hcv program is designed to offer program participants choice about where they live .

the goal of this choice is to promote individual autonomy , as well as to promote increased poverty deconcentration , which is thought to improve family well - being .

however , the success of this policy in achieving these goals remains unproven .

it can be argued that the hcv program participants face significant constraints on their choices .

further , the findings from demonstrations to - date present mixed findings regarding whether the program results in increased poverty deconcentration and racial integration to the extent anticipated by those who designed the initiatives .

given these findings , when debating the future of the housing choice voucher program , policymakers might consider a range of policy options , discussed below .

as noted earlier , interest in this topic may be especially high because of ( 1 ) ongoing interest in reforming assisted housing programs , ( 2 ) budget constraints leading to an increased interest in ensuring that programs are adequately targeted and meeting their goals , and ( 3 ) the recent release of final mto research findings .

choice and mobility are defining features of the nation's largest and primary housing assistance program , the housing choice voucher program .

much of the growth in the program in recent years is attributable to decisions by policymakers to replace other forms of housing assistance with vouchers , in part because of the choice and mobility aspects of the program .

however , there is some evidence that the current structure of the housing choice voucher program may limit families' choices and their mobility .

these program constraints serve to contain the cost of the program as well as ensure the quality of families' housing .

however , they may also serve to prevent families from living in low - poverty areas of opportunity .

in fact , the majority of voucher holders do not live in low - poverty communities .

policymakers , including various presidential administrations , members of congress , and judges , have expressed a desire to see poor families live in low - poverty communities , believing such communities can give these families a hand - up in terms of economic opportunity and their children's education .

thus , they have developed various demonstrations and other policy remedies designed to foster families' moves to areas with lower poverty rates and higher rates of racial integration using housing choice vouchers .

it was hoped that these mobility interventions would have large impacts on families' lives , and some positive impacts have been found in areas of health , housing and neighborhood satisfaction , and perceived wellbeing .

however , the findings to - date in areas of heightened interest — employment and children's education — have been limited , and disappointing to many advocates .

perhaps the findings are due to limitations in the design and implementation of the programs and demonstrations themselves , or perhaps they are evidence that while neighborhood matters , it does not always matter as much as other factors in influencing families' life outcomes .

thus , policymakers are left with several important questions to resolve as they consider the future of federal housing policy .

one question is the extent to which choice and mobility continue to be among the primary goals of federal housing assistance .

if they are , then how can the existing suite of federal housing assistance programs , including the housing choice voucher program , be improved to better promote these goals ? .

if they are not , then is the housing choice voucher program , which is designed expressly to support choice and mobility , the most effective and efficient means of providing federal housing assistance that meets other policy goals , such as affordability ? .

these difficult questions lack consensus among researchers , advocates , practitioners , or policymakers .

