in december 2010 , the board of governors of the international monetary fund ( imf , the fund ) , the institution's highest governing body , agreed to a wide - ranging set of institutional reforms .

if enacted , this reform package would increase the institution's core source of funding and expand the representation of dynamic emerging market and developing countries , such as brazil , china , and mexico , within the institution .

in order for key parts of the reform package to take effect , imf rules dictate that the reforms must be formally accepted by three - fifths of imf members ( 113 ) representing 85% of the total voting power .

under this formula , although unanimous support is not required , approval by the united states , the imf's largest stakeholder with 16.75% of the total voting power , is essential ( see text box ) .

to date , the united states has not formally approved these reforms .

congress plays a pivotal role in determining the u.s. position on the current imf reform agenda .

under u.s. law , specific congressional authorization is required for the united states to consent to change the u.s. quota , or "shares" in the fund , which determine the united states' total voting power .

furthermore , depending on the budgetary treatment of any new authorized u.s. contributions to the imf , appropriations would likely also be required .

a majority of imf member countries have approved these reforms , and with u.s. support , the imf would meet the thresholds necessary for the reforms to become effective .

news reports indicate that inaction by the united states on the reforms created tensions at the imf - world bank annual meetings in october 2012 .

some commentators have suggested that a lack of u.s. action may be frustrating for other imf member countries , since the u.s. administration was instrumental in advancing some of the reforms earlier in the process .

this report provides information about the reforms , congress's role in the reform process , and how the reforms could affect u.s. interests at the imf .

for additional background on the imf , see crs report r42019 , international monetary fund: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

although the imf board of governors approved the reform package in 2010 , some of the key parts of the package require additional action to take effect .

to move to an all - elected executive board , three - fifths of imf member countries representing 85% of the voting share need to formally approve an amendment to the imf's articles of agreement .

for the quota reform ( doubling quota and shifting of quota to emerging markets ) to take effect , the amendment to the articles providing for an all - elected executive board must be approved , and imf members representing at least 70% of total quotas consent to the quota changes .

with the largest voting power at the imf ( 16.75% ) , the reforms cannot go through without u.s. support , even though a majority of imf member countries have approved them .

table 2 summarizes the approval process for the board amendment and the quota reform , and the number of formal approvals received to date by the imf .

by contrast , reducing the seats held by advanced european economies on the imf executive board is a more informal process .

countries voluntarily decide how to group themselves on the executive board , and the consolidation will require coordination and proactive action among imf members .

the initial reform package included the pledge to reduce the representation of advanced european economies on the executive board by two seats following the implementation of the other reforms .

however , the process for obtaining the required acceptances for the board amendment and consents to the quota reform has taken longer than expected , and steps towards board realignment were taken in november 2012 .

in particular , the belgium and netherlands seats merged .

austria is currently serving as an executive director for the seat vacated by belgium , but reportedly will rotate its chair with turkey , the czech republic , and hungary .

it has also been reported that the grouping of nordic countries will permit all the baltic members of the group to rotate serving as the executive director , and that the switzerland executive director will rotate with poland in a few years .

some analysts are also skeptical as to the interest among members of congress to change the composition of u.s. commitments to the imf .

in the 112 th congress , continuing concerns about the use of imf resources in the eurozone debt crisis contributed to the introduction of legislation in the house and senate ( h.r .

2313 , s.amdt .

501 , and s. 1276 ) that would rescind u.s. financial commitments to the imf approved by congress in 2009 , primarily through to the nab .

similar language was also included in a house draft of the fy2012 state and foreign operations appropriations bill .

following the december 2010 international agreement on imf reform , the administration sought for several years to have congress introduce funding legislation but did not include a formal budget request .

in its budget requests for fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 , the obama administration has included authorization and appropriation requests for the united states to endorse and ratify the 2010 reform package .

during the spring of 2014 , during debate on a ukraine - assistance package , imf funding legislation was included in the senate version of the bill but was stripped out prior to passage .

congress has at least four options regarding the reform package .

the authorizing committees for the imf are the senate committee on foreign relations and the house committee on financial services .

in response to concerns among imf member nations that the institution was underfunded given the potential global needs for crisis funding and that the developing and emerging economies were underrepresented , member nations agreed in december 2010 to an ambitious package of reforms .

if completed , these reforms would double the imf's quota resources and allow emerging and developing countries to own a larger share of the institution and take on more responsibility for the fund's governance .

in order for key parts of the reform package to take effect , imf rules dictate that the reforms must be formally accepted by three - fifths of imf members ( 113 members out of 188 members ) representing 85% of the total voting power .

under this formula , although unanimous support is not required , approval by the united states , the imf's largest stakeholder , is essential .

to date , no action has been taken by congress on the necessary legislation .

in october 2014 , imf member countries agreed that if the 2010 reform package was not completed by the end of the 2014 , other options for advancing quota and governance reform should be considered .

following the absence of any imf authorizations or appropriations in the fy2015 omnibus legislation , imf managing director christine lagarde requested that fund staff prepare alternative reform options that could be enacted without u.s. authorizations or appropriations .

since the beginning of 2015 , two interim options that are reportedly being discussed are ( 1 ) "de - linking" the imf quota increase and governance reform proposals and ( 2 ) ad hoc quota increases , that would raise the quota and voting rights of a select group of under - represented countries .

delinking imf quota and governance is highly unlikely .

if the united states allows the imf quota increase to proceed without participating , the u.s. quota share would be expected to fall below 15% , and the united states would forfeit its veto power in supermajority decisions requiring 85% of the voting share .

for this reason , it is extremely unlikely that any administration would consent to the board reform amendment without the quota increase .

most experts believe that an ad hoc increase will be the likely interim measure pursued by imf membership .

