under its civil works program , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) plans , builds , operates , and maintains a wide range of water resource facilities .

the corps also undertakes flood - fighting activities and other natural disaster response activities .

these emergency activities have been authorized by congress and generally have been funded by supplemental appropriations , which have been significant relative to corps discretionary appropriations since 2005 .

from 1987 to 2016 , congress has appropriated approximately $33.2 billion in corps supplemental appropriations .

of this total , congress provided $31.4 billion from 2005 to 2016 , which was significant relative to the agency's regular ( i.e. , nonsupplemental ) annual discretionary appropriations over that period ( approximately $63.8 billion for fy2005 through fy2016 ) .

if supplemental bills provide funds to the corps , they most frequently fund two accounts: flood control and coastal emergencies ( fcce ; i.e. , flood fighting , repairs to damaged nonfederal flood - control projects ) and operations and maintenance ( o&m ; i.e. , repairs to existing corps projects ) .

in some instances , principally since 2005 , congress also has provided supplemental funding for other corps accounts , such as the mississippi river and tributaries ( mr&t ) account and the construction account .

of the supplemental funds that congress provided to the corps for hurricanes katrina and sandy , 31% and 66% , respectively , were for construction activities .

congress also provided the agency with $4.6 billion as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

in the wake of major flooding and other natural disasters , congress often considers whether to provide supplemental appropriations to the corps and other agencies .

proponents of providing supplemental funding for the corps argue that these investments are significant for recovery efforts and improve flood resilience of the affected areas .

congress may provide these funds with special considerations ( eg , designated as emergency funding and not requiring budgetary offsets ; waiving nonfederal cost - share requirements ) .

others argue that the annual appropriations process is the more appropriate forum for deciding on significant federal flood - damage reduction investments , contending that postdisaster investments should be subject to the same project - development and cost - sharing requirements as other similar corps projects and should compete in the agency's annual budget - development process .

other stakeholders would prefer more attention and funding that supports other programs and measures to reduce the nation's flood risks .

 ( for an overview of federal flood - related assistance programs , see crs report r45017 , flood - risk reduction and resilience: federal assistance and programs , by [author name scrubbed] et al. ) .

this report analyzes corps supplemental funding .

the report focuses on supplemental funding provided directly to the corps from 1987 to 2016 , as well as recently proposed supplemental funding in h.r .

4667 — further additional supplemental appropriations for disaster relief requirements , 2017 ( as passed by the house ) .

the report does not include extensive analysis of annual corps discretionary appropriations or supplemental appropriations for other agencies .

apart from corps disaster response , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) has extensive authority to assist and coordinate disaster response actions under the national response framework , and fema receives significant regular and supplemental appropriations for this work .

although the corps performs work under some mission assignments for fema ( i.e. , funded by fema , under direction of the president and fema ) , that work is not addressed in this report .

the majority of natural disaster - related supplemental appropriations generally are placed into one of the following four corps budget accounts based on the type of activity funded .

congress previously has provided the corps with approximately $33.2 billion ( nominal dollars ) in supplemental funding in 26 laws enacted between 1987 and 2016 .

it is considering legislation , principally h.r .

4667 , that would provide the corps an additional $12.09 billion in supplemental appropriations for the agency's activities associated with response , repair , and recovery from natural disasters including hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria in 2017 .

this section discusses enacted corps supplemental appropriations , as well as corps supplemental funding proposed in h.r .

4667 in the 115 th congress .

it also discusses common issues that policymakers consider in deliberating on these supplemental appropriations bills .

table 1 shows account - level funding in enacted corps supplemental appropriations bills and in h.r .

4667 .

of the $33.2 billion in enacted supplemental appropriations legislation , most of this amount ( $31.4 billion ) was provided in 12 appropriations laws enacted between 2005 and 2016 .

adjusting prior - year appropriations for inflation , congress provided the corps with approximately $38 billion ( in 2016 dollars ) in supplemental appropriations between 1987 and 2016 .

of this total , 92% was provided between 2006 and 2016 .

enacted corps supplemental appropriations and h.r .

4667 also are shown by year in figure 1 .

the discussion below differentiates between five primary types of supplemental funding that the corps received or the 115 th congress is considering: funding for the 2005 hurricanes ; funding for hurricane sandy response and recovery ; funding for "all other" floods , hurricanes , and other natural disasters ; funding for other nondisaster purposes , such as economic recovery and facility security ; and funding proposed in h.r .

4667 ( as passed by the house ) for natural disasters including hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

separately , the appendix lists the disaster events that were explicitly referenced in enacted corps supplemental appropriations from 2003 to 2016 and in h.r .

4667 .

the 115 th congress is considering possible responses to various natural disasters in 2017 .

in recent years through supplemental appropriations , congress not only has funded the emergency response and repair activities of the corps but also has provided the corps with funding to study and construct projects that reduce flood risks in areas recently affected by some hurricanes and floods .

that is , supplemental appropriations in response to hurricane katrina and hurricane sandy supported new investments in flood - risk reduction infrastructure projects in affected areas to a much greater extent than congress has provided for other flood events .

h.r .

4667 proposes $12.09 billion for the agency's activities associated with response , repair , and recovery from natural disasters including hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria ; of the $12.09 billion total , $10.425 billion would be for new construction of corps flood - risk reduction projects in areas affected by hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

during its deliberations on corps supplemental appropriations , congress often considers various issues and special considerations associated with the provision of these funds .

these include the role of congress in the authorization of construction of corps projects that receive supplemental funds , whether to maintain requirements for nonfederal cost sharing , and what requirements to include regarding reporting to congress and public transparency associated with supplemental funds .

supplemental corps funding debates also raise broader questions for policymakers , such as the effectiveness and efficiency of processes such as those for postdisaster supplemental appropriations and corps annual budget development , especially in regard to identifying and supporting priority investments in reducing the nation's flood risk .

