emergency management generally refers to activities associated with avoiding and responding to natural and human - caused hazards .

emergency management in the united states is highly decentralized and contextual in nature .

multiple jurisdictions as well as a vast number of agencies , nongovernmental organizations , and private sector entities are often involved .

in general , emergency management begins locally , but the federal government plays an important role when a state requests assistance .

consequently , the number and type of actors involved in an incident vary tremendously depending on the context and severity of the event .

similarly , the legal framework through which emergency management functions and activities are authorized is also decentralized and stems from multiple authorities .

this report provides members of congress and their staffs with an introduction to the principles and foundations of federal emergency management in the united states .

it examines the activities of several federal agencies , including the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the national guard , department of agriculture , department of defense , army corps of engineers , department of health and human services , department of housing and urban development , department of transportation , environmental protection agency , forest service , and small business administration .

in addition , this report discusses the four phases of emergency management: ( 1 ) mitigation , ( 2 ) preparedness , ( 3 ) response , and ( 4 ) recovery ; the process for requesting federal assistance for major disasters , emergencies , and fires ; and the types of assistance provided through each type of stafford act declaration .

this report also includes a description of federal - to - state cost shares under the stafford act , a discussion on how federal assistance is funded , and the process through which fema requests assistance from other federal entities .

this report also outlines the frameworks that guide various emergency management activities at the federal and state level , and discusses some of the key federal laws and policies influencing federal emergency management and highlights federal entities that provide assistance to states and localities .

related crs products examining these issues more in - depth are footnoted in this report .

the following sections describe key concepts that undergird federal emergency management .

many of these concepts originated at the state level and are still being put to use by states and localities .

some concepts developed by the states have been modified and / or adopted by the federal government as a national standard .

the system of emergency management in the united states is scalable .

this means that local governments request assistance from the state if responding or recovering from the incident is beyond their capacity .

in cases when a state is overwhelmed by the incident , the state governor may elect to request assistance from the federal government .

scalability makes emergency management response more practical , but it also contains a political element because it is embedded within the federalist system of governance aimed at the preservation of state autonomy .

the state - initiated request may also alleviate concern that the federal government might assume leadership of response and recovery operations .

the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( hereinafter the stafford act ) does provide the president authority to issue an emergency declaration in the absence of a gubernatorial request if the president determines the incident involves a subject area under the constitution or laws of the united states , in which the united states exercises preeminent responsibility and authority of the incident .

such cases , however , are rare .

the majority of federal disaster assistance is released only after a presidential declaration is issued in response to a gubernatorial request for federal assistance .

the stafford act authorizes federal assistance through three types of declarations: ( 1 ) major disaster declarations , ( 2 ) emergency declarations , and ( 3 ) fire management assistance grant declarations ( fmag ) .

however , fmag declarations are typically declared through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) regional director .

emergency and major disaster declarations can only be issued by the president .

each of these declarations are described in more detail in the following sections .

under the stafford act , the costs of response and recovery efforts are usually split between the state and the federal government .

the stafford act contains language detailing the amount the federal government must pay to the state for eligible repairs , restoration projects , and replacements of damaged facilities .

the formula is called a "cost - share," and the stafford act provides that the federal share "shall be not less than 75 percent. .

the cost - share can be adjusted to reduce , but not increase , the state share .

the reduced state share is known as a cost - share waiver .

in most cases , waivers are adjusted according to fema regulatory authority and carried out by the executive branch through administrative actions based on per capita preliminary damage estimates .

additionally , since 1997 , and particularly in the wake of concerns raised about state capacity to meet their cost - shares following the gulf coast storms of 2005 , congress has begun to exercise its authority to adjust cost - shares .

the majority of assistance provided under the stafford act is paid out of fema's disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

the drf is a no - year account used to fund response activities and pay for ongoing recovery programs .

the drf is also used to reimburse mission assignments ( discussed in the next section ) to other federal agencies .

current budgetary practice generally consists of funding the drf through regular appropriations acts and then providing additional funding through supplemental appropriations when the account is deemed to be at risk of running out of funding .

when the drf balance becomes low , fema generally initiates a spending freeze on long - term recovery projects ( primarily pa and hmgp projects ) , to save drf funds to meet immediate , life - threatening needs .

this policy remains in effect until the drf is replenished with a new appropriation .

the drf balance is not a criterion used by fema to recommend a major disaster declaration , nor does the president use the available balance to determine whether to issue a major disaster declaration .

the terminations of stafford act recovery projects are not subject to strict deadlines .

the requirements to "close out" a major disaster are established in 44 c.f.r .

13.50 .

in general , pa and hmgp projects take the longest to complete .

typically , major infrastructure projects take years to complete .

both the pa and hmpg have a common closeout sequence: individual projects are managed by applicants and each project is separately closed by fema and the state when all of the costs associated with the project have been reconciled with supporting documentation .

disasters and emergencies are closed when all of the applicant's projects are closed and the applicant's administrative allowance expenses have been reconciled to supporting documentation .

when all of the disaster's applicants are closed , the program can be closed .

programs are closed when the state's administrative costs have been reconciled with supporting documentation .

when all programs within a disaster are closed , the disaster can be closed .

funding for recovery projects and activities carried out by federal agencies through mission assignments that are completed under budget is returned to the drf .

the state can make an appeal if they believe the project requires additional federal funding to be completed .

federal agencies and departments with responsibilities for handling incidents may work in conjunction with other federal entities when the scope of the work is beyond their normal operations .

federal to federal support under the stafford act is generally carried out through "mission assignments," while non - stafford incidents , such as the ones described in table 1 , are carried out through other mechanisms such as interagency agreements and mutual aid agreements .

a number of statutory laws and policies supplement the stafford act .

these statutes and policies organize and define the federal role in emergency preparedness , mitigation , response , and disaster relief .

the following sections highlight some of these key laws and policies .

as mentioned earlier in this report , while the majority of emergency and disaster assistance is coordinated and provided by fema , other federal agencies provide assistance under authorities in conjunction with the stafford act declaration or through separate authorities .

several of these agencies are able to provide assistance without a presidential declaration .

the concluding section highlights of some of the key agencies that provide emergency and disaster assistance to states and localities including a brief description of the work performed by each agency .

the national guard is both a state and federal organization: it is simultaneously the organized militia of a state or territory and a reserve component of the army and the air force .

due to its size ( over 450,000 individuals ) , trained personnel , and available equipment , it is frequently used for emergency response .

normally , the national guard operates in a state status , under the control of state and territorial governors , who can order national guard personnel to perform full - time "state active duty" in response to disasters and civil disorders .

in this state capacity , national guard personnel are not subject to the restrictions of the posse comitatus act ( that is , they can perform law enforcement functions ) .

the national guard can also be activated under the authority of 32 u.s.c .

502 ( f ) .

this provision of federal law provides that "a member of the national guard may ... without his consent , but with the pay and allowances provided by law ... be ordered to perform training or other duty in addition to [inactive duty for training or annual training]. .

the advantage of using this authority is that the national guard personnel called will receive federal pay and benefits and are entitled to certain legal protections as though they were in federal service , but they remain under the control of their state or territorial governor and are therefore not subject to the restrictions of the posse comitatus act .

such activation can only occur with the approval of the department of defense .

finally , the national guard can be activated in a purely federal status .

when federally activated , national guard personnel operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the posse comitatus act .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has several agencies that provide emergency and disaster assistance , including the farm service agency , the natural resources conservation service , and rural development .

the majority of usda assistance does not require a stafford declaration .

rather , depending on the program , decisions regarding assistance are typically made by the secretary ( eg , emergency loans ) .

assistance may also be provided to participating producers under standing programs ( eg , federally subsidized crop insurance ) .

assistance for agricultural producers includes emergency loans , direct payments under the noninsured crop disaster program , and crop insurance .

disaster assistance is also provided for impairments to watersheds , including debris removal from stream channels , road culverts , and bridges , repairing levees , reseeding damaged areas , and purchasing floodplain easements .

private land assistance includes repairs to damaged farmland and re - establishment of forest land .

community assistance is also available in the form of housing disaster loans and grants , moratoria on loan payments , loan servicing assistance for essential community facilities , and emergency community water assistance grants .

the role of the department of defense ( dod ) and its components in supporting domestic response efforts is potentially significant .

dod has a broad range of capabilities that could be useful to civil authorities in emergency situations , including transportation assets , medical personnel and supplies , security forces , and communications equipment .

however , the extent of the support dod can provide is limited by the need to conduct its principal mission of national defense .

the two principal ways in which dod can provide defense support of civil authorities ( dsca ) are by way of an "immediate response," or in response to a formal "request for assistance" ( rfa ) .

additionally , as part of a proactive federal response , dod could preposition assets in anticipation of a request .

certain defense officials can provide dsca in a limited manner using "immediate response" authority .

immediate response authority enables local military commanders and certain dod civilians to act immediately to "save lives , prevent human suffering , or mitigate great property damage within the united states" when they receive a request for assistance from a civil authority under conditions that are "imminently serious" and when time "does not permit approval from higher authority. .

assistance provided under this authority might include providing medical care , restoring critical public services , and distributing food and other supplies .

however , commanders using this authority are obligated to seek approval or authorization through their chain of command as soon as possible .

the department of defense may also provide support in response to a "request for assistance" from state , local , or tribal entities , or from another federal agency .

the secretary of defense has the principal authority for approving dsca requests and retains control of all dod assets provided .

the forces provided in response to an rfa could include units from multiple military services and could include activated members of the national guard and reserve .

members of the federal reserves are always activated after a request for assistance under title 10 of the u.s. code .

therefore , when acting in a federal capacity , the national guard operates under the control of the president , receives federal pay and benefits , and is subject to the posse comitatus act in the same manner as active duty military personnel .

national guard forces remain under the control of their respective governors unless ordered into federal service ( see the previous section on the national guard ) .

there are a number of statutory authorities which can be used to activate members of the national guard and reserve , although they all have constraints that could potentially limit their utility in providing reserve forces for domestic response missions .

under its civil works program , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) performs emergency response actions to respond to flood and coastal emergencies , droughts , and other disasters .

the corps also plans , builds , operates , and maintains a wide range of water resources facilities , including hurricane protection and flood damage reduction projects .

the stafford act authorizes fema to direct the department of defense ( dod ) , which generally works through the corps , to provide assistance in the event of an emergency or major disaster .

the corps provides assistance to monitor and stabilize damaged structures and demolish structures designated as immediate hazards to public health and safety .

other forms of assistance include technical assistance in clearing , removing , and disposing of contaminated and uncontaminated debris from public property , and establishing ground and water routes into affected areas .

the corps also has authorities specific to the type of natural disaster that has occurred .

after a flooding event , the corps has the authority to rehabilitate certified flood control works ( eg , levees ) and federally constructed hurricane or shore protection projects and to conduct related inspections .

in the case of drought emergencies , the corps may allow for temporary water withdrawal from reservoirs for municipal and industrial use , as well as the construction of wells for transport of water to drought - distressed areas .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) provides grants to states and localities to strengthen public health and medical system capacity in preparedness for health threats .

under the nrf , the department serves as the primary agency for esf #8 ( public health and medical services ) to respond to the public health and medical consequences resulting from natural disasters and human - caused incidents .

the secretary of hhs has general authority under the public health service act to provide public health assistance to states , upon their request , without a stafford act declaration .

in addition , the secretary has authority to determine that a public health emergency exists .

pursuant to such a determination , the secretary may waive certain administrative requirements , provide additional forms of assistance , and take certain other actions to expand federal aid to state and local governments , not - for - profit entities , and others .

in either case , however , the secretary lacks a dedicated funding mechanism for the provision of assistance .

the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) may play a variety of roles in disaster recovery .

when the president declares a major disaster , hud may offer waivers of various program rules and regulations to allow communities to use their existing hud program funding and resources to meet needs arising from the disaster .

in some years , congress has provided additional appropriations for these programs — particularly the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program — to be used specifically for disaster assistance and recovery .

similarly , in some years , congress has provided hud with funding to provide housing vouchers to disaster displaced survivors , in conjunction with fema , or directed fema to contract with hud for the provision of such vouchers .

hud , through the federal housing administration ( fha ) , may also offer special mortgage insurance products to and special forbearance for borrowers affected by major disasters .

hud's community development block grant ( cdbg ) program provides formula grants to eligible communities to use for a range of housing and community development activities .

the cdbg program has been used frequently by the federal government to respond to natural and human - caused incidents .

in general , congress has provided increased flexibility and allocated additional cdbg funds to affected communities and states to help them mitigate against , respond to , and recover from presidentially declared disasters .

the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) works with fema to coordinate transportation support to disaster stricken areas .

dot reports on damage to transportation infrastructure , coordinates alternative transportation services , and coordinates the restoration and recovery of the transportation infrastructure , as well as other emergency responses involving transportation .

dot's federal highway administration's ( fhwa's ) emergency relief program ( er ) is the department's disaster program for highways .

the er program is administered through the state departments of transportation in close coordination with fhwa's division offices .

while er is a federal program , the decision to seek er funding is made by the state rather than the federal government .

the er program provides funds for the repair and reconstruction of roads on the federal - aid highway system that have suffered serious damage as a result of either ( 1 ) a natural disaster , such as a flood , hurricane , tidal wave , earthquake , tornado , severe storm , or landslide ; or ( 2 ) a catastrophic failure from any external cause .

in 2012 , congress passed the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) .

section 20017 of the act included a new disaster relief program for mass transit , the public transportation emergency relief program .

once established , the program is to fund "operating costs" for evacuation services ; rescue operations ; temporary public transportation service ; or reestablishing , expanding , or relocating public transportation route service before , during , or after an emergency .

the program is to be funded from the general fund on a such sums as necessary basis and will require appropriations action .

most observers expect the new program will be administered by the federal transit administration .

as noted above , the fhwa has a permanent program dedicated to disaster relief , the er program .

historically , the vast majority of er funds have gone for natural disaster repair and reconstruction .

for example , since 2005 , er funding allocations for gulf coast hurricane response have totaled over $3 billion .

funding provided for hurricane relief includes funds from the program's annual $100 million highway trust fund authorization and from additional appropriations provided in supplemental or other appropriations acts .

generally , er funds can only be used for roads and bridges on the federal - aid highway system .

repairs and reconstruction costs for other damaged roads ( mostly local roads and neighborhood streets ) may be reimbursed by fema .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) is most frequently involved in emergency response as the lead federal agency responsible for responding to oil spills and releases of hazardous substances within the inland zone under the national contingency plan .

epa also serves in this capacity if this plan is invoked under the national response framework through esf #10 — oil and hazardous materials annex .

 ( see the section on the " national oil and hazardous substances pollution contingency plan " in this report. ) .

epa also has various other response roles under the national response framework and may perform a wide array of support functions in responding to a disaster or emergency .

epa support to other federal agencies and state and local governments broadly includes activities necessary to address threats to human health and the environment focusing on impacts to drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities and post - disaster cleanup .

in accordance with various esfs under the nrf , as well as homeland security presidential directive 7: critical infrastructure identification , prioritization , and protection ( hspd - 7 ) , epa may provide a wide range of support functions to other federal agencies ( primarily fema and the army corps of engineers ) and state and local governments to protect drinking water or wastewater facilities .

as needed , epa may provide guidance and technical assistance to determine impacts from firefighting chemicals on wastewater treatment facilities ; safely manage contaminated debris ; identify critical water and wastewater systems requiring priority power restoration ; or identify alternate water supplies and wastewater collection and treatment for critical health care facilities .

epa also has additional emergency response roles related to protecting water infrastructure under other response plans and authorities .

epa is the lead federal agency for the water sector under the national infrastructure protection plan .

epa also has statutory "emergency powers" under the safe drinking water act to issue orders and commence civil action if a contaminant likely to enter a public water supply system poses a substantial threat to public health , and state or local officials have not taken adequate action .

the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 amended these emergency powers to include the authority for epa to take actions in response to a threatened or potential terrorist attack , or other intentional act , that would disrupt the provision of safe drinking water or impact the safety of a community's water supply .

epa may play a prominent role in post - disaster cleanup under the nrf .

epa may support the army corps of engineers in its mission under esf #3 — public works and engineering annex — to remove disaster debris .

the removal of contaminated debris , and hazardous materials comingled with debris , is coordinated under esf #10 — oil and hazardous materials annex .

in responding to such incidents , epa may provide technical assistance to state solid waste agencies regarding proper hazardous and nonhazardous waste management , including identifying recycling / reuse opportunities to minimize disaster debris and identifying potential waste staging or storage areas and disposal facilities .

epa also may support the u.s. department of energy's responsibility to maintain continuous and reliable energy supplies for the united states during disaster recovery under the national response framework through esf #12 — energy annex .

in practice , epa support for this function has involved waiving environmental requirements applicable to motor vehicle fuel under the clean air act .

as part of the federal response to hurricanes in 2005 , epa granted certain waivers under this statute in response to requests from state and local officials when significant disruptions in fuel production or distribution occurred in the wake of these natural disasters .

the forest service ( fs ) is one of two federal entities responsible for protecting most federal lands from wildfire — a situation that often requires immediate assistance .

wildfire management is generally split into three categories: preparedness , suppression , and fuel reduction .

the fs has received more than $2.0 billion annually over the last few years for wildfire management .

federal wildfire policy is to actively suppress all wildfires and to protect lives , property , and resources on federal lands .

in an emergency wildfire situation , the fs may work with multiple agencies .

the national interagency fire center ( nifc ) — of which the fs is a member — coordinates federal , state , and private forces to assist the state or region in need for complex situations while maintaining local wildfire protection .

as mentioned previously , there are fmags available from fema that provide grants , equipment , personnel , and supplies to supplement community resources when fires threaten destruction that might warrant a major disaster declaration .

if the president declares a disaster , fire management assistance and other recovery programs are also available from fema under the stafford act .

the type of assistance depends on a number of factors , such as the nature and severity of the wildfire damages and the insurance coverage of the affected parties .

also , the fs is involved in site rehabilitation and restoration following a wildfire via the burned area emergency response ( baer ) program .

under baer , emergency treatments on federal lands are prescribed and implemented to minimize threats to life or property resulting from the effects of a fire or to stabilize and prevent unacceptable degradation to natural and cultural resources .

since its creation in 1953 , the small business administration ( sba ) disaster loan program has offered direct loans to individuals and businesses to help repair , rebuild , and recover from economic losses after a disaster .

the majority of disaster loans ( approximately 80% ) are made to individuals and households ( renters and property owners ) to help repair and replace homes and personal property .

the three main types of loans for disaster - related losses provided by the sba disaster loan program are ( 1 ) home disaster loans , ( 2 ) business disaster loans , and ( 3 ) economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) .

home disaster loans are used by homeowners and renters to repair or replace their disaster - damaged primary residences or personal property .

sba regulations limit home loans to $200,000 for the repair or replacement of real estate and $40,000 for the repair or replacement of personal property .

business disaster loans help businesses of all sizes and nonprofit organizations repair or replace disaster - damaged property , including inventory and supplies .

eidls provide working capital to businesses that have been impacted by an incident .

eidls cannot be used to restore or repair businesses .

both business disaster loans and eidls are limited by law to $2 million per applicant .

they also provide assistance to small agricultural cooperatives ( but not enterprises ) , and certain private , nonprofit organizations that have suffered substantial economic injury resulting from a physical disaster or an agricultural production disaster .

