congressional interest in u.s. energy policy has focused in part on ways through which the united states could secure more economical and reliable fossil fuel resources both domestically and internationally .

recent expansion in natural gas production , primarily as a result of new or improved technologies ( eg , hydraulic fracturing ) used on unconventional resources ( eg , shale , tight sands , and coal - bed methane ) , has made natural gas an increasingly significant component in the u.s. energy supply .

while the practice of hydraulic fracturing is not new , relatively recent innovations have incorporated processes such as directional drilling , high - volume slick - water injection , and multistage fractures to get to previously unrecoverable resources .

as a result , the united states has again become the largest producer of natural gas in the world .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) projects unconventional gas activity to more than double from 2010 to 2040 , and forecasts that it will make up almost 80% of total u.s. natural gas production by 2040 .

in addition , some analysts believe that by significantly expanding the domestic gas supply , the exploitation of new unconventional resources has the potential to reshape energy policy at national and international levels — altering geopolitics and energy security , recasting the economics of energy technology investment decisions , and shifting trends in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

many in both the public and private sector have advocated for the increased production and use of natural gas because the resource is domestically available , economically recoverable , and considered a potential "bridge" fuel to a less polluting and lower ghg - intensive economy .

natural gas is cleaner burning than its hydrocarbon rivals , emitting , on average , about half as much carbon dioxide as coal and one - quarter less than oil when consumed in a typical electric utility plant .

further , natural gas combustion emits no mercury — a persistent , bioaccumulative neurotoxin — virtually no particulate matter , and less sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides , on average , than either coal or oil .

for these reasons , pollution control measures in natural gas systems have traditionally received less attention relative to those in other hydrocarbon industries .

however , the recent increase in natural gas production , specifically from unconventional resources , has raised a new set of concerns regarding environmental impacts .

these concerns centered initially on water quality issues , including the potential contamination of groundwater and surface water from hydraulic fracturing and related production activities .

they have since incorporated other issues , such as water management practices ( both consumption and discharge ) , land use changes , induced seismicity , and air pollution .

the new set of questions about hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs has led , in part , to various grassroots movements , some political opposition , and calls for additional regulatory actions , moratoria , and / or bans at the local , state , and federal levels .

currently , the development of natural gas in the united states is regulated under a complex set of local , state , and federal laws that addresses many — but not all — aspects of exploration , production , and distribution .

state and local authorities are responsible for virtually all of the day - to - day regulation and oversight of natural gas systems .

the organization of this oversight within each gas - producing jurisdiction varies considerably .

in general , each state has one or more regulatory agencies that may permit wells , including their design , location , spacing , operation , and abandonment , and may regulate for environmental compliance .

with respect to pollution controls , state laws may address many aspects of water management and disposal , air emissions , underground injection , wildlife impacts , surface disturbance , and worker health and safety .

furthermore , several federal statutes address pollution control measures in natural gas systems ; and , where applicable , these controls are largely implemented by state and local authorities .

for example , the clean water act ( cwa ) regulates surface discharges of water associated with natural gas drilling and production , as well as contaminated storm water runoff from production sites .

the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) regulates the underground injection of wastewater from crude oil and natural gas production , and the underground injection of fluids used in hydraulic fracturing if the fluids contain diesel fuel .

the clean air act ( caa ) limits emissions from associated engines and gas processing equipment , as well as some natural gas extraction , production , and processing activities .

natural gas is a nonrenewable fossil fuel that is used both as an energy source ( for heating , transportation , and electricity generation ) and as a chemical feedstock ( for such varied products as plastic , fertilizer , antifreeze , and fabrics ) .

raw natural gas is commonly recovered from geologic formations in the ground through drilling and extraction activities by the oil and gas industry .

this industry includes operations in the extraction and production of crude oil and natural gas , as well as the processing , transmission , and distribution of natural gas .

for both operational and regulatory reasons , the sector is commonly separated into four major segments: ( 1 ) crude oil and natural gas production , ( 2 ) natural gas processing , ( 3 ) natural gas transmission and storage , and ( 4 ) natural gas distribution ( see figure 1 ) .

this report uses these basic categories to track the various activities in natural gas systems , including the operations , emissions , and regulations discussed below .

while the focus of this report is on the production sector , it also highlights air quality issues in other sectors , where appropriate .

below is a brief outline of the crude oil and natural gas industry .

for more detail regarding specific activities or equipment , see the glossary of terms provided in table c - 1 .

production ( upstream ) .

production operations include the wells and all related processes used in the extraction , production , recovery , lifting , stabilization , separation , and treating of oil and / or natural gas ( including condensate ) .

production operations span the initial well drilling , hydraulic fracturing , well completion , and workover activities and cover all the portable non - self - propelled apparatus associated with those operations .

production sites include not only the ''pads'' where the wells are located , but also the stand - alone sites where oil , condensate , produced water , and gas from several wells may be separated , stored , and treated , as well as the low pressure , small diameter , gathering pipelines and related components that collect and transport the oil , gas , and other materials and wastes from the wells to the refineries or natural gas processing plants .

processing ( midstream ) .

natural gas is primarily made up of methane .

however , in its raw state , natural gas is a mixture of various hydrocarbons and may contain trace amounts of other chemical substances that must be removed before distribution .

the additional hydrocarbons are often referred to as natural gas liquids ( ngl ) .

they are sold separately and have a variety of different uses .

raw natural gas may also contain water vapor , nonhydrocarbon compounds , and other chemical substances .

processing operations are used to separate out the additional components from raw natural gas to produce ''pipeline quality'' or "dry" natural gas for consumption .

transmission and storage ( downstream ) .

dry natural gas leaves the processing segment and enters the transmission segment .

pipelines in the natural gas transmission segment can be interstate pipelines , that carry natural gas across state boundaries , or intrastate pipelines , that transport the gas within a single state .

while interstate pipelines may be of a larger diameter and operate at a higher pressure , the basic components are the same .

to ensure that the natural gas flowing through any pipeline remains pressurized , compressor stations are required at regular intervals .

further , to ensure proper load balancing during the delivery and receipt of natural gas , the transmission segment often includes storage facilities , typically consisting of both man - made and natural sites , such as depleted gas reservoirs and / or salt dome caverns .

distribution .

the distribution segment is the final step in delivering natural gas to customers .

the natural gas enters the distribution segment from delivery points located on interstate and intrastate transmission pipelines and then flows to business and household customers .

nationwide , natural gas distribution systems consist of thousands of miles of pipes , including mains and service lines to the customers .

distribution systems also include compressor and metering stations , which allow companies to both move and monitor the natural gas in the system .

the delivery point where the natural gas leaves the transmission segment and enters the distribution segment is often called the ''citygate.' .

typically , the citygate serves as the transfer point of ownership from producers to utilities .

raw natural gas is a mixture of various hydrocarbons ( primarily methane ) and may contain trace amounts of other chemical substances that must be removed before distribution .

air pollutants associated with the natural gas industry may be emitted through the release of natural gas vapors ( either purposefully or accidently ) , the combustion of natural gas ( either for use or for safety / disposal ) , the combustion of other fuel resources ( for process heat , power , and electricity ) , and the discharge of particulate matter during construction , transportation , and associated operations .

sources of emissions include pad , road , and pipeline construction ; drilling , completion , and flowback activities that occur during the development of a well ; and gas processing and transmission equipment such as controllers , compressors , dehydrators , pipelines , and storage vessels .

pollutants include , most prominently , methane and volatile organic compounds , of which the natural gas industry is one of the highest emitting industrial sectors in the united states .

pollutants also include nitrogen oxides , sulfur dioxide , particulate matter , and various forms of hazardous air toxics , including n - hexane , the btex compounds ( i.e. , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene ) , and hydrogen sulfide .

the clean air act ( caa ) seeks to protect human health and the environment from emissions that pollute ambient , or outdoor , air .

it requires the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to establish minimum national standards for air emissions from various source categories ( sources in the "crude oil and natural gas production," and the "natural gas transmission and storage" sectors are included under these categories ) , and assigns primary responsibility to the states to assure compliance with the standards .

epa has largely delegated day - to - day responsibility for caa implementation to all 50 states , including permitting , monitoring , inspections , and enforcement ; and in many cases , states have further delegated program implementation to local governments .

sections of the caa which are most relevant to air quality issues in the natural gas industry are discussed below .

some of the regulations implementing these sections have been revised by federal air standards promulgated by epa on august 16 , 2012 .

the paragraphs below summarize relevant sections of the caa prior to these revisions .

for a summary of the 2012 air standards and their relationship to the prior ones , see the subsequent section , " 2012 federal air standards for crude oil and natural gas systems ," as well as appendix a .

the expansion of both industry production and government regulation of natural gas systems has sparked discussion on a number of outstanding issues .

some of the more significant debates involving air quality concerns are outlined in the sections below .

u.s. natural gas production has grown markedly in recent years .

this growth is due in large part to increased activities in unconventional resources brought on by technological advance .

many have advocated for the increased production and use of natural gas in the united states for economic , national security , and environmental reasons .

they argue that natural gas is the cleanest - burning fossil fuel , with fewer emissions of carbon dioxide , nitrogen oxide , sulfur dioxide , particulate matter , and mercury than its hydrocarbon rivals ( eg , coal and oil ) on a per - unit - of - energy basis .

for these reasons , many have looked to natural gas as a "bridge" fuel to a less polluting and lower greenhouse gas - intensive economy .

however , the recent expansion in natural gas production in the united states has given rise to a new set of concerns regarding human health and environmental impacts , including impacts on air quality .

to address air quality and other environmental issues , the oil and gas industry in the united states has been regulated under a complex set of local , state , and federal laws .

currently , state and local authorities are responsible for virtually all of the day - to - day regulation and oversight of natural gas systems , and many states have passed laws and / or have promulgated rules to address air quality issues based on local needs .

further to this , organizations like the state review of oil and natural gas environment regulations ( stronger ) are available to help states assess the overall framework of environmental regulations supporting oil and gas operations in their regions .

at the federal level , epa has promulgated minimum national standards for vocs , so 2 , and haps for some source categories in the crude oil and natural gas sector .

the federal air standards focus primarily on the production and processing sectors of the industry , and were drawn , in part , from existing requirements found in the state codes of colorado and wyoming .

further to this , many producers in the crude oil and natural gas sector have set forth a series of recommended practices .

these practices are sustained by the economic incentives provided by capturing the fugitive releases of natural gas and its byproducts to be sold at market .

several voluntary partnerships sponsored by various federal and international agencies also serve to facilitate recommended practices for emissions reductions in the oil and gas industry .

epa's natural gas star program , the global methane initiative ( formerly the methane to markets partnership ) , and the world bank global gas flaring reduction partnership are three such programs .

many believe that air standards similar to those promulgated by colorado , wyoming , and the federal government are sufficient to control voc , so 2 , and hap emissions from the natural gas production sector .

some argue that the cost of compliance with state and federal air standards could affect industry profits , thereby reducing economic interest to invest and slowing production activities .

others are concerned that some pollutants and some emission sources remain unregulated by any standard , including methane , hydrogen sulfide , oil wells , offshore wells , conventional gas wells , and most operations downstream of the gas processing plant .

debate over the costs of compliance , covered sources and pollutants , and the proper regulatory institutions ( i.e. , local , state , or federal ) continues .

complicating these debates is the fact that a comprehensive national inventory that directly measures the quantity and composition of fugitive emissions from natural gas systems does not exist .

this is due to many factors , including costs and technical uncertainties .

but , until there is an adequate and reliable assessment of industry - wide emissions , the benefits , costs , and basis for regulation may remain uncertain .

appendix a .

federal air standards for crude oil and natural gas systems appendix b .

composition of fugitive and combusted natural gas emissions fugitive natural gas fugitive natural gas is primarily a mixture of low molecular - weight hydrocarbon compounds that are gases at surface pressure and temperature conditions .

while the principal component of natural gas is methane ( ch 4 ) , it may contain smaller amounts of other hydrocarbons , such as ethane , propane , and butane , as well as trace amounts of heavier hydrocarbons .

non - hydrocarbon gases , such as carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , helium ( he ) , hydrogen sulfide ( h 2 s ) , nitrogen ( n 2 ) , and water vapor ( h 2 o ) , may also be present in any proportion to the total hydrocarbon content ( see table b - 1 ) .

combusted natural gas combusted natural gas releases carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , carbon monoxide ( co ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and trace amounts of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , particulate matter ( pm ) , uncombusted methane ( ch 4 ) , vocs , and haps .

combusted natural gas is generally regarded as "cleaner" than other fossil fuels with respect to various criteria pollutants and greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions ( see epa's and eia's data comparisons in table b - 2 ) .

coal , fuel oil , and petroleum - based transportation fuels are composed of more complex long - chain hydrocarbon molecules , with higher carbon ratios , and may contain higher nitrogen and sulfur contents as well as increased amounts of ash and particulate matter .

by comparison , the combustion of natural gas releases minimal amounts of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides , virtually no ash or particulate matter , and lower levels of carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , and other reactive hydrocarbons .

while comparisons among the emission profiles of natural gas , coal , fuel oil , and transportation fuels are useful in certain contexts , it should be noted that these comparisons are not wholly substitutable , as end - uses of the fuels vary across sectors and pollution control mechanisms are in place for many of the fuels' combustion activities .

appendix c. glossary of term .

