medicaid is a federal - state program providing medical assistance for low - income individuals .

historically , medicaid eligibility has generally been limited to low - income children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the elderly , and individuals with disabilities .

however , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) included the aca medicaid expansion , which expands medicaid eligibility to individuals under the age of 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ; effectively 138% of fpl ) at state option .

participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and territories choose to participate .

in order to participate in medicaid , the federal government requires states to cover certain mandatory populations and benefits , but the federal government also allows states to cover optional populations and services .

due to this flexibility , there is substantial variation among the states in terms of factors such as medicaid eligibility , covered benefits , and provider payment rates .

medicaid is jointly financed by the federal government and the states .

states incur medicaid costs by making payments to service providers ( eg , for doctor visits ) and performing administrative activities ( eg , making eligibility determinations ) , and the federal government reimburses states for a share of these costs .

the federal government's share of a state's expenditures for most medicaid services is called the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

the fmap varies by state and is inversely related to each state's per capita income .

for fy2016 , fmap rates range from 50% ( 13 states ) to 74% ( mississippi ) .

the medicaid statute requires that states make disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments to hospitals treating large numbers of low - income patients .

this provision is intended to recognize the disadvantaged financial situation of such hospitals because low - income patients are more likely to be uninsured or medicaid enrollees .

hospitals often do not receive payment for services rendered to uninsured patients , and medicaid provider payment rates are generally lower than the rates paid by medicare and private insurance .

while most federal medicaid funding is provided on an open - ended basis , federal medicaid dsh funding is capped .

each state receives an annual federal dsh allotment , which is the maximum amount of federal matching funds that each state can claim for medicaid dsh payments .

in fy2015 , the federal dsh allotments to states totaled $11.9 billion .

this report provides an overview of medicaid dsh , including how state dsh allotments are calculated and the exceptions to the dsh allotments calculation ; how dsh hospitals are defined and how dsh payments to hospitals are calculated ; trends in dsh spending ; variation in states' dsh expenditures ; and requirements outlining the basic requirements for state dsh reports and independently certified audits .

medicaid dsh payments were established in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 ( obra 1981 ; p.l .

97-35 ) when the methodology for medicaid payment rates to hospitals was amended .

prior to obra 1981 , state medicaid programs were required to reimburse hospitals on a reasonable cost basis ( as defined under medicare ) unless the state had approval to use an alternate payment method .

this law deleted the reasonable cost methodology and transferred the responsibility for determining medicaid payment rates to the states .

a new provision required medicaid hospital payment rates to take into account the situation of hospitals that serve a disproportionate number of "low income patients with special needs. .

this requirement established the medicaid dsh payments .

the inclusion of this medicaid dsh provision in obra 1981 recognized that hospitals serving a disproportionate share of low income patients are particularly dependent on medicaid payments because low income patients are mostly medicaid enrollees and uninsured individuals .

hospitals often do not receive payment for services rendered to uninsured patients , and medicaid provider payment rates are generally lower than the rates paid by medicare and private insurance .

while most federal medicaid funding is provided on an open - ended basis , certain types of federal medicaid funding , such as federal dsh funding , are capped .

each state receives an annual dsh allotment , which is the maximum amount of federal matching funds a state is permitted to claim for medicaid dsh payments .

the original state dsh allotments provided in fy1993 were based on each state's fy1992 dsh payments .

in fy1992 , some states provided relatively more dsh payments to hospitals , and , as a result , these states locked in relatively higher medicaid dsh allotments .

other states made relatively fewer dsh payments , and these states locked in relatively lower dsh allotments .

this disparity still remains to some extent in current dsh allotments because dsh allotments are not distributed according to a formula based on the number of dsh hospitals in a state or the amount of hospital services these hospitals provide to low - income patients .

however , over time , the disparity in dsh allotments was reduced by providing larger annual increases to dsh allotments for states that initially made fewer dsh payments and limiting the growth of dsh allotments for states that initially provided relatively more dsh payments .

the methodology for calculating states' annual dsh allotments has changed a number of times over the years .

a history of the dsh allotment calculations is provided in appendix a .

currently , states' medicaid dsh allotments are based on each state's prior year dsh allotment .

specifically , a state's dsh allotment is the higher of ( 1 ) a state's fy2004 dsh allotment or ( 2 ) the prior year's dsh allotment increased by the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) for the prior fiscal year .

louisiana had been the only state that continued to receive its fy2004 dsh allotment ; however , fy2015 was the first year for which louisiana will receive a medicaid dsh allotment based on the prior year's dsh allotment increased by the percentage change in cpi - u .

each state's allotment can be no more than the greater of the prior year's allotment or 12% of its total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state spending and excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) during the fiscal year .

this rule is referred to as the "12% limit. .

this means the federal share of dsh expenditures cannot be more than 12% of each state's total medicaid medical assistance expenditures .

in addition to the state - specific 12% limit , there is a national dsh target .

federal regulations specify that aggregate dsh payments , including federal and state expenditures for all states , should not be more than 12% of the total amount of medicaid medical assistance expenditures for all 50 states and the district of columbia .

this national limit is not an absolute cap but a target .

the national dsh payment limit is different from the 12% limit on state dsh allotments because the 12% national payment limit restricts both federal and state spending while the 12% limit for allotments caps only federal spending .

due to the state - specific 12% limit for state dsh allotments , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) must publish preliminary dsh allotments before the start of the fiscal year based on estimated medicaid expenditures .

then , after the fiscal year has ended , cms uses actual expenditure data to calculate final dsh allotments .

cms calculates annual allotments and publishes them in the federal register .

the most recent federal register notice included final dsh allotments for fy2013 and preliminary dsh allotments for fy2015 .

the federal dsh allotments for fy2012 through fy2015 are shown in table 2 .

medicaid state plans must include explanations for how dsh hospitals are defined and how dsh payments are calculated .

there are federal requirements that states must follow in making these determinations , but for the most part , states are provided significant flexibility in defining dsh hospitals and calculating dsh payments .

the implementation of the dsh allotments effectively controlled the significant growth of dsh expenditures from the early 1990s .

as shown in figure 1 , total medicaid dsh expenditures ( i.e. , including both federal and state expenditures ) have remained relatively stable since the implementation of the federal dsh allotments in fy1993 .

in fy2015 , dsh expenditures totaled $18.6 billion , and the federal share of those payments was $10.6 billion .

the law establishing dsh allotments ( i.e. , medicaid voluntary contribution and provider - specific tax amendments of 1991 , p.l .

102-234 ) specified a national dsh payment limit equal to 12% of the total amount of medicaid medical assistance spending ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures and excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) for all 50 states and the district of columbia .

this is a target but not an absolute cap .

as mentioned earlier , the national dsh payment limit is different from the state - specific 12% limit on state dsh allotments because the 12% national payment limit restricts both federal and state spending while the 12% limit for allotments caps only federal spending .

the national dsh payment target states that aggregate dsh payments ( including federal and state expenditures ) should not be more than 12% of the total amount of medicaid medical assistance expenditures for all 50 states and the district of columbia .

the federal statute limits state dsh allotments ( i.e. , the maximum amount of medicaid dsh federal funds ) to no more than 12% of each state's total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures but excluding administrative expenditures ) , which means the federal share of dsh expenditures cannot be more than 12% of each state's total medicaid medical assistance expenditures .

this means if a state receives a federal dsh allotment equal to 12% of its total medicaid medical assistance expenditures and the state uses all of its federal dsh allotment , then with the state matching funds , the state would provide dsh payments in excess of 12% of its total medicaid medical assistance expenditures .

as a result , it is possible that the national dsh target could be surpassed even if state dsh allotments are subject to the 12% limit .

however , as shown in figure 2 , the implementation of dsh allotments effectively brought dsh payments under the 12% national target within a few years .

dsh allotments were implemented in fy1993 , and total dsh expenditures fell below 12% of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures in fy1996 .

in fy2015 , total dsh expenditures were 3.5% of the total medicaid medical assistance expenditures .

dsh expenditures are highly concentrated in a few states .

as shown in figure 3 , 4 states ( new york , california , texas , and louisiana ) accounted for half of the fy2015 dsh expenditures , and 10 states accounted for almost three - quarters of all dsh expenditures .

it makes sense that some of these states ( new york , california , texas , new jersey , pennsylvania , and ohio ) accounted for a large portion of the total medicaid dsh expenditures because these states were among the top 10 highest - spending states in terms of total medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures and excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) for fy2015 .

on the other hand , louisiana , missouri , north carolina , and south carolina ranked 24 th , 16 th , 11 th , and 27 th ( respectively ) in terms of total medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures and excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) for fy2015 , but these states were among the top 10 highest spending states in terms of medicaid dsh expenditures .

this means louisiana , missouri , north carolina , and south carolina spent larger proportions of their medicaid budgets on medicaid dsh payments relative to most other states .

since fy1993 , each state has been required to provide quarterly reports with information about the aggregate dsh payments made to hospitals .

then , in 1997 and again in 2003 , congress enhanced the dsh reporting requirements in response to hhs office of the inspector general audits and government accountability office reports detailing state violations in the dsh program .

the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ; p.l .

105-33 ) required states to provide an annual report to the secretary of hhs describing the method used to target dsh funds and to calculate dsh payments .

then , in 2003 , mma mandated that beginning in state plan rate year ( spry ) 2005 , states were required to submit annual reports and independently certified audits .

states' annual dsh reports must provide detailed information about each hospital receiving a dsh payment .

for each hospital , the report must include the following information: the hospital - specific dsh limit , the medicaid inpatient utilization rate , the low income utilization rate , state - defined dsh qualification criteria , medicaid basic payments , other supplemental payments , total medicaid uncompensated care , total uninsured uncompensated care , federal section 1011 payments , and dsh payments .

the annual independent certified audits must verify that hospitals retain the dsh payment ; dsh payments are made in accordance with the hospital - specific dsh limits ; uncompensated care only includes inpatient and outpatient services ; and the state separately documented and retains records of dsh payments ( including the methodology for calculating each hospital's dsh payments ) .

the annual independent certified audits must be completed by the last day of the federal fiscal year ending three years from the end of the spry under audit .

the annual dsh reports are due at the same time as the independent certified audits .

if a state does not submit the independent certified audit by this deadline , the state could lose the federal dsh matching funds for the sprys subsequent to the date the audit is due .

to ensure a period for developing and refining the reporting and auditing techniques , findings of state reports and audits for spry2005 to spry2010 were not to be given weight except to the extent that the findings draw into question the reasonableness of the state uncompensated care cost estimates used for calculations of prospective dsh payments .

for spry2011 and after , audit findings demonstrating that dsh payments exceed the hospital - specific cost limit are regarded as discovery of overpayment to providers requiring the state to return the federal share of the overpayment to the federal government ( unless the dsh payments are redistributed to other qualifying hospitals ) .

since dsh allotments were implemented in fy1993 , dsh payments have remained relatively stable .

total dsh expenditures have dropped as a percentage of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures from 15.0% in fy1992 to 3.5% in fy2015 .

over the next few years , dsh expenditures are to continue to decline as a percentage of medicaid medical assistance expenditures due to the dsh reductions .

the impact of these reductions will vary by state according to the uninsurance rate of each state ; whether a state is a "low dsh state" ; and how a state targets its dsh payments .

currently , the dsh reductions are slated to end in fy2025 with state dsh allotments returning to the level states would have received without the dsh reduction for fy2026 and subsequent years .

however , the future of medicaid dsh payments is uncertain because congress may decide to change the dsh reductions again .

also , as states build experience with the aca medicaid expansion , the role of dsh in medicaid may be revisited and modified by congress .

appendix a .

a chronology of state dsh allotments calculations the medicaid voluntary contribution and provider - specific tax amendments of 1991 ( p.l .

102-234 ) established ceilings on federal medicaid dsh funding for each state .

since fy1993 , each state has had its own dsh limit , which is referred to as "dsh allotments. .

these allotments are calculated by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) and promulgated in the federal register .

the methodology for calculating these allotments has changed a number of times over the years , and these different methodologies are described below .

fy1993 the original state dsh allotments provided in fy1993 were based on each state's fy1992 dsh payments .

this resulted in funding inequities because states that had been providing relatively more dsh payments to hospitals in fy1992 locked in higher medicaid dsh allotments ( and vice versa ) .

as a result , the dsh allotment a state receives is not entirely based on the number of dsh hospitals in the state or the hospital services provided in dsh hospitals to low - income patients .

fy1994 to fy1997 the dsh allotments for fy1994 to fy1997 were based on each state's prior year dsh allotment .

the annual growth for each state's dsh allotment depended on whether a state was classified as a "high - dsh" or "low - dsh" state .

states with dsh expenditures greater than 12% of their total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , federal and state medicaid expenditures excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) were classified as "high - dsh" states , and "high - dsh" states did not receive an increase to their dsh allotment .

states with dsh expenditures less than 12% of their total medicaid medical assistance expenditures were classified as "low - dsh" states , and the growth factor for the dsh allotment for "low - dsh" states was the projected percentage increase for each state's total medicaid expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state spending ) for the current year .

however , "low - dsh" states' dsh allotments could not exceed 12% of each state's total medical assistance expenditures .

fy1998 to fy2000 provisions included in the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ; p.l .

105-33 ) reduced medicaid dsh expenditures by replacing the state dsh allotment calculations with fixed state dsh allotments specified in statute for fy1998 through fy2002 .

the aggregate fixed allotments for fy1998 totaled $10.3 billion , which was a 50% decrease from the aggregate fy1997 dsh allotments .

the aggregate allotments for fy1999 and fy2000 decreased to $10.0 billion and $9.3 billion respectively .

adjustments for specific states a number of legislative adjustments were made to the bba fixed dsh allotments .

the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 1998 ( p.l .

105-78 ) increased the fy1998 dsh allotments for minnesota and wyoming .

the omnibus consolidated and emergency supplemental appropriations act , 1999 ( p.l .

105-277 ) increased the fy1999 dsh allotments for minnesota , new mexico , and wyoming .

the medicare , medicaid , and schip balanced budget refinement act of 1999 ( included in the consolidated appropriations act 2000 , p.l .

106-113 ) increased the fy2000 , fy2001 , and fy2002 dsh allotments for the district of columbia , minnesota , new mexico , and wyoming .

fy2001 and fy2002 the fixed state allotments were supposed to last through fy2002 with the aggregate dsh allotments slated to decrease in fy2001 and again in fy2002 .

however , the medicare , medicaid , and schip benefits improvement and protection act of 2000 ( bipa , which was incorporated into the consolidated appropriations act of 2001 , p.l .

106-554 ) eliminated the dsh reductions for fy2001 and fy2002 and provided states with increases to their dsh allotments .

specifically , the dsh allotments for those two years were determined by increasing each state's prior year dsh allotment by the percent change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) for the prior fiscal year .

these state dsh allotments could not exceed 12% of a state's total medical assistance expenditures for the allotment year .

this is referred to as the 12% rule .

extremely low dsh states bipa also established a special rule for dsh allotments for "extremely low dsh states," which were defined as states with fy1999 dsh expenditures greater than 0% and less than 1% of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , federal and state medicaid expenditures excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) .

the fy2001 dsh allotments for extremely low dsh states were increased to 1% of each state's fy2001 total medical assistance expenditures .

then , the fy2002 dsh allotments for extremely low dsh states were each state's fy2001 dsh allotment increased by the percentage change in cpi - u for fy2001 , subject to the 12% rule .

fy2003 for non - extremely low dsh states , fy2003 dsh allotments were each state's fy2002 fixed dsh allotment determined in bba ( i.e. , not states' actual dsh allotment for fy2002 as provided by bipa ) increased by the percent change in cpi - u for fy2002 , subject to the 12% rule .

for most states , the fy2002 state dsh allotments provided by bba were less than the actual state allotments states received in fy2002 .

as a result , in general , fy2003 dsh allotments were lower than the allotments states received in fy2002 .

this was not the case for extremely low dsh states , which received fy2003 dsh allotments based on their actual fy2002 dsh allotment increased by percentage change in cpi - u for fy2002 .

fy2004 the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) addressed the drop in dsh allotments for many states from fy2002 to fy2003 by exempting fy2002 dsh allotment amounts from the 12% rule and providing a 16% increase in dsh allotments for fy2004 .

low dsh states mma also discontinued the special arrangement for extremely low dsh states and instead established low dsh states — defined as those states in which total dsh payments for fy2000 were less than 3% of the state's total medicaid medical assistance expenditures .

for such states , fy2004 dsh allotments were each state's fy2003 dsh allotment increased by 16% .

after fy2004 state dsh allotments for years after fy2004 are set to be equal to each state's fy2004 dsh allotment , unless a state's allotment as determined by the calculation in place prior to mma would equal or exceed the fy2004 allotment for that state .

for any years a state's dsh allotments would be higher under the pre - mma calculation , that state's dsh allotment will be equal to its dsh allotment from the prior fiscal year increased by the percentage change in the cpi - u for the prior fiscal year , subject to the 12% rule .

low dsh states by statute , the definition of low dsh state is a state with fy2000 dsh expenditures greater than 0% but less than 3% of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures for fy2000 .

so states determined to be low dsh states in fy2004 continue to be low dsh states regardless of the states' dsh expenditures in years after fy2000 .

for fy2004 through fy2008 , low dsh states received dsh allotments in each year equal to each state's prior year dsh allotment increased by 16% , subject to the 12% rule .

for fy2009 forward , the allotment for low dsh states is equal to the prior year allotment amount increased by the percentage change in the cpi - u ( subject to the 12% rule ) , which is the same dsh increase provided to non - low dsh states .

district of columbia the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l .

109-171 ) increased the fixed dsh allotments for the district of columbia for fy2000 , fy2001 , and fy2002 from $32 million to $49 million .

this change was effective as of october 1 , 2005 .

increasing the district of columbia's dsh allotments for fy2000 to fy2002 was done for the purposes of determining the district of columbia's fy2006 dsh allotment .

this change made the district of columbia's dsh allotment for fy2006 $57.7 million , which was a $20.0 million increase over what the district of columbia would have gotten without the change .

the provision took effect on october 1 , 2005 , and applies to fy2006 and subsequent fiscal years .

fy2009 and fy2010 the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) temporarily increased states' dsh allotments for fy2009 and fy2010 .

specifically , arra provided states with a fy2009 dsh allotment that was 102.5% of the fy2009 allotment states would have received without arra .

then , states' fy2010 dsh allotments were 102.5% of each state's fy2009 dsh allotment as determined under arra .

for both years , the arra dsh provisions were not applied to the dsh allotments for states that would have had a higher dsh allotment as determined without application of the arra dsh provisions .

after fy2010 , states' annual dsh allotments returned to being determined as they were prior to the enactment of arra .

appendix b. imd dsh limits under sections 1923 ( h ) of the social security act , states cannot collect medicaid federal matching funds for dsh payments to imds and other mental health facilities that are in excess of state - specific aggregate limits .

the aggregate limit for each state is the lesser of a state's fy1995 dsh expenditures to imds and other mental health facilities or the amount equal to the product of a state's current year dsh allotment and the applicable percentage ( i.e. , the percentage of fy1995 dsh expenditures paid to imds and other mental health facilities with a maximum of 33% ) .

table b - 1 shows states' final imd dsh limits for fy2013 and preliminary limits for fy2014 and fy2015 .

appendix c. state - by - state dsh expenditures there is significant variation from state to state with respect to dsh expenditures .

two distinct differences are ( 1 ) the proportion of dsh payments going to hospitals and imds and ( 2 ) total dsh payments as a percent of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures and excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) .

nationally , 84% of medicaid dsh expenditures are allocated to hospitals , and the remaining 16% is distributed to imds and other mental health facilities .

this distribution varies by state .

as shown in table c - 1 , in fy2015 , most states targeted their dsh expenditures to hospitals with 15 states allocating all of their dsh expenditures to hospitals .

however , some states focused their dsh expenditures on imds and other mental health facilities .

one state ( maine ) used all of its dsh expenditures for imds and other mental health facilities .

table c - 1 also shows fy2015 total dsh expenditures ( i.e. , including both federal and state expenditures ) as a percentage of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures ( i.e. , including federal and state expenditures and excluding expenditures for administrative activities ) .

dsh expenditures made in fy2015 ranged from 0.1% of total medicaid medical assistance expenditures in wyoming to 16.9% in louisiana .

