this report analyzes the impacts of wind generation on competitive power markets , including financial and economic impacts on electric power generators .

overall , the goal of this report is to provide context for several electricity market concepts that are relevant to understanding the economic effects of wind power generation .

additionally , this report addresses three specific questions about the market interaction of wind power and electric power generators: ( 1 ) how might wind power affect wholesale market clearing prices ? .

 ( 2 ) does wind power contribute to negative wholesale power price events within competitive electric power markets ? .

and ( 3 ) does wind power impact electric system reliability ? .

this report focuses on data and information available for competitive electricity markets that are managed by a regional transmission operator ( rto ) or independent system operator ( iso ) .

specific information for three rto / iso organizations is provided in this report: ( 1 ) midwest independent system operator ( miso ) , ( 2 ) pjm , and ( 3 ) electric reliability council of texas ( ercot ) .

these three rtos were selected for the analysis in an effort to limit the scope of this report .

furthermore , these rtos are commonly cited as markets that are being affected by wind power generation .

as a result , there is no discussion of wind power market impacts within cost - of - service , vertically integrated electricity markets that are common in the west and southeast regions of the united states , nor is there any discussion of how wind power is managed by federally owned transmission system operators such as the bonneville power administration .

wind electricity generation in the united states has experienced rapid growth over the last two decades .

in 1992 , cumulative installed u.s. wind capacity was approximately 1,500 megawatts ( mw ) .

in august of 2012 , the u.s. wind industry reached a new milestone of 50,000 mw of installed wind power capacity .

in 2011 , 3% of electricity generated in the united states was derived from wind power , compared to less than 1% in 1992 .

growth in the u.s. wind power sector has been influenced by complementary policies and incentives at both the state and federal level .

states essentially create demand for wind power projects by implementing renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) policies that require a certain amount of renewable power to be generated by a certain date .

for example , a state - level rps may require that 25% of retail electricity sales be derived from renewable energy sources by 2025 .

as of september 2012 , 29 states and the district of columbia had established binding rps policies .

each state rps policy is unique with respect to its design , goals , and means of compliance .

federal incentives that support wind electricity generation are generally provided in the form of tax credits and depreciation benefits for qualified wind power projects .

federal tax incentives for wind power provide an economic incentive for wind projects and they may reduce the financial impact to rate payers in states that require a certain amount of renewable electricity generation .

currently , qualified wind power projects can receive either a production tax credit for every kilowatt - hour of electricity produced during the first 10 years of operation or a project can elect to receive a one - time investment tax credit equal to 30% of qualified project capital costs .

the federal production tax credit is currently 2.2 cents ( $0.022 ) for each kilowatt - hour of electricity produced from a qualified wind project .

under current law , tax credit incentives for new wind power projects are scheduled to end on january 1 , 2013 .

u.s. wind power growth has resulted in several challenges that are being addressed in various power markets throughout the country .

the variable nature of wind power generation has led to several integration studies aimed at analyzing transmission system operational challenges that may need to be addressed as wind power continues to grow .

additionally , as will be discussed further in this report , some u.s. electricity markets have experienced lower , and even negative , wholesale market prices at certain locations at certain times that may be linked to wind power generation .

reports by consulting companies have been published indicating that low and negative wholesale prices resulting from wind power are distorting markets , adversely impacting the financial economics of conventional power generators , and skewing the economic signals necessary to stimulate new capacity builds to ensure electric system reliability .

however , other studies have concluded that additional wind power production within rto markets will reduce wholesale prices and ultimately reduce electricity costs to consumers .

competitive electricity markets are extremely complex and vary regionally , with different markets having different rules regarding electricity dispatch , and revenue opportunities , among others .

additionally , the financial performance of electricity generators operating in competitive power markets is multi - dimensional and is influenced by a number of variables ( eg , natural gas costs , coal costs , electricity demand , and transmission congestion ) .

as a result , identifying and quantifying the direct and absolute impact of one factor , such as wind power generation , on competitive markets can be difficult .

a comprehensive analysis of electricity markets and how wind power affects each respective market is beyond the scope of this report .

generally , however , there are two distinct types of markets in the united states: ( 1 ) competitive markets , in which power generators are subject to price competition when selling power into wholesale markets , and ( 2 ) cost - of - service markets , in which power generators earn a regulated rate - of - return established by a public utilities commission .

this report's analysis is confined to how wind power is integrated into competitive markets .

in order to provide some context for the discussions below about how wind power might affect wholesale electric power markets , an overview of some important concepts and definitions is provided to orient the reader .

these concepts and definitions provide some insight into the complexities associated with u.s. power markets , and the relationships between wind power generation , wholesale power markets , and the financial economics of power generators .

wholesale electric power prices are influenced by a number of different variables .

some of the most common variables include: ( 1 ) economic activity and load demand , ( 2 ) weather , ( 3 ) fuel prices , ( 4 ) transmission congestion , and ( 5 ) zero marginal cost generation .

as described in figure 2 above , wholesale prices are bid by generators based on the marginal ( i.e. , fuel ) cost of production .

wholesale prices are cleared at the intersection of supply bid and load demand .

as such , the amount of economic activity ( load demand ) and the price of fuel can significantly influence wholesale market clearing prices .

for example , the miso 2011 state - of - the - market report states that wholesale market prices were lower in 2011 , compared to 2010 , as a result of lower natural gas prices and lower loads .

in many rto - managed markets , natural gas generation typically sets the market clearing price during peak demand times when wholesale prices are highest and when generator margin opportunities are the greatest .

low natural gas prices result in lower natural gas generation costs , which reduce the wholesale clearing price and therefore the revenue and margins available to all generators .

additionally , weather conditions directly influence load demand , and can move clearing prices up or down depending on the seasonality or abnormality of annual weather conditions .

also , as briefly discussed above , transmission congestion can cause clearing prices to fluctuate in certain locations within an rto operating area .

finally , as will be discussed in further detail below , the addition of zero marginal cost generation can potentially reduce market clearing prices by shifting out the power supply curve , thereby reducing the market clearing price at a specified demand level during certain times throughout the day .

since 2008 , wholesale power prices in all rto markets have declined .

in some rto markets , power price declines have been substantial ( see figure 3 ) .

as indicated in figure 3 , wholesale power prices and price declines vary across each rto .

arguably , the wholesale price declines observed since 2008 are primarily due to lower natural gas generation costs and lower electricity demand .

the power price fall coincides with the 2008 financial crises and the associated reduction in electricity demand due to lower levels of economic activity .

also , increasing u.s. natural gas production through the expanded use of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling techniques contributed to low natural gas prices .

low natural gas prices translate into low marginal costs for natural gas electricity generation .

since natural gas generation is typically used to supply power during peak demand periods , market clearing prices were generally lower during peak demand times when power generators might otherwise be able to capture higher revenues and operating margins .

various studies and reports , as referenced below , have been published regarding the wholesale electricity price impacts from the increased penetration of wind power .

considering the key concepts and definitions described above , the following sections examine three fundamental questions related to the impact of wind power in competitive electricity markets: ( 1 ) how might wind power affect market clearing prices ? , ( 2 ) does wind power contribute to negative wholesale electricity price events ? , and ( 3 ) does wind power impact electric system reliability ? .

the immediate policy issue related to the market and economic effects of wind power is the future of production tax credit ( ptc ) incentives for wind projects .

as briefly discussed above , the ptc has supported u.s. wind industry growth since being introduced in 1992 .

under current law , ptc incentives will no longer be available to new wind projects on january 1 , 2013 .

debate about ptc incentives for wind power includes many aspects and considerations , the financial and economic impacts discussed in this report being only one .

proponents of extending the ptc incentive may contend that the wind industry supports thousands of u.s. manufacturing and project development jobs , supports many environmental objectives , helps diversify u.s. energy supply , and can potentially reduce consumer electricity bills .

opponents of a ptc extension may argue that wind is a mature electric power technology that no longer needs federal subsidies , the cost of the ptc is too expensive relative to the small amount of overall generation provided by wind , and the intermittent and variable nature of wind power may result in power system operational reliability challenges .

others have advocated a gradual phase - out of the ptc incentive as a way to eventually eliminate them while allowing the industry time to adjust to incentive reductions .

the senate finance committee reported the family and business tax cut certainty act of 2012 ( s. 3521 ) on august 28 , 2012 .

among a number of tax - related provisions and extensions , s. 3521 includes language that extends the availability of production tax credits for wind facilities until january 1 , 2014 .

the bill also modifies the definition of a qualified facility by allowing projects that start construction , rather than be placed in service , by january 1 , 2014 to qualify for ptc incentives .

this modification could be viewed as important to wind projects as it alleviates investment and development pressures that might result from having to place new projects into service by the end of 2013 .

increasing amounts of wind power can potentially impact wholesale power prices in rto - managed markets by possibly reducing market clearing prices and contributing to negative price events in certain locations during certain seasons and times of day .

however , the absolute financial impacts of wind power generation are unclear due to the complex nature of wholesale power markets and the many variables that can impact wholesale electricity prices and generator revenues ( i.e. , location , natural gas prices , generation mix , and electricity demand ) .

independent market monitor reports , as referenced in the text above , for the three selected rtos ( miso , pjm , and ercot ) indicate that wind power can contribute to negative price events ; however , negative prices are more likely to occur at night when wind power generation is high , load demand is low , and electricity prices are low .

however , during peak demand , when power prices are high , wind power generation is typically low .

therefore , wind power may have less of a price impact during times when generators can capture high revenues and earn high margins .

finally , some studies suggest that wind power could potentially influence reliability issues or contribute to resource inadequacy .

however , each rto has created a unique power market that is designed to incentivize reliability and resource adequacy within its operating territory .

nevertheless , should wind power continue to experience growth , it is uncertain whether current rto market designs would function to ensure availability of the types of generation that would be necessary to both maintain resource adequacy and manage the variable and intermittent nature of wind power .

