the judgment fund ( or fund ) is a permanent appropriation enacted by congress in 1956 .

the fund is an unlimited amount of money set aside to pay judgments against the united states .

it is only accessible when the united states has waived its sovereign immunity and certain statutory conditions are met .

the fund has evolved in administration and function over the last half century and has been subject to limiting principles .

most importantly , the judgment fund cannot be used in place of a specific appropriation .

the fund remains a source of continued controversy and discussion , especially in the current fiscal environment .

during the budget uncertainties in the 1990s , federal agencies became increasingly concerned about the judgment fund's solvency , as statutory and constitutional constraints precluded the agencies from obligating funds where appropriated money is not available .

this report reviews the history of the judgment fund , which has been administered through different agencies and with variable levels of congressional oversight since its inception .

this report also outlines specific instances in which the fund may be accessed , and when costs other than the principal award may be paid .

finally , this report provides examples of how and when the judgment fund may be accessed , as well as instances of when tribal judgment funds are implicated .

federal courts have some discretion when deciding at the end of litigation whether to charge the losing party with costs for the prevailing party .

however , the categories of costs that may be awarded are strictly circumscribed and the subject of considerable debate .

under 28 u.s.c .

ยง 1920 , the clerk of the court may award costs for court fees , transcripts , fees related to witnesses , materials for presentation in the case , compensation for court - appointed experts , and docket fees .

to obtain costs for suc h items in payment fro m the judgment fund , the submitting agency must include a bi ll of costs or the c ourt's order awarding costs with the request for payment .

courts have limited payment to the enumerated items in ยง1920 and the specific exemptions in applicable statutory authority when awarding costs .

payments of interest and attorneys' fees have caused considerable debate with respect to this issue .

as discussed above , the judgment fund enabling statute limits an agency's ability to access the fund .

this section provides examples of statutes that prevent an agency from relying on the judgment fund as the source of payment , and briefly outlines the legislative intent of these statutes .

the judgment fund has changed many times in its over - 50-year history , and recent legislative proposals in congress could again alter certain payments and processes .

in the 113 th congress , the judgment fund transparency act of 2013 has been introduced to amend the judgment fund enabling statute .

the act would require the secretary of the treasury to post on a publicly accessible website the claimant , agency , fact summary , and payment amount for each claim from the judgment fund , within 30 days after the payment was made , unless a law or court order otherwise prohibits the disclosure of such information .

recently , fms released its 2011 fiscal report , which included all of the information from the transparency act except for fact summaries , pursuant to the house appropriations committee's recommendations that accompanied the financial services and general government appropriations act of 2012 .

the committee instructed fms to report online each claim paid from the judgment fund in the given fiscal year .

in the 112 th congress , the government transparency and recordkeeping act of 2012 was introduced but not enacted .

the bill would have amended the judgment fund enabling statute to require the secretary of the treasury to publicly report all judgment fund payments since 2003 , and report all future payments from eaja .

the bill's provisions called for the disclosures to be made online and include those required under the judgment fund transparency act , as well as specific details about attorneys' fees and interest paid from the judgment fund .

legislation in the 110 th and 111 th congress would have amended the no fear act to require agencies to reimburse the judgment fund for payments for claims within two years of a final finding of discrimination .

claims under the no fear act are paid from the judgment fund ; however , the law does not specify a definitive period for agencies to reimburse the fund .

the stated purpose of the legislation was to "encourage timely resolution or settlement of complaints. .

these bills saw no action .

