a "dirty bomb" or other type of radiological dispersal device ( rdd , a device for dispersing radioactive material ) could contaminate several square miles of densely populated or economically critical areas , such as a key port or the center of a large city .

 ( the amount of area contaminated would depend on many factors. ) .

the types of radioactive material most likely to be used in an rdd are widely available .

while radioactive contamination from an rdd would kill few people , many experts believe , it could render an area off - limits , perhaps for many years .

that , in turn , would require a massive cleanup effort , possibly including demolition and reconstruction of buildings and streets .

as a result , an rdd attack could impose tens of billions of dollars of costs from economic activity forgone , societal disruption , and cleanup and remediation .

congress has acted in multiple ways to protect the united states against the threat of terrorists seizing radioactive material that they would need to make an rdd: congress has held numerous hearings on securing and detecting nuclear and other radioactive materials , and the threat they pose .

the safe port act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-347 ) , section 121 ( 6 u.s.c .

921 ) mandated that all cargo containers entering the united states through certain ports "shall be scanned for radiation .

to the extent practicable , the secretary [of homeland security] shall deploy next generation radiation detection technology. .

section 501 ( 6 u.s.c .

591 ) of that act established the domestic nuclear detection office and made it "responsible for coordinating federal efforts to detect and protect against the unauthorized importation , possession , storage , transportation , development , or use of a nuclear explosive device , fissile material , or radiological material in the united states , and to protect against attack using such devices or materials. .

congress has funded the global threat reduction initiative of the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) .

among other things , this initiative secures nuclear and other radioactive material domestically and internationally .

congress has funded programs by the departments of homeland security , defense , state , and energy to research , develop , procure , and operate equipment to detect nuclear and other radioactive material at u.s. and foreign ports and elsewhere .

the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) is one of several agencies playing a role in protecting the united states against an rdd attack .

nrc is in charge of regulating civilian nuclear and other radioactive materials .

in the wake of 9 / 11 , it issued a series of orders to its licensees mandating steps to increase security of many types of radioactive materials .

orders are effective immediately , issued with little or no formal input from stakeholders , and apply only to licensees to whom they are issued .

because of these limitations , nrc has prepared a forthcoming new rule that it has developed with extensive input from stakeholders and that would apply to all licensees .

this rule , 10 c.f.r .

37 , is "physical protection of byproduct material. .

 ( "byproduct material" includes specified types radioactive material other than uranium or plutonium as defined in appendix a . ) .

combining features of the security orders , the rule would regulate radioactive material of the types and quantities that pose the greatest threat for use in an rdd .

the rule will have broad impacts across the country and across most if not all aspects of industries that use radioactive material , including hospital and blood bank irradiators , industrial radiography equipment , massive facilities for irradiating certain foods and medical supplies , laboratory equipment for research into radiation and its effects , state regulators , and manufacturers , distributors , and transporters of radioactive sources .

nrc anticipates that the rule will be published in the federal register in early 2013 .

it would be effective one to several years after publication ; until then , the orders would remain in effect .

congress may find this analysis of interest for several reasons: congress attaches great importance to protecting the united states against terrorist threats ; the rule will affect the many industrial , research , and medical activities nationwide that use radioactive materials , thereby affecting many constituents and raising cost - benefit issues ; and there is wide concern about regulation and radiation more generally .

this report analyzes the rule .

in order to analyze the rule , crs conducted detailed telephone interviews with 14 professionals in the radiation industry .

they include radiation safety officers — individuals responsible for the safety and security of radioactive material and radiation equipment — at large universities ; industrial radiographers ; state regulators ; manufacturers and distributors of radioactive sources ; a representative of the nuclear energy institute , which describes itself as "the policy organization of the nuclear energy and technologies industry" ; and a transporter of radioactive material .

these interviews — which provided the views of front - line radiation professionals — constitute the database for this analysis of 10 c.f.r .

37 .

they display the widespread effects of this new rule , and the widely divergent views that these professionals hold of virtually every part of this rule .

at the same time , one interviewee commented , "part 37 is a sweeping , high - impact rule that affects the entire industry" ; based on their responses , most if not all interviewees would seem to agree .

while there had been concerns about the vulnerability of the united states to "weapons of mass destruction," or more precisely chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) weapons , for many years prior to september 11 , 2001 , the events of that day elevated concern about cbrn attacks , especially those that might be mounted by "non - state actors" such as terrorists .

one concern is that a terrorist group might acquire and set off a radiological dispersal device , or rdd .

an rdd might contaminate several square miles with radioactive material .

such material would probably result in few prompt fatalities , but could cause additional long - term cancer fatalities .

its main potential impact would be rendering key sections of a city or critical infrastructure ( eg , wall street , pennsylvania avenue , the port of los angeles - long beach ) off - limits for years , causing immense societal and economic disruption , forcing many people to relocate , and requiring cleanup that could cost billions of dollars .

a "dirty bomb," in which radioactive material is dispersed using explosives , is one type of rdd , but other means of dispersal are possible , such as dropping material from a tall building on a windy day .

for further information on rdds , see crs report r41890 , "dirty bombs": technical background , attack prevention and response , issues for congress , by jonathan medalia .

every chemical element has at least one radionuclide , or radioactive form of its atom , but only a few are of concern for an rdd .

radionuclides with half - lives of a few days or less decay quickly , reducing cleanup costs and societal dislocation .

radionuclides with half - lives of tens of thousands of years emit so little radiation per unit mass that tons might be required to emit as much radiation , per unit time , as a few grams of other materials .

different types of radiation pose different threats .

most radionuclides are rare or nonexistent in commerce .

the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) screened radionuclides and found 16 of particular concern .

appendix b shows these radionuclides .

in 2004 , the iaea produced a code of conduct on the safety and security of radioactive sources that was intended to "serve as guidance to states for — inter alia — the development and harmonization of policies , laws and regulations on the safety and security of radioactive sources. .

it applies to specified quantities of the 16 radionuclides .

a category 1 source of a radionuclide has 100 times as much material as a category 2 source , which has 10 times as much material as a category 3 source .

most category 2 quantities of the 16 radionuclides weigh a few grams or less .

while the iaea defines these categories in terms of harm to an individual , they have become the international standard for defining harmful quantities of materials meriting protection against possible terrorist use .

10 c.f.r .

37 applies to the iaea's category 1 and 2 quantities of the 16 specified radionuclides .

cesium - 137 is radioactive ; cesium - 137 chloride is of particular concern as a potential threat: because of its dispersibility , solubility , penetrating radiation , source activity , and presence across the united states in facilities such as hospitals , blood banks , and universities , many of which are located in large population centers , radioactive cesium chloride is a greater concern than other category 1 and 2 sources for some attack scenarios .

this concern is exacerbated by the lack of an avenue for permanent disposal of high - activity cesium radiation sources , which can result in disused cesium sources sitting in licensees' storage facilities .

as such , these sources pose unique risks .

figure 1 shows the area that an rdd attack using 1,000 curies ( about 50 grams ) of cesium - 137 chloride could contaminate under the specified conditions .

that amount fits into a vial 2-1 / 4 inches high by 1 inch in diameter .

for comparison , 2,700 curies of cesium - 137 is a category 1 quantity and 27 curies is a category 2 quantity .

the statute that created the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) made it responsible for regulating the use and protection of special nuclear material — which for practical purposes consists of uranium enriched in isotope 235 ( highly enriched uranium , or heu , and low - enriched uranium , or leu ) and plutonium — in civilian uses , but not for regulating nuclear weapons or special nuclear material for weapons use .

nrc also regulates fuel in nuclear reactors , which is typically low - enriched uranium , and "byproduct material," which includes many types of radioactive material other than plutonium or enriched uranium .

byproduct material is widely used in medicine , industry , and research .

nrc issues licenses permitting facilities ( such as nuclear power plants or hospitals ) or other organizations ( such as industrial radiography companies that use mobile radioactive sources in the field ) to possess specified quantities of radioactive material .

a license is not needed to possess minute quantities of radioactive material , such as are found in home smoke detectors .

agreement states are a central component of the nation's regulatory framework .

pursuant to the atomic energy act of 1954 , as amended ( 42 u.s.c .

2011 et seq .

 ) , nrc is responsible , with respect to radioactive material , for maintaining the health and safety of the public and the common defense and security .

section 274 ( b ) of the act permits nrc to relinquish its authority to regulate certain types of radioactive material within their borders to states that have entered into agreements with nrc for this purpose .

there are 37 of these "agreement states. .

nrc can relinquish its regulating authority in the area of public health and safety ; however , pursuant to section 274 ( m ) of the act , nrc cannot relinquish its regulatory authority in matters concerning the common defense and security to agreement states .

each agreement state regulates radioactive materials within its boundaries , which can include most medical , academic , and industrial uses of byproduct material .

agreement states do not regulate commercial nuclear power plants , research and test reactors , and facilities that are part of the nuclear fuel cycle .

in the wake of the 9 / 11 attacks , nrc issued orders to its licensees to enhance the security of radioactive materials .

these orders went , among others , to licensees of large irradiators , manufacturers and distributors of radioactive material , and certain transporters of radioactive material , as detailed in appendix c .

an "increased controls" ( ic ) order went to other licensees authorized to possess specified quantities of certain radioactive material .

in the federal register of june 15 , 2010 , nrc solicited comments for a proposed rule , "physical protection of byproduct material," that would incorporate and modify previous security orders as 10 c.f.r .

37 .

the proposed rule would deal with "the security requirements for use of category 1 and category 2 quantities of radioactive material. .

nrc approved the rule in march 2012 and sent it to omb for its review in july .

nrc anticipates that the rule will be published in the federal register in early 2013 .

for states regulated by nrc , the rule will become effective one year after it is published in the federal register .

for agreement states , the rule will take effect two years later .

once nrc and the agreement states implement the rule , nrc and , when appropriate , agreement states will rescind the various orders the rule replaces .

there are several differences between an order and a rule .

an order can be effective immediately .

the rulemaking process may take years , as it involves issuing a preliminary draft , soliciting comments , in some cases obtaining approval from the office of management and budget , and a waiting period before the rule takes effect .

an order that addresses an urgent situation , such as for post - 9 / 11 security , may have little or no feedback from stakeholders , while a rule , such as 10 c.f.r .

37 , entails extensive feedback , often with hearings , working groups , and lengthy correspondence .

orders apply only to current licensees ; having an order apply to future licensees requires notifying them individually that the order applies to them .

in contrast , a rule applies to current and future licensees .

an order and a rule both have the effect of law .

nrc wanted to replace its orders with a rule for various reasons: the orders issued by the nrc could stay in place indefinitely .

however , the regulations would not reflect current commission policy or requirements .

imposing long - term requirements through orders has not traditionally been the agency's preferred method of regulation .

orders , unlike rules , do not apply prospectively to applicants for new licenses .

the nrc would have to periodically issue new orders to cover new and amended licenses .

in order to make the requirements generally applicable to all present and future licensees , the security - related requirements need to be placed in the regulations .

in addition , notice and comment rulemaking allows for public participation and is an open and transparent process .

the rule makes many changes as compared to the orders , such as requiring individuals already deemed trustworthy and reliable ( t&r ) to complete certain security training , requiring a personal history disclosure , and requiring each licensee to "review the access program content and implementation" at least once a year .

nrc provides details in a 69-page table comparing the rule and orders .

nrc's policy is to publish an implementation guidance document in the federal register when , or shortly after , it issues a rule .

such documents provide details ( often in the form of questions and answers ) on how licensees are to implement a rule .

the guidance , unlike a rule , is not mandatory , and licensees may find other ways to implement a rule , but guidance shows what nrc finds acceptable .

nrc issued draft guidance in june 2010 for 10 c.f.r .

37 ; however , there have been many changes to the rule since then , so there will be many changes to the final guidance document as well .

10 c.f.r .

37 is included in an nrc document .

it is divided into six subparts ( with a seventh , subpart e , reserved ) and an appendix .

this part of the report comments on selected sections of subpart a ( general provisions ) , b ( background investigations and access control program ) , c ( physical protection requirements during use ) , and d ( physical protection in transit ) .

comments are based on interviews with radiation professionals .

two striking features of the interviews are the extent to which there is a diversity of views on almost every issue raised , and the many ways in which the rule impacts the radioactive - materials industry .

subparts f ( records ) and g ( enforcement ) and the appendix ( category 1 and category 2 radioactive materials ) are brief and straightforward , so are not discussed here .

discussions with radiation professionals yielded comments on several topics that are not directly a part of 10 c.f.r .

37 but are related to it .

they are discussed here because they add insight into how radiation professionals view , and are affected by , the new rule .

this section presents views — often , contending views — on each of several topics from various radiation professionals .

several general points emerge from the foregoing analysis .

while the rule imposes many requirements on licensees , the previously issued security orders did so as well , so the incremental burden of the rule is much less than would have been the case had the orders not been issued first .

since many actions must be undertaken by all facilities with category 1 or 2 material regardless of facility size , the rule would appear to impose a proportionately larger burden on small licensees than on larger ones .

layered defense — in which no layer is perfect but each reduces the likelihood of a successful terrorist attack — is a cornerstone of post - 9 / 11 homeland security .

the rule puts into effect a layered defense using personnel reliability , ability to detect intrusion , police response , etc .

vulnerabilities are inevitable: someone deemed t&r might not be , security systems could fail , or police might not respond in time .

nonetheless , the ability of one layer to offset weaknesses in others can be expected to improve security , especially as terrorists would not necessarily know where vulnerabilities are or how to exploit them .

security can be expected to increase over time as more monitoring equipment is installed , as local law enforcement becomes more familiar with the need for rapid response , and as the t&r process becomes more effective .

however , as with so many other aspects of enhanced security post - 9 / 11 , this gradual accretion of security measures has made the united states safer but cannot guarantee safety .

further steps might increase security further , such as a more rapid rollout of gtri , a more uniform t&r policy , or federal adjudication of some or all t&r applications .

whether the costs of these measures are worth the potential benefit is a matter for political judgment .

radiation professionals who use or regulate radioactive material every working day express a wide range of views on how changes from orders to rule and details of each section of the rule affect them .

nrc consulted with them and made many changes in moving from the draft to the final rule in response to their recommendations .

nonetheless , judging from comments presented throughout this report , further changes — whether to the rule or the accompanying guidance document — may prove desirable .

such changes would benefit from further consultation with radiation professionals .

appendix a .

definition of "byproduct material" 10 c.f.r .

37 regulates "byproduct material. .

this appendix presents the definition of the term as contained in 10 c.f.r .

30 , "rules of general applicability to domestic licensing of byproduct material," at 10 c.f.r .

30.4 , "definitions. .

byproduct material means — ( 1 ) any radioactive material ( except special nuclear material ) yielded in , or made radioactive by , exposure to the radiation incident to the process of producing or using special nuclear material ; ( 2 ) ( i ) any discrete source of radium - 226 that is produced , extracted , or converted after extraction , before , on , or after august 8 , 2005 , for use for a commercial , medical , or research activity ; or ( ii ) any material that — ( a ) has been made radioactive by use of a particle accelerator ; and ( b ) is produced , extracted , or converted after extraction , before , on , or after august 8 , 2005 , for use for a commercial , medical , or research activity ; and ( 3 ) any discrete source of naturally occurring radioactive material , other than source material , that — ( i ) the commission , in consultation with the administrator of the environmental protection agency , the secretary of energy , the secretary of homeland security , and the head of any other appropriate federal agency , determines would pose a threat similar to the threat posed by a discrete source of radium - 226 to the public health and safety or the common defense and security ; and ( ii ) before , on , or after august 8 , 2005 , is extracted or converted after extraction for use in a commercial , medical , or research activity .

appendix b. radionuclides and quantities of concern regulated by nrc appendix c. nuclear regulatory commission security orders to licensees in the wake of the 9 / 11 attacks , nrc issued orders to its licensees to enhance the security of radioactive materials .

this appendix summarizes these orders ; a full listing is available on the nrc website at http: / / www.nrc.gov / reading - rm / doc - collections / enforcement / security / index.html#6 .

licensees of panoramic and underwater irradiators having more than 10,000 curies of material ( 68 fr 35458 , june 13 , 2003 ) .

nrc , under its common defense and security authority , issued this order to nrc and agreement state licensees .

manufacturers and distributors of radioactive material ( 69 fr 5375 , february 4 , 2004 ) .

nrc , under its common defense and security authority , issued this order to nrc and agreement state licensees .

licensees transporting radioactive materials in quantities of concern ( 69 fr 44407 , august 2 , 2005 ) , with category 1 as the threshold for a quantity of concern .

nrc , under its common defense and security authority , issued this order to nrc and agreement state licensees .

increased controls ( ic ) order for licensees authorized to possess 16 types of radioactive material above specified "quantities of concern. .

 ( 70 fr 72128 , december 1 , 2005 ) .

nrc acted because "the commission has determined that certain additional controls are required to be implemented by licensees to supplement existing regulatory requirements" to enhance the security of certain quantities of certain radioactive sources .

the order required licensees to ( 1 ) allow only "trustworthy and reliable" personnel to have unescorted access to category 1 and 2 material ; ( 2 ) have a program to monitor and immediately respond to unauthorized access ; ( 3 ) follow certain procedures in shipping category 2 material ; ( 4 ) obtain from nrc an order to implement certain added security measures to ship category 1 material ; ( 5 ) protect mobile or portable radioactive sources ; ( 6 ) retain documentation ; and ( 7 ) protect information describing protection of radioactive material from unauthorized disclosure .

nrc issued the ic order to its licensees under its public health and safety authority .

the agreement states issued legally binding requirements , identical to the ic order , to their licensees .

fingerprinting orders: the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 , august 8 , 2005 ) , section 652 , amended section 149 of the atomic energy act to require fingerprinting and an fbi criminal history records check of any individual permitted unescorted access to certain radioactive materials .

nrc determined that individuals with unescorted access to category 1 or 2 material required fingerprinting and a records check , and issued orders requiring these measures to irradiator licensees and manufacturer and distributor licensees ( 71 fr 63046 , october 27 , 2006 ) , licensees making shipments of category 1 material ( 71 fr 62302 , october 24 , 2006 ) , and to all other licensees with category 1 or 2 quantities of material ( 72 fr 70901 , december 13 , 2007 ) .

nrc issued the fingerprinting orders to its licensees under its public health and safety authority .

the agreement states issued legally binding requirements , identical to the fingerprinting orders , to their licensees .

certain licensees requesting unescorted access to radioactive material ; order imposing trustworthiness and reliability requirements for unescorted access to certain radioactive material ( effective immediately ) , ( 75 fr 160 , january 4 , 2010 ) : "starting in december 2007 , the nrc and the agreement states began issuing additional orders or other legally binding requirements to the ic licensees , imposing the new fingerprinting requirements .

in the december 2007 fingerprinting order , paragraph ic 1.c of the ic requirements was superseded by the requirement that 'service provider licensee employees shall be escorted unless determined to be trustworthy and reliable by an nrc - required background investigation. .

however , nrc did not require background investigations for non - m&d [manufacturer and distributor] service provider licensees .

consequently , only service representatives of certain m&d licensees may be granted unescorted access to the radionuclides of concern at an ic licensee facility , even though non - m&d service provider licensees provide similar services and have the same degree of knowledge of the devices they service as m&d licensees .

to maintain appropriate access control to the radionuclides of concern , and to allow m&d licensees and non - m&d service provider licensees to have the same level of access at customers' facilities , nrc is imposing trustworthiness and reliability requirements for unescorted access to radionuclides of concern , as set forth in this order. .

"the order was issued to nrc and agreement state licensees by the nrc under its common defense and security authority. .

