natural disasters can have varying effects on the landscape .

for agricultural producers , natural disasters are part of the inherent risk of doing business .

the federal role for mitigating weather risk is primarily through federal crop insurance and a suite of agricultural disaster assistance programs to address a producer's crop or livestock production loss .

other , separate u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) programs are designed to repair agricultural and forest land following a natural disaster and potentially mitigate future risk .

these programs offer financial and technical assistance to producers to repair , restore , and mitigate damage on private land .

agricultural land assistance programs include the emergency conservation program ( ecp ) , the emergency forest restoration program ( efrp ) , and the emergency watershed protection ( ewp ) program .

in addition to these programs , usda also has flexibility in administering other programs that allow for support and repair of damaged cropland in the event of an emergency .

this report describes these emergency agricultural land assistance programs .

it presents background on the programs — purpose , activities , authority , eligibility requirements , and authorized program funding levels — as well as current congressional issues .

agricultural land assistance programs help producers rehabilitate crop and forest land following natural disasters .

these programs are described below .

historically , the majority of emergency assistance for agriculture was funded through supplemental appropriations or as an add - on to regular annual appropriations .

a supplemental appropriation provides additional budget authority during the current fiscal year either to finance activities not funded in the regular appropriation or to provide funds when the regular appropriation is deemed insufficient .

since most agricultural land assistance programs do not receive the level of attention that triggers a standalone supplemental appropriation bill , annual appropriation bills are increasingly seen as a vehicle for funding these programs .

the change in funding mechanism from standalone supplemental appropriations to annual appropriations has presented a challenge for agricultural land assistance programs .

the timing of annual appropriations bills may not coincide with natural disasters and the subsequent requests for assistance .

this can increase the time between eligible disasters and funding availability .

disaster funds are typically provided to remain available until expended , which has allowed smaller , more localized disasters to be addressed in years without appropriations .

however , despite this flexibility , the inconsistent funding has left some agricultural land assistance programs without funding during times of high request volume .

beginning in the 2008 farm bill , and continued in the 2014 farm bill , congress authorized a series of permanent disaster assistance programs that receive mandatory funding , rather than relying on supplemental appropriations .

these programs assist with crop and livestock production loss and are generally authorized at funding amounts that are "such sums as necessary" and by their mandatory nature are not subject to annual appropriations .

for the three agricultural land rehabilitation programs discussed in this report , however , funding remains discretionary and is provided on an ad hoc basis .

the variability of funding for agricultural land rehabilitation has led some to suggest that these programs have been left behind in favor of providing assistance for crop and livestock production loss rather than for land rehabilitation and natural resources degradation .

some have suggested that the use of permanent mandatory funding could be expanded beyond production to include land rehabilitation assistance .

others point out that permanent mandatory funding would be difficult to achieve in the current fiscal climate .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) limits emergency supplemental funding for disaster relief .

under section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of the bca , funding used for disaster relief must be used for activities carried out pursuant to the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act , p.l .

93-288 ) for fy2012 through fy2021 .

this means funds appropriated through emergency supplemental acts for disaster relief through fy2021 may apply only to activities with a stafford act declaration .

in recent years , agricultural land rehabilitation programs have received funding through annual appropriations .

however , it is still considered supplemental in nature and , in some cases , classified as disaster relief .

when classified as disaster relief , the funds must be used for a major disaster declared pursuant to the stafford act .

since emergency agricultural land assistance programs do not normally require a federal disaster declaration from either the president or a state official , the stafford act requirement has become a limiting factor in the way agricultural land assistance programs work , potentially assisting fewer natural disaster events .

for example , droughts are traditionally not declared as major disaster events under the stafford act .

however , droughts are one of the eligible natural disasters for land assistance programs — primarily to assist livestock producers to provide water to animals .

since agricultural land assistance program funds are typically available until expended , the stafford act requirement also limits what areas may receive future assistance with any remaining funding .

for example , the fy2016 appropriated levels classify only a portion of the funding provided as disaster relief and therefore subject to the requirements of the bca and the stafford act .

the remaining funds are not considered disaster relief for budget scoring purposes and are therefore appropriated within the regular limitations of the current budget agreement .

these funds are not subject to a stafford act declaration and may be used according to the authorities of the program .

another contentious issue for federal land assistance programs is mitigation .

mitigation actions are steps taken to reduce risk before a natural disaster occurs .

currently only one mitigation program exists for emergency agricultural land assistance — the ewp floodplain easement program ( described above ) .

this program purchases floodplain easements on agricultural land that has a history of flooding ( two of the previous 10 years ) .

under the program , the land is permanently taken out of production and restored to a natural function .

this program has been authorized since 1997 .

however , prohibitions in appropriations acts have limited available funding for the program .

some have questioned the use of federal restoration funds in areas with a high risk of damage by natural disasters , arguing that it encourages poor land use decisions .

while the alternative of mitigation can potentially reduce the future cost of federal assistance , the initial cost of the permanent easement and restoration is sometimes viewed as too expensive a federal cost .

