the federal housing administration ( fha ) was established by the national housing act of 1934 and became part of th e department of housing and urban development ( hud ) in 1965 .

it insures private lenders against losses on certain home mortgages .

if the borrower does not repay the mortgage and the home goes to foreclosure , fha pays the lender the remaining amount that the borrower owes ( that is , it pays a claim to the lender ) .

fha charges borrowers fees , called premiums , in exchange for the insurance .

fha insurance is intended to encourage lenders to offer mortgages to some borrowers who otherwise might be unable to access mortgage credit at affordable interest rates or at all .

for example , fha requires a smaller down payment than many other types of mortgages , potentially making it easier for lower - wealth borrowers , first - time homebuyers , or others for whom a large down payment may present a barrier to homeownership to obtain a mortgage .

to qualify for fha insurance , both the borrower and the mortgage must meet certain criteria .

for example , the principal balance of the mortgage must be under a certain dollar threshold .

lenders that originate fha - insured mortgages must be approved by fha .

this report describes certain measures of the financial health of the fha insurance fund for home mortgages , the mutual mortgage insurance fund .

the discussion in this report assumes a certain degree of familiarity with fha - insured mortgages .

for more information on the basic features of fha - insured mortgages and fha's role in the mortgage market , see crs report rs20530 , fha - insured home loans: an overview .

most single - family mortgages insured by fha are financed through an insurance fund called the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) .

since fy2009 , the mmi fund has included fha - insured reverse mortgages as well as traditional "forward" home mortgages .

much of the discussion in this report focuses only on traditional forward mortgages , rather than reverse mortgages .

however , certain specified sections discuss both forward and reverse mortgages .

money flows into the mmi fund primarily from the mortgage insurance premiums paid by borrowers and from sales of foreclosed properties , and money flows out of the mmi fund primarily from claims paid to lenders when fha - insured mortgages default .

the mmi fund is intended to be self - supporting .

it is meant to pay for costs related to insured loans ( such as insurance claims paid to lenders ) with money it earns on those loans ( such as through premiums paid by borrowers ) , not through appropriations .

the mmi fund is also required to maintain a capital ratio of 2% to help pay for any unexpected increases in losses on its insured mortgages , beyond the losses that it currently anticipates .

 ( capital in this context is defined as the assets that the mmi fund currently has on hand , plus the net present value of future cash flows associated with the mortgages that it currently insures .

the capital ratio is the ratio of capital to the total dollar amount of mortgages insured under the mmi fund. ) .

as will be discussed in more detail later in this report , the mmi fund , like all federal loan and loan guarantee programs subject to the federal credit reform act of 1990 , has permanent and indefinite budget authority to receive funds from the department of the treasury to cover increases in the costs of loan guarantees made in prior years .

fha faces an inherent tension between facilitating the provision of mortgage credit to underserved borrowers and safeguarding the health of the mmi fund .

in the years following the housing and mortgage market turmoil that began around 2007 , rising mortgage default rates and falling home prices put pressure on the mmi fund .

this resulted in the capital ratio falling below the required 2% threshold in fy2009 and then turning negative for a period of time .

the capital ratio became positive again in fy2014 and regained the 2% threshold in fy2015 .

the capital ratio falling below 2% , and then turning negative , raised concerns that the mmi fund would not have enough money to cover all of its expected future losses on the loans that it was currently insuring .

at the end of fy2013 , the mmi fund received $1.7 billion from treasury using its permanent and indefinite budget authority to ensure that it was holding enough funds to cover expected future losses on insured loans .

this represented the first time that the mmi fund ever had to draw on its permanent and indefinite budget authority with treasury for this purpose .

the mmi fund has not needed to draw such funds from treasury in subsequent years .

congress has expressed ongoing interest in the mmi fund's financial status and its prospects for needing additional funds to pay for future losses on its insured loans .

this report focuses on the financial position of the mmi fund .

it begins with a brief overview of some of the major factors that affect the mmi fund's financial soundness .

the remainder of the report focuses on ( 1 ) how the mmi fund is accounted for in the federal budget and ( 2 ) the results of annual independent actuarial reviews that are mandated by congress .

the budgetary treatment of fha - insured mortgages and the actuarial review are two different processes , but both examine how the loans insured under the mmi fund have performed and are expected to perform in the future and the effect of this loan performance on the financial position of the mmi fund .

the annual actuarial review is the basis for determining the capital ratio .

however , it is the annual budget process that determines whether or not the mmi fund requires assistance from treasury .

this section briefly describes some of the major factors that can affect the mmi fund's financial position .

these factors include default and foreclosure rates on fha - insured loans and the average loss to fha when a loan goes to foreclosure , the amount of the premiums charged by fha , the volume of loans that fha insures , and current and future economic conditions .

this section describes how fha - insured mortgages are accounted for in the federal budget in the year that the loans are insured and in the years thereafter .

it includes a discussion of the circumstances under which the mmi fund would need an appropriation in order to cover the cost of insuring new single - family loans in an upcoming fiscal year ( a situation which has never occurred ) , and the circumstances under which the mmi fund can draw on permanent and indefinite budget authority with treasury to reserve for higher - than - expected costs of loans insured in past years ( an event that occurred at the end of fy2013 ) .

separately from the annual budget process , fha is required by law to obtain an independent actuarial review each year that analyzes the financial position of the mmi fund and to provide an annual report to congress on the results of the actuarial review .

this review traditionally analyzes the mmi fund's financial position by reporting the amount of funds that it currently has on hand and estimating the net amount ( in present value terms ) that it expects to earn or lose in the future on loans that it currently insures .

these numbers are added together to compute the "economic value" of the mmi fund .

the economic value is the amount of money that the mmi fund would be projected to have on hand after all of the cash flows associated with its insured loans are realized , assuming that it does not insure any more loans going forward .

the results of the actuarial review are presented in fha's annual report to congress on the financial status of the mmi fund .

the budgetary treatment and the actuarial review of the mmi fund are two different ways of looking at the same thing — namely , how the loans insured under the mmi fund have performed and are expected to perform in the future , and the effect of this loan performance on the financial position of the mmi fund .

however , the annual actuarial review is separate from the federal budget process , and uses somewhat different economic assumptions than those used in the federal budget .

this section describes the actuarial review and accompanying annual report to congress along with important related concepts .

it then discusses the results of the fy2018 actuarial review and annual report that were released in november 2018 .

in the annual actuarial review , the independent actuary reviews the mmi fund's financial information to estimate the mmi fund's current financial position , including both forward and reverse mortgages insured under the fund .

this usually includes reporting the amount of funds that the mmi fund currently has on hand and estimating the cash flows that it expects in the future — such as premiums paid into the fund and claims paid out of the fund — on the loans that it currently insures .

it uses economic modeling to project the mmi fund's financial status for the current year and several years into the future under a "base case" scenario and several alternative economic scenarios .

some of the key terms used in the actuarial report and fha's annual report on the financial status of the mmi fund include the following: capital resources are the net assets ( assets minus liabilities ) that the mmi fund currently has on hand that can be converted into cash to pay claims on defaulted mortgages or other expenses .

present value of future cash flows on outstanding business is the estimated amount that the mmi fund is currently expected to gain or lose in the future , in present value terms , on the loans that it currently insures ( this estimate does not take into account any new loans that might be insured in the future ) .

economic value or economic net worth is the mmi fund's capital resources plus the present value of its future cash flows on outstanding business .

it represents the amount of capital resources that the mmi fund would have after expected future cash flows on currently insured loans are realized .

in other words , it represents the amount that the mmi fund could use to pay for any additional , unexpected losses on its outstanding loans .

the law also mandates that fha meet a 2% capital ratio requirement , which means that the economic value of the mmi fund must be at least 2% of the total dollar volume of mortgages that fha currently insures .

the capital ratio is calculated on the basis of the actuarial report .

the capital ratio fell below this 2% requirement in fy2009 and remained below 2% for several years thereafter , turning negative in fy2012 and fy2013 .

the capital ratio was estimated to be positive again in fy2014 and was estimated to exceed 2% in fy2015 and each subsequent year to date .

this section briefly describes selected current issues related to the financial status of the mmi fund , and in particular certain issues that are often discussed in the context of the annual actuarial review and annual report to congress .

namely , it discusses the inclusion of reverse mortgages in the mmi fund , debate over the appropriate level for the premiums charged for fha - insured mortgages , and certain trends in fha - insured mortgage characteristics that fha identified in its fy2018 annual report as worthy of monitoring .

fha - insured reverse mortgages , known as home equity conversion mortgages ( hecms ) , were moved into the mmi fund beginning in fy2009 .

in contrast to traditional forward mortgages , hecms are fha - insured reverse mortgages for elderly homeowners who are seeking to access their accumulated home equity .

hecms that were insured by fha prior to fy2009 are obligations of a different fha insurance fund , but hecms insured in fy2009 or later are obligations of the mmi fund .

the dollar amount of hecms insured under the mmi fund is much smaller than the amount of traditional forward mortgages: about $72 billion of the $1.3 trillion of insurance - in - force under the mmi fund are hecms .

however , changes in the estimated value of hecms can have a significant impact on the mmi fund's overall economic value and on the capital ratio .

estimates of hecm performance are particularly sensitive to economic assumptions , such as future house prices and interest rates , making the value of the hecm portfolio volatile .

while the value of forward mortgages insured under the mmi fund has consistently increased since fy2012 , the value of hecms has fluctuated between negative and positive values and has become increasingly negative in recent years .

the volatility in the hecm portfolio can be seen in the results of recent actuarial reviews and in the standalone capital ratios for the forward and hecm portfolios as reported by fha .

as shown in figure 1 , the standalone capital ratio for the forward mortgage portfolio alone has steadily increased from negative 0.91% in fy2012 to positive 3.93% in fy2018 .

in comparison , the standalone capital ratio for hecms has fluctuated during that time period , ranging from a high of positive 3.07% in fy2013 to a low of negative 18.83% in fy2018 .

 ( the capital ratio for the overall mmi fund in fy2018 was estimated to be 2.76%. ) .

given the smaller overall insurance volume of the hecm portfolio , changes in the portfolio's economic value can have a larger impact on the hecm standalone capital ratio than a comparable dollar volume change in the larger forward portfolio would have on its standalone capital ratio .

nevertheless , the trends in the standalone capital ratios illustrate differences in the performance of the two portfolios .

the volatility of hecms and their inclusion in the mmi fund potentially raise some policy questions .

in its fy2015 annual report on the status of the mmi fund , fha noted that including both hecms and forward mortgages in the fund could make it more difficult to independently assess the financial health of the separate programs , particularly since the capital ratio for the entire mmi fund is often used as a proxy for the performance of the much larger forward mortgage portfolio .

furthermore , including both types of mortgages in the same fund could impact policies related specifically to forward mortgages , such as the level of fees paid by borrowers , in response to instability in the mmi fund driven by hecms .

for these reasons , some industry groups and other observers have argued that congress should consider legislation to remove hecms from the mmi fund .

however , gao and others have noted that removing hecms from the mmi fund would involve tradeoffs .

the upfront and annual mortgage insurance premiums charged by fha account for most of the revenue coming into the mmi fund .

as described earlier in the " mortgage insurance premiums " section of this report , the levels of the premiums charged can impact the mmi fund's status in several potentially conflicting ways .

all else being equal , higher premiums should bring more money into the mmi fund .

however , higher premiums have the potential to negatively impact fha's finances by leading to a reduction in fha loan volume or impacting the credit quality of the loans that fha insures .

higher premiums also increase the costs of fha - insured mortgages for homebuyers , potentially making fha - insured mortgages less affordable or pricing some potential homebuyers out of the market .

therefore , setting the appropriate levels for the mortgage insurance premiums requires striking a balance between maintaining affordability of fha - insured mortgages and managing risk to the insurance fund .

in the years following the housing market turmoil that began around 2007 , fha increased the premiums that it charges for new fha - insured forward mortgages several times .

most of these changes affected the annual premiums .

following several increases , fha decreased the annual mortgage insurance premiums that it charges in january 2015 .

the current annual premiums are at their lowest levels since the beginning of october 2010 , though they are higher than the premiums that fha was charging previously .

in recent years , as the capital ratio has increased over 2% , some industry groups and housing advocates have called for fha to further reduce the mortgage insurance premiums it charges for forward mortgages ( or to reduce the amount of time that it charges the premiums ) , arguing that the mmi fund is strong enough to take such steps to increase the affordability of fha - insured mortgages .

the improvement in the mmi fund's capital ratio in fy2018 again led to calls from some advocates and industry groups to decrease the mortgage insurance premiums .

however , fha has reportedly indicated that it is not likely to reduce the premiums in the near future .

on january 9 , 2017 , in the last weeks of the obama administration , fha had announced that it would again decrease the annual mortgage insurance premiums charged to borrowers who took out new fha - insured mortgages that closed on or after january 27 , 2017 .

however , on the first day of the trump administration , before the new premiums had gone into effect , fha announced that it was suspending the planned premium reduction .

in its announcement , fha indicated a need to further study the impact that the fee decrease could have on the insurance fund and the long - term financial viability of fha .

in its fy2017 annual report to congress on the financial status of the mmi fund , fha estimated that had the premium decrease gone into effect , the capital ratio for the mmi fund would have been 1.76% in fy2017 , below the statutorily mandated level of 2% .

the lower capital ratio would have resulted from the combination of an estimated decrease of $3.2 billion in the net present value of expected future cash flows on insured mortgages ( stemming from lower premiums that would have been paid on fha - insured mortgages originated in fy2017 , including some borrowers refinancing their existing fha - insured mortgages into new mortgages with lower premiums ) and an estimated increase of $45 billion in fha's insurance - in - force ( stemming from more people obtaining fha - insured mortgages as a result of the premium decrease ) .

these estimated differences in the net present value of future cash flows and insurance - in - force also would have reduced the economic net worth and the capital ratio for the forward mortgage portfolio alone .

however , based on the figures provided in the annual report , the estimated capital ratio for forward mortgages alone would still have remained above 2% if the premium decrease had gone into effect , even though the capital ratio for the mmi fund as a whole ( including both forward mortgages and hecms ) would have fallen below that threshold .

the capital ratio for the mmi fund as a whole is the only number that matters for the purposes of complying with the law .

nevertheless , the estimated impact that the premium decrease would have had on the forward portfolio alone may be relevant to the extent that some are concerned that the inclusion of hecms in the mmi fund may affect policy decisions related specifically to the forward portfolio .

in the fy2018 annual report to congress , fha identified several trends related to the credit quality of its forward mortgage insurance portfolio that it is monitoring due to their potential to increase risk to fha .

in particular , fha noted the following five trends: cash - out refinances : 75 cash - out refinances are refinance transactions in which the borrower can access equity in the home by taking out a new mortgage for a higher amount than the remaining principal balance of the existing mortgage .

the share of cash - out refinances insured by fha has been increasing in recent years , reaching 63% of all fha - insured refinance mortgages , and 15% of all fha - insured forward mortgages , in fy2018 .

the share of cash - out refinances may be increasing for several reasons ; for example , rising home prices may lead to more cash - out refinances by increasing borrowers' equity in their homes , and continuing low interest rates may be depressing other types of refinancing activity ( making cash - out refinances a larger share of all refinance mortgages ) .

nevertheless , cash - out refinances have the potential to pose a risk to fha by increasing borrowers' leverage and reducing the equity they have in their homes .

if home prices should fall in the future , it is possible that some borrowers with higher loan - to - value ratios due to cash - out refinances could have difficulty repaying their mortgages .

debt - to - income ratios : 77 debt - to - income ratios for borrowers with new fha - insured purchase mortgages have been increasing in recent years .

in fy2018 , the average debt - to - income ratio for a new purchase borrower was about 43% , compared to 42% in fy2017 and 40% in fy2008 .

the share of fha - insured purchase mortgages with borrower debt - to - income ratios above 50% has been increasing as well , reaching nearly 25% in fy2018 .

higher debt - to - income ratios could increase the risk that some borrowers might have problems repaying their mortgages if they encounter financial difficulties .

credit scores : 78 the average credit scores of borrowers who obtain fha - insured mortgages have been decreasing since fy2011 .

in fy2018 , the average borrower credit score for fha - insured mortgages was 670 , compared to 676 in fy2017 and 701 in fy2011 .

this in part reflects a return of fha to its traditional role in the mortgage market ; in the aftermath of the housing market turmoil that began around 2007 , fha insured a greater share of mortgages as mortgage credit conditions tightened , including mortgages for borrowers with higher credit scores who traditionally may not have sought fha - insured mortgages .

as mortgage credit conditions have eased somewhat , more high - credit - score borrowers may find it easier to obtain other types of mortgages .

however , lower borrower credit scores could potentially suggest increased risk associated with these mortgages , and fha has said that it "will continue to monitor declining credit scores for new fha endorsements for the risk they pose to the mmif. .

down payment assistance : 80 fha has also been monitoring the increasing share of mortgages that have some form of down payment assistance , and in particular down payment assistance provided by a federal , state , or local governmental entity ( rather than other sources , such as a family member ) .

in fy2018 , about 38% of fha - insured purchase mortgages included some type of down payment assistance , compared to about 30% in fy2011 .

fha has noted that mortgages with down payment assistance , and down payment assistance provided by a governmental entity specifically , tend to have somewhat higher default rates than other fha - insured mortgages .

fha has also expressed some concerns about certain types of governmental down payment assistance programs and has suggested that it may be necessary to take action to provide more clarity about what types of down payment assistance are allowed .

non b ank mortgage originations : 83 the share of fha - insured mortgages originated by nonbanks , rather than by traditional depository institutions , has been increasing in recent years .

in fy2018 , nonbank lenders originated nearly 87% of new fha - insured mortgages .

while all lenders that originate fha - insured mortgages are required to meet certain standards , mortgages originated by nonbanks may pose different types of risks to fha than traditional depository institutions .

in its annual report , fha stated that it "believes it needs to strike a better balance in doing business" with both nonbank and depository lenders .

there are several potential drivers of the trends identified by fha , including , among other things , economic conditions and the availability of other types of mortgage credit .

the overall impact of each of these trends on fha loan performance and , by extension , its finances will depend on a variety of factors , and some of these trends may pose more of a potential risk to fha than others .

