the honoring america's veterans and caring for camp lejeune families act of 2012 ( h.r .

1627 , p.l .

112-154 , enacted on august 6 , 2012 ) is an "omnibus" bill containing a number of provisions impacting various veterans programs .

p.l .

112-154 reflects a compromise agreement by the house and senate committees on veterans affairs on provisions contained within several bills ( h.r .

1627 ; s. 277 ; s. 914 ; s. 951 ; h.r .

802 ; h.r .

1484 ; h.r .

2074 ; h.r .

2032 ; h.r .

2349 ; h.r .

2433 ; and h.r .

4299 ) reported during the 112 th congress , and several free - standing provisions .

this report provides information on the various provisions of p.l .

112-154 by program , benefit , or topic , rather than by each legislative provision .

however , for each change in a program , benefit , etc. , the section number of p.l .

112-154 is provided .

the servicemembers civil relief act ( scra ) provides protections for servicemembers in the event that their military service impedes their ability to meet financial obligations incurred before entry into active military service .

the scra does not require forgiving of all debts or the extinguishment of contractual obligations on behalf of servicemembers who have been called up for active duty , nor is absolute immunity from civil lawsuits provided .

instead , the act suspends civil claims against servicemembers and protects them from default judgments .

the scra includes provisions that prohibit the eviction of military members and their dependents from rental or mortgaged property ; create a 6% cap on interest on debts incurred before an individual entered active duty military service ; protect against the cancellation of life insurance or the non - reinstatement of health insurance policies ; allow some professionals to suspend malpractice or liability insurance while on active duty ; and proscribe taxation in multiple jurisdictions and forced property sales to pay overdue taxes .

the scra has been amended since its passage in 2003 , and proposed changes continue to be introduced in congress .

most recently , section 710 of p.l .

112-154 extended protections related to mortgages and foreclosures until december 31 , 2014 .

specifically , section 710 amended section 303 of the scra ( 50 u.s.c .

app .

533 ) addressing mortgages and trust deeds .

this section covers servicemembers who , prior to active military service , entered into a property transaction subject to a mortgage , a trust deed , or other security loan .

as amended , if the servicemember is unable to make payments on the loan due to military service , the provision prevents the vendor from exercising any right or option under the contract to rescind or terminate , to resume possession of the property for nonpayment of any installment due , or to breach the terms , except by action in a court of competent jurisdiction , until one year after the term of active duty terminates .

a sale , foreclosure , or seizure of property during a servicemember's period of military service , and for one year after , is prohibited unless under a court order issued prior to foreclosure on the property , or if made pursuant to an agreement under section 107 of the act .

additionally , section 701 requires the comptroller general of the united states to submit a report to congress addressing the protections afforded under section 303 of the scra within 540 days after the date of enactment .

section 703 of p.l .

112-154 requires the secretary of the va to , within 180 days of enactment , report to the house and senate committees on veterans affairs on a plan to: ( 1 ) evaluate the skills and capabilities of employees ( and managers ) at the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) who process disability compensation and pension benefit claims ; ( 2 ) provide training for those employees whose skills and capabilities are deemed unsatisfactory ; ( 3 ) re - evaluate employees who receive the training ; and ( 4 ) take appropriate personnel actions if employees' skills and capabilities are still deemed unsatisfactory after additional training and re - evaluation .

section 502 of the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 granted the va special authority to conduct competitions in which only small businesses owned by service - disabled and other veterans may compete ( i.e. , set - asides ) , and to make noncompetitive ( or sole - source ) awards to such firms .

eligibility for these contracting preferences is limited to firms and firm owners listed in a database maintained by the va , and firms or owners that misrepresent their status in order to qualify for preferences under the 2006 act are subject to debarment , or exclusion from government contracting for a specified period of time .

specifically , section 502 provided that any firm determined to have "misrepresented [its] status" as a veteran - owned or service - disabled veteran - owned small business for purposes of the va's "veterans first" contracting program "shall be debarred from contracting with the department for a reasonable period of time , as determined by the secretary. .

such debarments — prescribed by law — are known as statutory debarments and , unlike administrative debarments under the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , are imposed for purposes of punishment .

section 706 of p.l .

112-154 amends section 502 to clarify that debarment is to be imposed only in cases where status has been "willfully and intentionally" misrepresented .

prior law would appear to have authorized debarment for inadvertent or unintentional misrepresentation of status , although it is unclear how often this occurred .

section 706 further amends section 502 to prescribe that the period of any debarment shall be "not less than five years," as opposed to a "reasonable period of time , as determined by the secretary. .

in addition , section 706 prescribes time frames within which debarment actions are to be commenced and completed , as well as establishes how "principals" of debarred firms are to be treated .

specifically , it requires that the va begin a debarment action not later than 30 days after determining that a concern willfully and intentionally misrepresented its status , and complete the debarment action within 90 days after this determination .

section 706 also provides that the debarment of a firm includes the debarment of "all principals in that concern for a period of not less than five years. .

section 707 of p.l .

112-154 requires the va secretary to report to the house and senate committees on veterans' affairs within 30 days of the end of each fiscal quarter on conferences sponsored or co - sponsored by the va that were attended by 50 or more people and were estimated to cost the va $20,000 or more .

the report must include an accounting of the final costs of the conference by category ( i.e. , transportation , per diem , lodging , refreshments , entertainment , etc .

 ) .

under current law , every federal contractor and subcontractor with a contract value of $100,000 or more must report annually to the secretary of the department of labor ( dol ) with information on total employment , new employees , and the number of qualified veterans in total employment and new employees .

section 708 of p.l .

112-154 requires the dol secretary to establish and maintain a website for public disclosure of the information federal contractors and subcontractors are required to report to dol on their employment of veterans .

section 709 of p.l .

112-154 directs the va secretary to establish an award program , the vetstar program , to recognize businesses' contributions to veterans' employment on an annual basis .

