a coverdell education savings account ( esa ) — often referred to simply as a coverdell — is a tax - advantaged investment account that families can use to save for their child's elementary , secondary , or college education expenses .

this report provides an overview of the mechanics of coverdells , including a summary of the key parameters of coverdells .

the report also examines the specific tax advantages of these plans .

for an overview of all tax benefits for higher education , see crs report r41967 , higher education tax benefits: brief overview and budgetary effects , by [author name scrubbed] .

as previously mentioned , the specific tax advantage of coverdells is that withdrawals from these plans are excludable from gross income , and hence not subject to income taxation , if they are used to pay for specific education expenses incurred in a given year .

these expenses are referred to as adjusted qualified education expenses ( aqee - see shaded text box ) .

any amount withdrawn from a coverdell account which does not go toward these expenses is subject to income taxation and may be subject to an additional 10% penalty tax .

logically , a taxpayer who receives a coverdell distribution ( the beneficiary or the beneficiary's guardian ) would seek to minimize their income tax liability by withdrawing just enough money from their coverdell to cover aqee and no more .

however , especially when coverdells are used for higher education expenses , this is not as straightforward as it may seem due to a variety of factors , including the availability of other education tax benefits and student aid .

in order to understand the complex decisions taxpayers must consider when determining the amount of money they should withdraw from a coverdell , this section details the income tax treatment of coverdell distributions , including the definition of aqee , when coverdell distributions may be taxable , and the interaction of coverdell distributions with other education tax benefits .

 ( an overview of basic gift tax rules is also included. ) .

in addition to the tax advantages of coverdells , these plans are also treated more favorably than other types of college savings or investments when determining a student's eligibility for federal need - based student aid .

specifically , coverdells generally have a minimal impact on a student's federal expected family contribution ( efc ) .

the efc is the amount that , according to the federal need analysis methodology , can be contributed by a student and the student's family toward the student's cost of education .

all else being equal , the higher a student's efc , the lower the amount of federal student need - based aid he or she will receive .

a variety of financial resources are reported by students and their families on the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) .

these resources are assessed at differing rates under the federal need analysis methodology .

distributions from coverdell plans are generally not considered income in the federal need analysis calculation and are therefore not reported on the fafsa , although the value of the coverdell is considered an asset in the federal need analysis methodology and should be reported on the fafsa .

when calculating a student's efc , the federal need analysis methodology considers a percentage of the student's assets and a percentage of the parents' assets reported on the fafsa .

a student's assets are assessed at a flat rate of 20% , while parents' assets are assessed on a sliding scale , resulting in a maximum effective rate of up to 5.64% .

therefore , the ownership of the asset is important when determining how it will affect a student's efc .

for students who are classified as dependent students for fafsa purposes ( which differs from the classification of dependent for tax purposes ) , coverdells are considered an asset of the parent , as long as the custodial ownership of the plan belongs either to the parent or student .

therefore , dependent students benefit from a lower assessment rate on coverdells , which , all else being equal , results in a lower efc and the potential for more federal need - based student aid .

for students who are classified as independent students for fafsa purposes , coverdells are treated as an asset of the student , as long as the custodial ownership of the plan belongs either to the student or student's spouse ( if applicable ) .

coverdells that are owned by someone other than the student , parent , or spouse are not reported as an asset on the fafsa , but distributions from these coverdells are reported as untaxed income for the beneficiary on the fafsa .

in general , income is assessed at a higher rate compared to assets in the federal need analysis methodology .

students and their families may have a variety of resources to choose from when they finance their education expenses , including coverdells .

while coverdells may encourage some families to save for and fund their child's future education expenses , they may also introduce additional complexity in financial planning .

