on january 13 , 2012 , president barack obama announced that he would ask congress to reinstate so - called presidential reorganization authority , and a legislative proposal that would renew this authority was conveyed to congress on february 16 , 2012 .

bills based on the proposed language were subsequently introduced during the 112 th congress in the senate ( s. 2129 ) and the house ( h.r .

4409 ) .

similar authority was available to presidents periodically between 1932 and 1984 .

it allowed the president to present plans to reorganize executive branch departments and agencies to congress that would be considered under an expedited parliamentary process .

should this authority be reinstated , the president indicated that his first submitted plan would propose consolidation of six business and trade - related agencies into one: u.s. department of commerce's core business and trade functions , the export import bank , the overseas private investment corporation , the small business administration , the u.s. trade and development agency , and the office of the u.s. trade representative .

this report summarizes the repeated renewal and evolution of presidential reorganization authority from 1932 to 1984 , as well as subsequent unsuccessful efforts to renew it since then .

the report then discusses president obama's request in the context of this background .

finally , the report provides analysis of the possible options for congressional consideration relative to this legislation .

between 1932 and 1981 , congress periodically delegated authority to the president that allowed him to develop plans for reorganization of portions of the federal government and to present those plans to congress for consideration under special expedited parliamentary procedures .

under these procedures , the president's plan would go into effect unless one or both houses of congress passed a resolution rejecting the plan , a process referred to as a "legislative veto. .

this process favored the president's plan because , absent congressional action , the default was for the plan to go into effect .

in contrast to the regular legislative process , the burden of action under these versions of presidential reorganization authority rested with opponents rather than supporters of the plan .

in 1984 , the mechanism was amended to require congress to act affirmatively in order for a plan to go into force .

this arguably shifted the balance of power to congress .

the authority expired at the end of 1984 and subsequently has not been available to the president .

presidents used this presidential reorganization authority regularly , submitting more than 100 plans between 1932 and 1984 .

presidents used the authority for a variety of purposes , from relatively minor reorganizations within individual agencies to the creation of large new organizations , including the department of health , education , and welfare ( hew ) , the environmental protection agency , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the terms of the authority delegated to the president varied greatly over the century .

during some periods , congress delegated relatively broad authority to the president , while during others the authority was more circumscribed .

as noted above , the reorganization authority was refined and reauthorized on a number of occasions between 1932 and 1984 .

on some occasions , such as 1939 , 1945 , and 1949 , congress enacted a completely new statute .

on other occasions , modifications were made by amendment of the preceding reorganization authority .

as a result of these modifications , the statute currently laid out in the u.s. code is structured very differently from the early statutes of 1932 and 1933 .

nonetheless , all of the elements of the current statute are represented , though perhaps in embryonic form , in the authority's earliest incarnation .

each of the elements of the reorganization authority is integral to its overall scope and effect , but several of these more strongly influence the relative authority of the president and congress , and the resulting balance of power between the two branches .

these elements are the reorganization plan contents , the limitations on power , and the expedited parliamentary procedures .

the provisions that define the potential scope of reorganization plan content , when combined with the provisions that further limit or prohibit certain reorganization plan content , set the boundaries of a reorganization that the president can propose under this special authority .

the provisions that specify the parliamentary procedures to be used define the role of congress in facilitating or impeding the enactment of a submitted plan .

these procedures also define the requirements of the president during this process .

such requirements may be seen by the administration as easing or making more difficult a plan's enactment and implementation .

as previously noted , a legislative proposal that would renew the president's reorganization authority was conveyed to congress on february 16 , 2012 .

the proposal would amend the expired provisions of the reorganization act of 1977 , as amended in 1984 , which are listed at 5 u.s.c .

901 et seq .

 ( hereinafter "1984 statute" ) .

it would reactivate the authority for two years from the date of enactment by amending section 905 ( b ) and section 908 ( 1 ) , the two places in the law that specify deadlines that limit the period during which the authority can be used ; define "efficiency - enhancing plan" as one that the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) determines is likely to result in a decrease in the number of agencies or cost savings in performing the functions that are the subject of the plan ; require that all plans are efficiency - enhancing plans ; allow the abolition or renaming of an existing department , or the creation of a new department ( not permitted under the 1984 statute ) ; allow the consolidation of two or more departments ( not permitted under the 1984 statute ) ; and allow the creation of a new agency that is not part of an existing agency ( not permitted under the 1984 statute ) .

should this authority be granted , the president indicated that his first submitted plan would propose consolidation of six business and trade - related agencies into one: u.s. department of commerce's core business and trade functions , the export import bank , the overseas private investment corporation , the small business administration , the u.s. trade and development agency , and the office of the u.s. trade representative .

it appears that this plan would also involve the relocation of some subunits and functions that are not directly linked with business and trade .

the administration has stated , for example , that the national oceanic and atmospheric administration would be moved to the department of the interior .

president obama has requested a renewal of presidential reorganization authority , and a bill has been introduced in the senate that would grant him this power in a modified form .

congress might approach the question of whether , and how , to delegate this authority to the president in various ways .

first , congress could simply elect not to renew the authority , either by not acting on the president's proposal , or by actively rejecting it .

in the event that congress elects to renew presidential reorganization authority , it might do so in a number of different ways .

for example , it could renew the authority ( 1 ) without modifications , ( 2 ) with the requested amendments to the scope of the authority , ( 3 ) with a different set of amendments to the scope of the authority , ( 4 ) with changes to the nature of the expedited congressional procedures , or ( 5 ) with some combination of these .

each of these approaches is discussed in greater detail below .

presidential reorganization authority raises administrative , political , and institutional questions , including the following: is government reorganization desirable ? .

if reorganization is desirable , is the president better suited than congress to undertake government reorganization ? .

if the president is better suited to undertake reorganization , is the granted authority under a given proposal flexible and extensive enough to allow the president to make meaningful changes to government organizational arrangements ? .

are the limitations on plan contents sufficient to preclude organizational changes that might be deemed by congress to be problematic from a policy or institutional point of view ? .

should organizations that exercise predominantly quasi - legislative or quasi - judicial ( regulatory ) functions be treated differently from those that exercise predominantly executive functions ? .

what kind of input into the crafting of reorganization plans should be afforded to congress ? .

do congressional procedures allow for a sufficient congressional check on the president's use of this authority ? .

should the president have the ability to reorganize any quarter of the executive branch as he sees fit , or should he be required to lay out his intentions for reorganization prior to obtaining the authority ? .

to what degree should congress prescribe the parameters of potential reorganizations ? .

what limitations should be included in statute ? .

what significance should be given to recommendations from congressional commissions , congressional committees , gao , and other stakeholders ? .

answers to these questions , drawn from the history of reorganization authority , could provide a basis for evaluating the potential approaches discussed below .

government reorganization is often cast in terms of potential administrative benefits , such as improved program effectiveness , greater efficiency , reduced cost , and improved policy integration across related programs .

whenever congress has delegated reorganization authority to the president in the past , it has clearly stated in the statutory provisions that the objective of reorganization is such administrative improvement .

congress has often required that reorganization plans submitted by the president certify that such improvements are at least part of the objective of the proposed reorganization .

in more recent versions of the law , the president is required to articulate the plan's means of achieving such improvements .

in addition to these administrative goals , reorganization efforts often have spoken or unspoken political goals and outcomes .

the political nature of reorganization arises from the fact that it redistributes power and resources , and interests inside and outside the federal bureaucracy stand to gain or lose in this process .

depending on the scope and limitations of the authority available to the president , organizational units and functions might not only be moved , but could be abolished .

employees in the reorganized agencies will often be the most directly impacted , but outside interests , such as those who are regulated by , or receive benefits from , such agencies are affected as well .

congressional committees may also be impacted by a reorganization , directly through potential jurisdictional changes or indirectly through constituent groups .

although a government reorganization may have beneficial outcomes over time , it is axiomatic that it is disruptive , at least in the short term , to the functioning of the organizational systems involved .

it is likely to upset existing power dynamics , rearrange relationships , create uncertainty and anxiety , and generally interrupt the flow of work .

proponents of a delegation to the president of broad reorganization authority might argue that the president can be more effective than congress in conceptualizing , as well as implementing , government - wide reorganization .

some critics argue that congress is often unable to develop consensus and pass meaningful reorganization legislation .

where such consensus is arrived at , critics might assert that political , rather than administrative reform concerns are primary in its crafting .

opponents of reauthorizing the president's reorganization authority might argue that congress is better suited as a place for sorting out the competing demands and interests involved in broad reorganizations .

they might argue that congress , by representing a greater cross section of interests , provides a better forum in which to shape the federal government .

critics of presidential reorganization authority might also note that congress has successfully reorganized the federal government , in large and small ways , through the legislative process .

when congress delegates reorganization authority to the president and establishes expedited procedures for the consideration of resulting plans , it cedes some of its institutional power to the president .

the history of such delegations suggests that congress has been selective about when and under what terms it does so .

among the factors that appear to influence this decision - making process are the perceived administrative need and expected benefits , the record of collaborative efforts between a particular congress and a particular president , and other political contextual factors .

