coal has been the fuel most used for thermal energy since the early days of the industrial revolution .

however , the mechanization of factories quickly brought a shift in coal use from heat to steam engines , and then to fuel steam turbines to power the electric motors of industry .

the advent of electrical lighting and the electrification of buildings and residences drove even greater demand for electricity .

for most of the twentieth century , the primary use of coal in the united states was for electric power generation .

in 2011 , 93% of coal consumed in the united states was for electric power production , according to the energy information administration ( eia ) .

figure 1 shows the use of the four major types of coal produced in the united states , with bituminous and subbituminous coal dominating electric power generation .

the various types of coal differ mostly in carbon content and heating value: anthracite has the highest carbon content ( between 86% and 98% ) , and a heat value of about 15,000 british thermal units ( btus ) per pound .

anthracite coal is a small part of the electric power market , and is mostly found in the appalachian region of pennsylvania .

bituminous is the most abundant form of coal in the united states , and is the type most commonly used to generate electricity .

bituminous coal has a carbon content of approximately 45% to 86% , and a heat value between 10,500 btus and 15,500 btus .

subbituminous coal is mostly found in six western states and alaska .

it has a carbon content of between 35% and 45% , and a heat value of between 8,300 btus and 13,000 btus .

subbituminous coal generally has a lower sulfur content than other types of coal .

lignite has the lowest carbon content of the four types of coal generally used for electric power generation , averaging between 25% and 35% , and a high moisture and ash content .

it also has the lowest heat value ranging between 4,000 btus and 8,300 btus .

for most of the history of power generation in the united states , coal has been the dominant fuel used to produce electricity .

even as recently as 2011 , coal was used to fuel almost 42% of power generation in the united states , as shown in figure 2 .

coal has been the fuel of choice for many decades because of its wide availability , and the relatively low cost of producing electricity in large , coal - burning power plants .

coal's low - priced , high energy content enabled the building of power plants able to take advantage of economies of scale in steam - electric production .

in a steam power plant , coal ( or other fossil fuel ) is burned to provide heat for turning water into steam in a boiler .

the steam is then forced under pressure into a steam turbine - driven generator which produces electricity .

as of 2011 , the u.s. coal - powered generation fleet consisted of 1,387 units with a nameplate capacity of almost 318 gigawatts ( gw ) representing approximately 30% of total u.s. generating capacity .

electric utilities and independent power producers are the primary entities involved in u.s. electricity production .

together , these electric power sector participants have combined for an average annual consumption of almost 995 million tons of coal in the period from 2002 to 2011 , with electric utilities consuming between 60% to 70% of the total ( primarily in base load power plants ) .

the capital costs of power plant construction ( i.e. , the costs of finance and construction ) vary according to the type ( for example , coal or nuclear ) , and size of power plant .

the cost for these plants to generate electricity is largely based on their cost of fuel , as well as operations and maintenance costs , other capital costs , and how the power plant is operated ( for example , whether the facility is run as a base load or peaking facility ) .

while the regulatory regime ( i.e. , under a rate - regulated or competitive environment ) , costs of transmission and distribution , and weather are strong determinants , the cost of fuel is often the major factor affecting electricity production especially for power plants which have already recovered their capital costs of construction .

transportation costs for coal have historically been a major consideration in the choice of coal as a fuel .

barge transport is used where river access is available .

but rail transportation is the most common mode of transit for coal as unit trains offer the ability to transport large shipments to power plants on a regular basis .

however , rail transportation can be costly .

first , coal - burning electric power plants receive approximately 72 percent of their coal by rail .

second , rail transportation costs account for a sizable share of total delivered costs .

while , on average , transportation costs account for approximately 20 percent of total [delivered] costs , they can reach as high as 59 percent on shipments of coal originating in the powder river basin .

u.s. coal transportation costs are cited as a major reason why many utilities in the new england states have chosen to generate electricity with natural gas , or import coal from overseas as a lower cost alternative .

in 2011 approximately 72 million short tons ( mst ) of coal were used by the u.s industrial sector , which represented roughly 7% of total coal consumption in the country .

the industrial sector's share of u.s. coal demand has declined substantially since 1949 , when the industrial sector accounted for nearly 45% of annual coal consumption ( see figure 7 ) .

the decline of the industrial sector's share of coal consumption is generally a result of three developments since 1949: ( 1 ) reduced coal use for coke production and steel making , ( 2 ) reduced coal use for industrial process applications , and ( 3 ) increased coal use for electric power production , which now represents more than 90% of u.s. coal demand .

coal has a number of industrial uses including steel making , cement production , combined heat and power ( chp ) , and process heating .

additionally , coal is used by a number of industrial operations including alumina refineries , chemical producers , pharmaceutical companies , and paper manufacturers .

according to the world coal institute , there are thousands of products that include coal or coal by - products: soap , aspirins , solvents , dyes , plastics , fibers , and specialty products ( eg , activated carbon , carbon fiber , and silicon metal ) .

the energy information administration classifies industrial sector coal consumption into three separate categories: ( 1 ) coke plants , ( 2 ) combined heat and power ( chp ) , and ( 3 ) non - chp .

table 1 indicates the amount of coal consumed in 2011 for each of these categories .

given the expected increase in natural gas supplies and expected shift in electricity production from coal to natural gas as a primary fuel , the issue of what level of coal generation should be preserved for power generation in the united states may be a question congress will be faced with .

while u.s. coal currently used for power generation may have options for markets overseas , the domestic future of coal power generation is clouded by both market prices and environmental regulations .

the united states is believed to have a bountiful supply of coal .

but how much or whether the future of coal will include power generation may be a question of national energy policy .

congress may be also confronted with the question of whether an "all - of - the above" strategy for energy is viable .

the electric utility industry values diversity in fuel choice options since reliance on one fuel or technology can leave electricity producers vulnerable to price and supply volatility .

however , an "inverse relationship" is developing for coal vs. natural gas as a power generation choice based on market economics alone , and policies which allow one fuel source to dominate may come to the detriment of the other .

congress may also face a decision as to whether coal - fired power generation can be a viable technology option for the future .

new advanced ngcc plants entering the market in 2017 are expected to cost approximately $63 per mwh , while new advanced coal plants are estimated to cost $111 per mwh , and advanced coal with ccs is estimated at $139 per mwh .

the cost difference between these technologies , and proposed ghg emissions limits , raise concerns over coal's future as a viable fuel choice for power generation .

it is not clear ( at this point in time ) whether research and development will result in new technologies able to reduce the differential .

