financial derivatives are widely used throughout the economy by financial firms , corporations , farmers , and investors to serve a number of different purposes .

a broad set of factors are responsible for the 2008-2009 financial crisis , but derivatives played a key role in the crisis by fueling a housing bubble and enabling large - scale systemic risk in the financial system .

congress plays a major role in the derivatives market by passing laws and regulations that define the nature of derivatives market activity and through its oversight role over the major regulators of the derivatives markets .

the 2008-2009 financial crisis spurred policymakers from a range of countries , spearheaded by the g - 20 , to commit their countries to reforming domestic and international rules governing the over - the - counter ( otc ) derivatives markets .

most assessments generally agree that a broad set of factors played a role in the financial crisis and in the ensuing sovereign debt crisis in europe .

however , actions by investors in the derivatives markets likely aggravated the financial crisis , required billions in government assistance to american international group , inc. ( aig ) and other financial firms to cover losses associated with credit default swaps ( cds ) , and played a key role in destabilizing financial markets .

in addition , public and congressional attention has continued to focus on derivatives markets as a result of the key role derivatives played in worsening greece's financial crisis and the roughly $6 billion in derivatives - trading losses in 2012 reported by jp morgan .

according to standard finance theory , derivatives markets benefit financial markets and the wider economy by improving the pricing of risk , adding to liquidity , and helping market participants manage their risks .

in particular , derivatives are used by financial firms , corporations , farmers , and investors to hedge against , or speculate on , changes in prices , rates , or indices , or even on events such as the potential defaults on debts .

as a result , they have added to liquidity and been instrumental in expanding financial opportunities for a broad range of market participants , particularly in mitigating risks associated with changes in exchange rates and interest rates .

nevertheless , otc derivatives can add substantial risk to financial markets due to the very nature of derivatives .

otc derivatives contracts often involve lengthy commitments during which time a position can potentially generate a substantial counterparty credit exposure .

also , since otc derivatives often require a small initial outlay of cash , small changes in the value of the underlying securities of the derivatives can abruptly expand the potential liabilities and raise counterparty credit risk dramatically during periods of market turbulence .

in addition , derivatives markets and transactions span national borders and national regulators .

consequently , troubles in derivatives markets can reverberate far beyond the original source of the problem .

the financial crisis inquiry commission concluded that derivatives contributed to the 2008-2009 financial crisis in three major ways .

first , credit default swaps were instrumental in fueling the securitization of mortgages and mortgage - backed securities and in the subsequent housing bubble .

next , credit default swaps were essential in creating synthetic collateralized debt obligations ( cdo ) , or financial instruments that served as bets on the performance of real mortgage - backed securities , which amplified the losses from the collapse of the housing bubble by allowing multiple bets on the same securities and helped spread the losses throughout the financial system .

finally , once the housing boom ended , derivatives were at the center of the crisis due to ( 1 ) concerns that losses associated with derivatives would trigger cascading losses throughout the global financial system ; and ( 2 ) the lack of transparency concerning the overall size of the derivatives market and the extent of derivatives transactions between systemically important financial institutions that directly added to uncertainty and panic in global financial markets .

perhaps the best known example of problems stemming from large otc derivatives exposure in the financial crisis came from the near - collapse of the large conglomerate american international group , inc. ( aig ) , which wrote about $1.8 trillion worth of otc derivatives contracts for credit default swaps .

these credit default swaps guaranteed payment if certain mortgage - backed securities defaulted or experienced other "credit events. .

many of aig's contracts did require it to post collateral as the credit quality of the underlying securities ( or aig's own credit rating ) deteriorated , but aig did not post an initial margin , as this was deemed unnecessary because of the firm's triple - a rating .

as the subprime crisis worsened , aig was subjected to margin calls that it could not meet .

to avert bankruptcy , with the risk of global financial chaos , the federal reserve and the treasury put tens of billions of dollars into aig , the bulk of which went to its derivatives counterparties .

the aig case illustrates two aspects of otc markets that are central to derivatives reform proposals .

first , as noted above , aig was able to amass an otc derivatives position so large that it threatened to destabilize the entire financial system when the firm suffered unexpected losses , and the risks of default to aig derivatives counterparties grew .

in a market with mandatory clearing and margin , in which aig would have been required to post an initial margin to cover potential losses , there is a stronger possibility that aig would have run out of money long before the size of its position had reached $1.8 trillion .

second , because otc contracts were not reported to regulators , the u.s. federal reserve ( the fed ) and the u.s. treasury department lacked information about which institutions were exposed to aig , and the size of those exposures .

uncertainty among market participants about the size and distribution of potential derivatives losses flowing from the failure of a major dealer was a factor that exacerbated the "freezing" of credit markets during the peaks of the crisis , and made banks unwilling to lend to each other .

a basic theme in derivatives reform proposals is to get the otc market to act more like the exchange - traded futures market — in particular , to have bilateral otc swaps cleared by a third - party clearing organization .

generally , otc derivatives are used in a variety of ways , including hedging , investing , exploiting arbitrage opportunities , and position - taking .

otc derivative instruments are generally referred to as swaps .

yet swaps have widely differing characteristics and degrees of standardization , and can include bets on a number of different types of assets .

the global otc derivatives markets are dominated by five different types of swaps: foreign exchange swaps ; interest rate swaps ; equity - linked swaps ; commodity swaps ; and credit default swaps , as indicated in table 1 .

at the end of 2011 , the total notional amounts outstanding of otc derivatives amounted to $647.8 trillion , down about 8% from the $706.9 trillion in derivatives recorded in june 2011 .

the notional amount , also called the reference amount , refers to the underlying value of the assets that are being bet on through a derivatives contract .

figure 1 depicts the relative total sizes of the global derivatives market ; world assets ; world gdp ; and the world's official reserves .

it demonstrates that the size of the global derivatives market , in terms of notional value , tends to dwarf these other major categories .

financial markets that trade derivatives grew rapidly over the past decade and now serve large trades involving vast amounts of funds , as indicated in table 2 .

according to data published by the international monetary fund ( imf ) and the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , global trading in otc foreign exchange derivatives and otc interest rate derivatives amounted to $567 trillion in 2011 , or approximately nine times world gross domestic product ( gdp ) of $70 trillion .

these data do not include trading in equity and commodity - linked derivatives , which likely would boost these numbers substantially higher .

in addition , the total notional value , or the total gross nominal value of the underlying assets , of derivatives in 2011 was reported as being more than twice the size of the total value of all stocks , bonds , and bank assets , as indicated in table 2 .

the united states , with the largest gross domestic product ( gdp ) of any country ( and about the same size as the eu's gdp ) also had the largest single share of otc interest and exchange rate derivatives trading in 2011 — a share slightly greater than that of the euro area — in terms of the notional value of the derivatives .

the financial crisis of 2008-2009 exposed weaknesses in the otc markets that contributed to the build - up of systemic risk and threatened to disrupt the functioning of international financial markets .

otc derivatives are traded by a large and diverse group of market participants , including banks , hedge funds , pension funds , other institutional investors , corporations , and government entities .

this market , however , is dominated by a limited number of dealers .

such dealers provide liquidity to the market by selling derivatives contracts to customers and managing the resulting risk exposures through offsetting transactions in the underlying assets , exchange traded derivatives , and further trades with dealers and traders in otc markets .

these dealers are highly interconnected through a network of trades and , therefore , are highly exposed to spillover , or contagion , effects from turmoil in other parts of the markets .

such market disruptions can trigger a chain of credit - related losses which , in turn , could result in severe market disruptions and potentially a chain of defaults .

according to the financial stability board ( fsb ) , these weaknesses include ( 1 ) the build - up of large counterparty exposures between particular market participants through collateralized debt obligations ( cdos ) and credit default swaps which have not been appropriately risk - managed ; ( 2 ) contagion risk arising from the interconnectedness of the otc derivatives market participants ; and ( 3 ) the limited transparency of overall counterparty credit risk exposures that can precipitate a loss of confidence and market liquidity in times of stress .

in november 2008 , as the heads of state of the g - 20 nations met in washington , dc , to respond to the financial crisis , they agreed to implement a number of reforms to address the perceived failures in the financial system .

the g - 20 leaders concluded at that time that major failures in regulation and supervision of financial markets , in combination with increased risk - taking by banks , had created fragilities that threatened to undermine the financial system .

in particular , the leaders concluded that the global financial system had become highly interconnected , but that the system lacked a commensurate level of transparency regarding the associated counterparty exposures that was comparable to the level of complexity .

the growing interconnectedness of financial markets means that a shock that originates in one country or asset market can quickly affect other markets and other countries , known as contagion .

however , while global financial markets have become increasingly interconnected , large and highly complex financial firms have grown to straddle continents and markets .

at the same time , regulators and regulations have remained national in scope and have been unprepared to address financial crises with cross - border implications .

due to the challenges of effectively harmonizing all regulations across national boundaries and legal systems , and possibly as a result of few effective institutional mechanisms to ensure such coordination of national regulatory bodies , national regulators have focused on meeting national objectives .

at times , this can lead to a lack of uniformity , or even conflicts , between regulatory regimes .

arguably , it can lead to national priorities subsuming concerns about global financial stability .

through successive summits , g - 20 leaders have addressed these perceived failures by refining their goals and developing increasingly detailed objectives for the g - 20 members to improve financial market infrastructures ( fmis ) .

one of these first steps included "improving the infrastructure of over - the - counter" ( otc ) derivative markets and credit default swaps .

the bank for international settlements ( bis ) has argued that providing harmonized standards for fmis is important to the functioning of the financial system and in fostering stability .

the bis concluded that fmis , or systemically important payments systems , play a critical role in the financial system and the broader economy by facilitating the clearing , settlement , and recording of monetary and other financial transactions , such as payments , securities , and derivatives contracts... .

while safe and efficient fmis contribute to maintaining and promoting financial stability and economic growth , fmis also concentrate risk .

if not properly managed , fmis can be sources of financial shocks , such as liquidity dislocations and credit losses , or a major channel through which these shocks are transmitted across domestic and international financial markets .

in addition , at the november 2008 washington , dc , summit , the leaders supported actions by regulators to speed up efforts to reduce the systemic risks associated with credit default swaps and over - the - counter derivatives transactions .

they also supported efforts to ensure greater transparency for otc derivatives and an adequate infrastructure to support the growing volumes of otc derivatives trading .

these three objectives — improving transparency , mitigating risk , and protecting against market abuse — continue to drive g - 20 reforms of the otc derivatives markets .

the g - 20 leaders have expressed their support for reforming the otc derivatives markets in successive g - 20 summits .

actions taken by the g - 20 leaders at some of the summits have been particularly noteworthy: at the pittsburgh summit in september 2009 , g - 20 leaders agreed that all standardized otc derivative contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms , where appropriate , and cleared through central counterparties ( ccps ) by the end of 2012 .

in addition , they agreed that all otc contracts should be reported to trade repositories ( trs ) .

the g - 20 leaders also tasked the financial stability board with assessing the implementation of the agreed reforms and determining whether those reforms would be sufficient to achieve the main goal of improving transparency in the derivatives markets , mitigating systemic risk , and protecting against market abuse .

in october 2010 , the fsb published a report containing 21 recommendations for the g - 20 nations to assist them in implementing the g - 20 leaders' commitments concerning standardization , central clearing , exchange or electronic platform trading , and reporting of otc derivatives transactions to trade repositories .

the fsb then published an updated report in october 2011 , a third report in june 2012 , and a fourth report in october 2012 .

these reports detail country commitments in six specific areas of reform: ( 1 ) standardization of otc derivatives contracts ; ( 2 ) central clearing of otc derivatives contracts ; ( 3 ) exchange or electronic platform trading ; ( 4 ) transparency and trading ; ( 5 ) reporting to trade repositories ; and ( 6 ) application of central clearing requirements .

in april 2011 , the committee on payments and settlement systems of the bank for international settlements published a consultative report on recommendations regarding otc derivatives data reporting .

in january 2012 , the committee published its final report .

at the cannes g - 20 summit in november 2011 , the leaders adopted the recommendations of the derivatives markets working group and agreed to continue making progress in reforming the otc derivatives market .

the summit final communiqué declared that: reforming the over - the - counter derivatives markets is crucial to building a more resilient financial system .

all standardized over - the - counter derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms , where appropriate , and centrally cleared , by the end of 2012 ; otc derivatives contracts should be reported to trade repositories , and non - centrally cleared contracts should be subject to higher capital requirements .

we agree to cooperate further to avoid loopholes and overlapping regulations .

a coordination group is being established by the fsb to address some of these issues , complementing the existing otc derivatives working group .

as indicated above , the fsb was tasked by the g - 20 with monitoring and reporting on the success of g - 20 nations in meeting the year - end 2012 deadline of implementing the otc derivatives market reforms .

these reforms have focused on the three major objectives of the reforms as articulated by the g - 20 leaders at the washington , dc , summit: improving transparency , mitigating risk , and protecting against market abuse .

these three objectives have been addressed through five broad areas of reforms: ( 1 ) standardizing otc derivatives contracts ; ( 2 ) developing international standards and policy for central clearing and for risk management of non - centrally cleared derivatives ; ( 3 ) developing international standards and policy for exchanges or electronic platform trading ; ( 4 ) developing the infrastructure to facilitate reporting otc transactions to trade repositories ( tr ) ; and ( 5 ) developing and implementing international standards and policies for capital requirements .

as a result of self - assessments by g - 20 members , except for france , germany , and italy , which are represented by the eu in the survey , and such fsb members as singapore and switzerland , the fsb offered four general conclusions: only japan and the united states had adopted the necessary legislation to reach the goal of having derivatives centrally cleared by the end of 2012 , while the eu had reached a political consensus regarding legislation .

most authorities estimated that a significant proportion of interest rate derivatives will be centrally cleared by year - end 2012 , but they were less confident of progress for other asset classes and could not make firm estimates when central clearing could be achieved .

on the whole , the countries surveyed were markedly behind in implementing commitments that standardized contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic platforms by year - end 2012 .

according to the bis , increasing the proportion of the market traded on organized platforms is important for improving transparency , mitigating systemic risk , and protecting against market abuse .

only the united states had passed legislation with requirements for pre - and post - trade transparency and proposed detailed regulations ; the eu had made legislative proposals , and the japanese diet had approved legislation with provisions to improve the transparency of derivatives markets .

the increased standardization of contracts is a core element of the g - 20 nations' commitment relating to central clearing , organized trading and reporting to trs , and increasing the benefits in terms of improved transparency , reduced systemic risk , and greater protection against market abuse .

most countries have made progress in developing legislative frameworks to have all otc derivatives contracts reported to trade repositories ( trs ) , although not all members have adopted legislation .

the majority of members have published consultative documents regarding the establishment of trs and the related reporting requirements .

the fsb lacked information on capital requirements for non - bank regulated entities , because capital standards related to banks' exposures to central clearing parties are still being developed .

the basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) published a report in november 2011 on capital standards for banks' exposures , and the bis published a report in march 2012 on collateral requirements for central clearing of otc derivatives and a report in july 2012 on capital requirements for bank exposures to central counterparties .

the bis expected that by the start of 2012 the higher capital requirements associated with the higher counterparty credit risk of non - centrally cleared derivatives contracts would have been met internationally for banks through the basel iii standards .

the bis expects that the higher capital standards for non - centrally cleared contracts will provide incentives for standardization and central clearing .

in march 2010 , 14 of the largest derivatives dealers committed to take a number of steps to make derivatives trading more transparent , expand central clearing , improve standardization of derivatives contracts , and manage collateral associated with derivatives trading .

these commitments included specific target levels for the central clearing of otc credit derivatives and otc interest rate derivatives that were eligible for central clearing counterparties .

it was acknowledged , however , that the enhanced clearing targets covered only part of the otc market , because most derivative contracts were not eligible for central counterparty clearing .

in order to address this issue and to implement the g - 20 recommendations , the fsb initiated a working group , led by the committee on payment and settlement systems ( cpss ) of the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , the international organization of securities commissions ( iosco ) , and the european commission ( ec ) to assess and develop policy options for promoting the increased use of standardized products and for implementing at the global level the mandatory clearing of derivatives contracts and the exchange or electronic trading requirements .

the following sections examine the major issues involved and the progress made to date in the five broad areas of reforms addressed by the fsb surveys: ( 1 ) standards for otc derivatives contracts ; ( 2 ) central clearing and non - centrally cleared derivatives ; ( 3 ) exchanges or electronic platform trading ; ( 4 ) reporting to trade repositories ( tr ) ; and ( 5 ) capital requirements .

the fsb is charged with monitoring and reporting on the progress the g - 20 nations have made in changing laws and regulations implementing the g - 20 recommendations .

the latest fsb progress report on otc derivatives market reforms was published in october 2012 , with another report expected to be published in april 2013 .

table 2 provides a summary of the progress g - 20 members and some fsb members have made in adopting and implementing legislation and regulations regarding otc derivatives markets .

some countries , principally those with limited derivatives markets , tend to lag behind other countries , such as the united states , with advanced and extensive derivatives markets .

according to the fsb data in table 2 , the surveyed countries have made the most progress in adopting measures regarding reporting to trade repositories and the least progress in implementing margin requirements for non - centrally traded derivatives .

the report is based on a questionnaire sent to the fsb member countries covering the members' work plans and progress to date in implementing otc derivatives market reforms .

although the survey generally solicits simple yes / no responses , the survey also requests detailed explanations on some issues .

responses by the individual fsb members are available to the members , but are not provided to the public .

for individual country detail , see appendix b to this report .

the fsb concluded in its october 2012 report that australia , the european union , hong kong , japan , and the united states had progressed in implementing regulations governing central clearing and reporting to trade repositories .

the fsb concluded that the countries surveyed are committed to changing their legislative and regulatory framework to achieve the g - 20 objectives , but that some jurisdictions were "waiting for key elements of the regulatory framework in the eu , japan , and the united states to be finalized before putting their own legislation in place. .

the fsb also noted that important standard setting bodies had made "significant" progress in developing the international policies that facilitate the advancement of otc derivatives reform across jurisdictions and that those jurisdictions needed to "promptly develop and implement legislative and regulatory frameworks. .

the fsb concluded , however: but legislation and regulation are not by themselves enough .

market participants need to take practical steps to ensure that the necessary market infrastructure is available by further expanding the number and scope of otc derivatives transactions that are standardized , centrally cleared , traded on organized platforms and reported to trs .

failure to implement the commitments by the agreed deadline risks a loss of momentum for reform , in addition to failing to deliver the benefits of improved transparency , mitigation of systemic risk , and protection against market abuse .

in october 2012 , the fsb offered three general conclusions concerning the state of regulatory development of otc derivatives trading among the g - 20 members: 1 .

market infrastructures regarding otc derivatives trading , central clearing , and reporting are in place and can be scaled up ; 2 .

the international policy work on the four safeguards ( fair and open markets , cooperative oversight arrangements , liquidity arrangements , and robust resolution regimes ) for clearing derivatives through global counterparties is substantially completed and implementation is proceeding at a national level ; and 3 .

the most significant impediment to further progress appears to be uncertainty regarding the regulatory framework .

in addition to the general conclusions , the fsb issued a series of specific conclusions regarding the readiness of the g - 20 members to meet the self - imposed deadline of year - end 2012 for implementing major reforms in the otc derivatives market .

according to the fsb: 1 .

market infrastructure has been set up to provide services to a wide range of the global otc derivatives markets , including clearing counterparties , that are capable of clearing some products in all asset classes and trade repositories exist for reporting transactions in all asset classes .

2 .

the proportion of transactions reported to trs and centrally cleared has plateaued due to uncertainty over the future regulatory framework .

3 .

further clarity and consensus regarding "standardization" is needed in order to reduce the risk of regulatory arbitrage in the application of central clearing and organized platform trading requirements .

4 .

the financial sector should accelerate its work on standardization of both products and processes to increase the use of standardization .

5 .

adding new products and participants to organized trading platforms and to trade repositories takes from six months to more than a year .

6 .

trade repositories have become an important source of data for authorities ; however , significant gaps remain concerning the extent of reporting and the central clearing of products .

7 .

impediments to aggregating data may limit progress in further developing the use of trade repositories for regulatory and financial stability purposes .

8 .

the fsb supports ongoing efforts to improve authorities' access to tr data and guidance on access to tr data .

congress has addressed directly the governance of the derivatives market through the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

the dodd - frank act , in its title vii on otc derivatives reform , addresses each of the major g - 20 commitments .

often , final implementation is left to the relevant executive agencies , particularly the cftc and the sec — though with additional roles for the prudential regulators .

section 722 of the dodd - frank act amended the commodity exchange act's section 2 to limit the applicability of the act's swaps market reforms so that they "shall not apply to activities outside the united states unless those activities — ' ( 1 ) have a direct and significant connection with activities in , or effect on , commerce of the united states. .

however , the act left to the cftc to determine which such activities related to the swaps markets do have such a direct and significant connection .

congress would have an oversight role in this cftc determination — an important one , due to the global nature of the otc derivatives markets .

on july 12 , 2012 , the cftc issued proposed guidance on "cross - border application of certain swaps provisions of the commodity exchange act. .

the guidance was aimed at setting out how certain requirements in title vii , such as the clearing , trade execution , registration of a person as a swap dealer or major swap participant , and other reporting and recordkeeping provisions , would apply to cross - border swaps that may be transacted across national boundaries .

under the guidance , foreign firms that do more than a de minimus amount of otc derivatives markets activity as swap dealers would register with the cftc .

foreign firms that do register with the cftc , however , would be allowed to substitute compliance with a comparable and comprehensive foreign regulatory regime , for u.s. regulatory compliance .

this potential for substituted foreign compliance further invokes a determination of how much regulatory progress other g - 20 countries have achieved in derivatives reforms , in comparison to the united states .

again , congress is involved through its oversight of the cftc , which will make these assessments .

this determination by the agency could potentially affect u.s. businesses with foreign operations and their dealings with non - u.s. clients and foreign businesses with u.s. operations .

indeed , the 112 th congress considered legislation seeking to address questions raised by the extraterritorial nature of the global swaps market and the dodd - frank provisions .

bills introduced in the 112 th congress included h.r .

2779 , exempting from the clearing requirement most swaps between corporate affiliates in the united states and abroad .

h.r .

2779 passed the house in the 112 th congress .

also , h.r .

3283 expressly limited the extraterritorial reach of dodd - frank by exempting swaps and security based swaps between u.s. and non - u.s. persons ( except for reporting requirements ) .

such agency rulemakings and proposed legislation raise broad questions for congressional oversight or potential new legislation , such as the following: what connections to the united states would require a non - u.s. person to register as a swap dealer or major swap participant ? .

which dodd - frank act requirements should apply to the otc derivatives , or swaps , activities of non - u.s. persons ? .

what about to u.s. persons , and their branches , subsidiaries , and affiliates outside of the united states ? .

to the extent that title vii of the dodd - frank requirements would apply , under what circumstances should u.s. authorities permit non - u.s. persons to comply with the regulatory regime of a foreign jurisdiction instead of complying with u.s. requirements ? .

a look at progress achieved by foreign regimes in implementing these g - 20 commitments should help members of congress and u.s regulators in deliberating these questions .

following the financial crisis of 2008-2009 , national leaders in the g - 20 have spearheaded reforms in the rules and regulations governing the trading of financial instruments known as derivatives .

while these reforms are being implemented , congress may choose to monitor them carefully to assess the comparability between regulations adopted in the united states and those adopted abroad in markets that serve as competitors for u.s. financial services firms .

the objective of these reforms is to establish criteria for standardizing derivatives contracts and to have those contracts traded on organized trading markets through central counterparties that have a capital base that is sufficient to cover any risk exposure .

in addition , the data on standardized contracts are expected to be reported to trade repositories and made available to regulators and policymakers in order to assess the stability and performance of the derivatives market .

these reforms are being addressed through regulatory changes in five areas: ( 1 ) standardizing otc derivatives contracts ; ( 2 ) developing international standards and policy for central clearing and for risk management of non - centrally cleared derivatives ; ( 3 ) developing international standards and policy for exchanges or electronic platform trading ; ( 4 ) developing the infrastructure to facilitate reporting otc transactions to trade repositories ( tr ) ; and ( 5 ) developing and implementing international standards and policies for capital requirements .

in addition , as regulators in the united states , the european union , and elsewhere craft new rules to govern the otc derivatives markets , they confront the challenge of regulating domestic activity in markets that are fundamentally international in scope .

while market participants generally have accepted the fact that the otc derivatives markets will be reformed , they are closely monitoring how those reforms are implemented and instances of differences in implementation or regulatory arbitrage .

as implementation proceeds in both the united states and abroad , congress may be pressed at times to amend current measures .

the fsb has been tasked by the g - 20 to coordinate and report on the progress its members have made in adopting various derivatives market reforms .

according to the latest report , the surveyed countries are making progress in such areas as having derivatives contracts centrally cleared and reported to trade repositories , but lag behind in standardizing contracts , building up capital reserves , and having contracts traded through exchanges or on electronic platforms .

without a generally accepted definition of what constitutes a standardized derivatives contract , data reported to trade repositories will not be comparable , which would greatly reduce the ability of regulators to make assessments of the state of the derivatives markets .

another key issue is the comparability of reforms across the surveyed countries .

while countries are ostensibly meeting the reform objectives of the g - 20 , it is not possible to assess the quality of the current reforms and the potential for regulatory arbitrage .

this is particularly true for g - 20 members that currently are not hosts to large volumes of derivatives trading and may have relatively under - developed capital markets .

as a result of a survey of the efforts made to date by g - 20 members and some fsb members , the financial stability board concluded in october 2012 that: regulators and derivatives market participants were struggling to meet their commitments to implement market reforms by the end of 2012 .

while significant progress has been made in constructing the architecture for standardizing , clearing , and reporting derivatives contracts , regulators are juggling sometimes conflicting objectives .

in particular , market participants are pressuring regulators to develop a common set of rules to reduce the prospects of regulatory arbitrage and to reduce regulatory uncertainties in cross - border transactions .

regulators in a number of countries surveyed by the fsb are closely gauging their own actions to ensure that any regulations they propose are aligned with those of the market leaders , principally the united states and the european union .

in addition , few of the surveyed countries have adopted measures for building capital reserves .

various countries face impediments in reforming the way derivatives are traded and reported , the most important being uncertainty over the regulatory framework that is being developed in the united states and european union .

as a group , the g - 20 countries and the fsb members have committed to adopting legislation and regulations to fully implement the g - 20 reforms , but few nations have progressed as far as the united states and most are either drafting or still finalizing regulations .

according to the fsb , the market infrastructure is mostly in place for greater coordination of efforts regarding standardizing , clearing , and reporting on derivatives contracts .

a lack of regulatory conformity , however , appears to be impeding progress .

for instance , market leaders remain uncertain over the definition of what constitutes a standardized derivatives contract and , therefore , are hesitant to adopt regulations on clearing and reporting relative to standardized derivatives contracts .

trade repositories are positioned to report on each of the five asset classes ( foreign exchange contracts ; interest rate contracts ; equity - linked contracts ; commodity contracts ; and credit default swaps ) .

nevertheless , there is no single standard format for data reporting and storage , and the majority of trs use proprietary codes and formats , which make aggregation and reconciliation difficult , thereby undermining one of the main objectives in collecting and reporting data on derivatives contracts .

furthermore , these efforts are closely tied to efforts to overcome the lack of a single , industry - wide format for data reporting , processing , and storage of otc derivatives trade data .

this lack of a common format defeats one of the major objectives of the reporting requirement: the ability to aggregate otc derivatives data across multiple trs to support the objectives of supervisory and regulatory authorities .

appendix a. glossary bank for international settlements ( bis ) : headquartered in basel , switzerland , bis serves the specialized needs of central banks and international organizations by promoting collaboration among central banks , conducting research , acting as a prime counterparty for central banks in their financial transactions , and serving as an agent or trustee in connection with international financial operations .

basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) : provides a forum for cooperation on banking supervisory matters by working to improve the quality of banking supervision worldwide ; it seeks to reach a common understanding of key supervisory issues by exchanging information on national supervisory issues , approaches and techniques ; at times , the bcbs uses this common understanding to develop guidelines and supervisory standards , in particular in the area of international standards on capital adequacy , the core principles for effective banking supervision , and the concordat on cross - border banking supervision .

central c ounterparties ( ccps ) : act as intermediaries between counterparties to contracts traded in one or more financial markets in a central counterparty system ; acts as the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer , through a system known as novation ( an open - offer system of legally binding contracts ) , thereby ensuring the performance of open contracts ; generally attempts to reduce risks to participants by requiring participants to provide collateral to cover current and potential future exposures .

collateralized d ebt o bligations ( cdos ) : are a type of structured asset - backed security whose value and payments are derived from a portfolio of fixed - income underlying assets ; cdos are assigned different risk classes or tranches , with "senior" tranches considered to be the safest .

since interest and principal payments are made in order of seniority , junior tranches offer higher coupon payments ( and interest rates ) or lower prices to compensate for additional default risk .

investors , pension funds , and insurance companies buy cdos .

cdos based on sub - prime mortgages were at the heart of the 2008-2009 global financial crises .

committee on payment and settlement systems ( cpss ) : established in 1990 by the g - 10 countries to address general concerns regarding the efficiency and stability of payment , clearing , settlement , and related arrangements ; focuses on issues related to these systems or arrangements and to their relations with the major financial markets for the conduct of monetary policy ; and undertakes specific studies at the request of the governors or on its own initiative .

the cpss is comprised of the central bank governors of 25 central banks .

credit d efault s waps ( cds ) : are a credit derivative contract between two counterparties in which the buyer makes periodic payments to the seller and in return receives a sum of money if a certain credit event occurs ( such as a default in an underlying financial instrument ) .

payoffs and collateral calls on cdss issued on sub - prime mortgage cdos were a primary cause of the problems of american international group , inc. ( aig ) and other companies in the financial crisis .

european market infrastructure regulation ( emir ) : is legislation that was adopted by the european commission in july 2012 and became effective in august 2012 to implement reforms in the over - the - counter derivatives market .

reforms include reporting obligations for otc derivatives ; clearing obligations for eligible otc derivatives ; measures to reduce counterparty credit risk and operational risk for bilaterally cleared otc derivatives ; common rules for central counterparties ( ccps ) and for trade repositories ; and rules on the establishment of interoperability between ccps .

european securities and market authority ( esma ) : an independent eu authority that helps safeguard the stability of the eu's financial system by ensuring the integrity , transparency , efficiency , and orderly functioning of securities markets , and by enhancing investor protection .

the esma attempts to improve supervisory convergence among securities regulators and across financial sectors by working closely with the other european supervisory authorities competent in the field of banking ( eba ) , and insurance and occupational pensions ( eiopa ) .

 ( see http: / / www.bis.org / publ / cpss101a.pdf . ) .

european banking authority ( eba ) : established by the european parliament and council in november 2010 ; it assumed the existing and ongoing tasks and responsibilities from the committee of european banking supervisors ( cebs ) .

the eba acts as the hub in a network of eu and national bodies safeguarding the stability of the financial system , the transparency of markets and financial products , and the protection of depositors and investors .

it also acts to prevent regulatory arbitrage ; guarantee a level playing field ; strengthen international supervisory coordination ; promote supervisory convergence ; and provide advice to the eu institutions in the areas of banking , payments , and e - money regulation and issues related to corporate governance , auditing , and financial reporting .

 ( see http: / / www.eba.europa.eu / . ) .

financial m arket i nfrastructures ( fmis ) : are generally viewed as systemically important multilateral payment systems among participating institutions that facilitate the clearing , settlement , and recording of monetary and other financial transactions , such as payments , securities , and derivatives contracts .

according to the bis , fmis provide participants with centralized clearing , settlement , and recording of financial transactions among themselves or between each of them and a central party to allow for greater efficiency and reduced costs and risks .

some fmis are critical in helping central banks conduct monetary policy and maintain financial stability .

 ( see principles for financial market infrastructures , bank for international settlements , april 2012 [ http: / / www.bis.org / publ / cpss101a.pdf ]. ) .

financial stability board ( fsb ) : was created at the g - 20 london summit in april 2009 as the successor to the financial stability forum ; its mission is to coordinate and monitor at the international level the work of national financial authorities and international standard - setting bodies , in the interest of financial stability .

the fsb is chaired by mark carney , governor of the bank of canada ; its secretariat is hosted by the bis .

u.s. members consist of the department of the treasury , the board of governors of the federal reserve system , and the securities and exchange commission ( see http: / / www.financialstabilityboard.org / ) .

group of twenty ( g - 20 ) : members of the g - 20 consist of the following countries: argentina , australia , brazil , canada , china , france , germany , india , indonesia , italy , japan , mexico , russia , saudi arabia , south africa , south korea , turkey , the united kingdom , the united states , and the european union ; serves as a forum for advancing international economic cooperation among 20 major advanced and emerging - market countries .

originally established in 1999 to facilitate discussions among the g - 20 finance ministers , its prominence increased with the onset of the global financial crisis in the fall of 2008 , and the g - 20 started meeting at the leader level .

in september 2009 , g - 20 leaders announced that , henceforth , the g - 20 would be the "premier" forum for international economic cooperation .

international monetary fund ( imf ) : originated in july 1944 , when representatives of 45 countries met in bretton woods , new hampshire , to develop a framework for international economic cooperation .

it currently has 188 member countries , and provides policy advice and financing to members in economic difficulties and also works with developing nations to help them achieve macroeconomic stability and reduce poverty .

in particular , the imf ( 1 ) promotes international monetary cooperation and exchange rate stability ; ( 2 ) provides policy advice to governments and central banks based on analysis of economic trends and cross - country experiences ; ( 3 ) conducts research , statistics , forecasts , and analysis based on tracking of global , regional , and individual economies and markets ; ( 4 ) provides loans to help countries overcome economic difficulties ; ( 5 ) provides concessional loans to help fight poverty in developing countries ; and ( 6 ) provides technical assistance and training to help countries improve the management of their economies .

international organization of securities commissions ( iosco ) : was created in 1983 .

it sets standards for securities markets .

its membership regulates more than 95% of the world's securities markets and it is the primary international cooperative forum for securities market regulatory agencies .

legal entity identifier ( lei ) : a program designed to create and apply a single , universal standard identifier to uniquely identify any party to a financial transaction internationally .

it helps regulators conduct more accurate analysis of global , systemically important financial institutions and their transactions with all counterparties across markets , products , and regions , allowing regulators to better identify concentrations and emerging risks .

trade r epositories ( trs ) : are entities that maintain a centralized electronic record of transaction data .

timely and reliable access to data stored in trade repositories potentially can enhance the transparency of transaction information to relevant authorities and the public to identify and evaluate the potential risks posed to the broader financial system , promote financial stability , and support the detection and prevention of market abuse .

appendix b .

individual country progress in implementing derivatives market reforms this appendix presents detailed information on the progress the g - 20 members , except france , germany , and italy , which are represented by the european union , and such fsb members as singapore and switzerland , have made in meeting the g - 20 self - imposed deadline of adopting reform measures by year - end 2012 .

the detailed information reflects self - assessments by the individual countries and is cumulative over the four surveys that have been conducted to date .

the latest survey was published in october 2012 .

argentina standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

derivatives are traded through mercado abierto electronico ( mae ) and two other exchanges , which account for 75% of all derivatives contracts traded in argentina .

central bank regulations were changed in order to provide for a regulatory stimulus for using guarantees and central clearing parties ( ccps ) by all financial institutions supervised by the central bank .

argentina argues that it has no need for developing new regulations , but will expand the variety of contracts offered .

central clearing .

no central clearing .

central bank regulations provide incentives to trade derivatives on organized platforms that provide for central clearing .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

argentina has a central bank regulation in place that provides incentives to trade derivatives on organized platforms that provide for central clearing .

the comision nacional de valores ( cnv ) regulates the securities markets in argentina and requires all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

mae , the electronic securities and otc derivatives trading market in argentina , is considering increasing the standardized derivative products that can be traded on this platform .

cnv requires firm use a common soft for trading negotiable securities that ensures standardization .

transparency and trading .

argentina permits a single dealer functionality .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

no laws are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 that require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

derivatives operations of banks with cross - border counterparties , the bulk of otc transactions , are subject to reporting and monitoring by the central bank .

legislative and / or regulatory steps have been completed toward implementing a reporting requirement .

no additional legislative or regulatory steps are needed for a reporting requirement to be effective .

regulations require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

application of central clearing requirements .

derivatives under the jurisdiction of the cnv must be centrally cleared .

central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities under the jurisdiction of the cnv .

current laws or regulations do not provide for intra - group transactions that are not traded through regulated markets .

australia standardization .

the main derivatives traded in australian markets are interest rate and foreign exchange products , which already are fairly standardized .

the australian government introduced into the parliament a legislative framework to allow requirements to centrally clear standardized derivatives through central counterparties .

implementing regulations and rules would be necessary before mandatory obligations are imposed .

australian regulators are considering changes to implement basel iii by january 2013 .

central clearing .

government has introduced legislation to establish a flexible framework for regulators to impose mandatory trade reporting , central clearing , and trade execution obligations on participants , and also establish licensing requirements for trade repositories .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

the government introduced into parliament a legislative framework to require trading of standardized derivatives on trading platforms or exchanges , with final adoption of the legislation expected by the end of 2012 .

implementing regulations and rules need to be developed prior to full implementation of the legislation .

transparency and trading .

under current law , which is under review , a single - dealer platform is not required to be regulated as a market .

consequently , under the current market licensing regime if mandatory trading is imposed it would initially be on platforms or markets which offer multi - dealer functionality .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is under review for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is under review for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

the australian government introduced into parliament a legislative framework to allow the imposition of mandatory trade reporting of otc derivatives .

the government expects the legislation to be in effect before the end of 2012 , but implementing regulations and rules would be required before any mandatory obligations could be imposed .

it also determined that if trade repositories are not available , the legislation would permit the imposition of a requirement that data be reported to a prescribed governmental authority .

application of central clearing requirements .

australia is developing a framework that does not specify any asset classes that are exempt from the central clearing requirements .

however , implementation of any central clearing requirements will be considered on an asset class basis and will likely be harmonized with requirements in major jurisdictions .

the framework being adopted does not specify any entities that are exempt from the central clearing requirements .

however , implementation of any central clearing requirements likely will be considered on an asset class basis and take into account the impact on financial and non - financial entities .

coverage will be coordinated with other fsb members .

current laws or regulations for intra - group transactions are under review .

brazil standardization .

brazil's derivatives markets are already highly standardized .

central clearing .

existing legislation requires all exchange - traded derivatives to be centrally cleared ; non - exchange traded derivatives may be bilaterally risk managed or centrally cleared at the option of the counterparties .

mandatory clearing requirements apply only to exchange - traded derivatives .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

does not have a law or regulation in place requiring all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms , but provides capital incentives for use of exchange - traded derivatives .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is required .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for the 90% of the market that is exchange - traded ; no pre - trade requirement exists for the 10% of the market that is otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 that require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

pre - existing laws enacted by the central bank and comissao de valores mobiliarios ( cvm ) ( securities and exchange commission of brazil ) require all otc derivatives trades to be reported to a trade reporter .

also , derivatives transactions must be registered to have legal validity .

no additional legislative or regulatory steps are needed for a reporting requirement to be effective .

regulations do not require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements apply only to exchange - traded derivatives .

current laws or regulations do not provide for intra - group transactions .

canada standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

canada is considering new capital standards and regulatory steps relative to trading repositories to be implemented indirectly through basel iii capital standards and trade reporting .

central clearing .

central clearing is being reviewed with legislation expected before the end of 2012 .

legislation is in place in provinces where the majority of otc derivatives trades are booked , but further work is required to harmonize rules across the provinces .

the canadian securities administration is working to identify and implement legislative changes that are needed to support central clearing .

canada is considering a system that would provide for central clearing of systemically important products through a ccp located in canada for canadian market participants , with other products cleared offshore .

alternatively , all products could be cleared at existing and planned global ccps located in europe or the united states .

if this method is adopted , however , canada supports adopting four safeguards to protect the safety and robustness of the canadian market: ( 1 ) acceptable multilateral cooperative oversight arrangements ; ( 2 ) satisfactory multi - currency emergency liquidity arrangements ; ( 3 ) a robust recovery and resolution regime for ccps ; and ( 4 ) fair and open access to ccps .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

reviewing laws or regulations to require all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms , and is expected to publish a consultation paper in late 2012 to help develop regulations regarding the impact of a trading requirement .

transparency and trading .

canada is developing a process for developing and implementing reporting regulations , with requirements scheduled to be implemented in 2013 .

the canadian securities administration published a consultation paper on trade repositories and most jurisdictions are assessing what legislative changes may be required .

in some provinces , legislation has been proposed .

canada anticipates that a very small number of trades may not be accepted by trade repositories reporting to trade repositories .

laws will be in place by year - end 2012 , depending on legislative changes in rules , to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

the canadian securities administrators published a consultation paper on trade repositories .

most jurisdictions are assessing what legislative changes may be required .

ontario and quebec have amended legislation to support reporting to trade repositories and regulatory access to the data .

it is anticipated that a small number of trades may not be accepted by trade repositories and could be reported to securities regulators .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements for coverage of all the asset classes are under review .

foreign exchange swaps and forwards may be exempted with a view toward harmonizing rules with other jurisdictions .

reviewing coverage of central clearing requirements , particular consideration is being given to systemic risk concerns and harmonization with other jurisdictions .

regarding regulations for intra - group transactions , canadian securities regulators are considering comments received in response to a consultation paper on end - user exemptions .

china standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

china has taken steps to increase the use of standardized products and procedures by adopting an improved master agreement and definition document for an electronic trading platform .

china has approved the china foreign exchange trading system ( cfets ) to introduce standardized post - trade procedures for interest rate swaps .

central clearing .

central clearing is under consideration .

legislation has not been proposed , but the shanghai clearing house is being encouraged to establish detailed schemes for central clearing of otc derivatives and interest rate swaps .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

china is reviewing laws and / or regulations to require all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

has developed an electronic trading platform operated by the china foreign exchange trading system ( cfets ) .

under regulations developed by the people's bank of china ( pbc ) , all standardized otc interest rate and credit derivatives can be traded on the cfets platform ; certain types of derivatives are required to be traded on the cfets platform .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is required .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

under current rules , all otc interest rate , fx and credit risk mitigation tools ( other than credit risk mitigation agreements ) can be traded on the china foreign exchange trade system ( cfets ) electronic platform ; interest rate trades executed outside the cfets platform are be reported to cfets .

additional legislative or regulatory steps are needed to determine the frequency and content of reporting and which institution will play the role of trade repositories .

regulations require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements covering all asset classes are under review .

central clearing requirements for all types of financial entities and requirements for intra - group transactions are yet to be determined .

european union standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

the european union adopted new regulations through the european markets infrastructure regulation ( emir ) .

the regulation introduces a reporting obligation for otc derivatives , a clearing obligation for eligible otc derivatives , measures to reduce counterparty credit risk and operational risk for bilaterally cleared otc derivatives , common rules for central counterparties and for trade repositories , and rules on the establishment of cooperation between central counterparties .

the eu also adopted changes to the capital requirements directive to implement the basel iii commitments .

the eu is also planning additional amendments to the markets in financial instruments directive ( mifid ) that will include a revised directive covering market structure , exemptions from financial regulation , organization and conduct of business requirements for investment firms and trade venues , powers of national authorities , sanctions , and rules for third - country firms operating through a branch .

the changes to mifid also include a new regulation which provides requirements for trade transparency , the mandatory trading of derivatives on organized venues and the provision of services by third - country firms without a branch .

in addition , the eu has proposed changes to the markets abuse directive ( mad ) governing insider trading and information .

central clearing .

the european markets infrastructure regulation ( emir ) proposal was made in september 2010 , which , according to the eu's survey for the fsb , would require all standardized otc derivatives to be cleared through central counterparties ( ccps ) .

the measure was agreed on in march 2012 , with adoption by the european commission expected by the end of 2012 .

additional technical rules are being drafted by the european securities and markets authority ( esma ) , the european banking authority ( eba ) , and the european insurance and occupational pensions authority ( eiopa ) .

the technical standards are expected to be adopted by the end of 2012 .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

currently does not have a law or regulation in place requiring all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms , but the final rules proposed on mifid and markets in financial instruments regulation ( mifir ) are expected to be in effect by mid - 2014 .

proposed amendments to mifid would require that the trading of all otc derivatives , subject to central clearing and which are sufficiently liquid , take place on one of three regulated venues: ( 1 ) regulated markets ; ( 2 ) multilateral trading facilities ; and ( 3 ) the future organized trading facilities .

the amendments are expected to be adopted and technical standards developed for full implementation by mid - 2014 .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is proposed as part of the amended mifid and mifir .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

through the european markets infrastructure regulation ( emir ) , laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

technical standards are being developed by the european securities markets authority ( esma ) and are expected to be adopted by the european commission by year - end 2012 .

reporting to the esma will be required in instances where a trade repository is not able to record the details of an otc derivative .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements cover all asset classes .

central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities , except for a temporary exemption for certain pension arrangements .

current laws or regulations exempt intra - group transactions .

hong kong standardization .

hong kong is monitoring developments in the otc derivatives markets and is consulting with the industry to follow changes .

interest rate swaps and forward contracts ( non - deliverable forwards ) are already fairly standardized .

the hong kong monetary authority has completed the legislative process for incorporating the basel iii framework into its capital regime for banks for implementation in 2013 , which is expected to increase standardization .

central clearing .

hong kong has adopted an interim legislative proposal to support voluntary clearing of certain derivatives transactions through local central clearing parties recognized by the securities and futures commission .

hong kong is drafting legislative amendments on central clearing with the intent of having them adopted by the end of 2012 .

regulators are in the process of fine - tuning a regulatory regime for otc derivatives , including mandatory clearing requirements .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

a regulatory proposal reviewed by the legislative council is being drafted that will give regulators the authority to impose trading requirements , but the timing of implementing the proposals is subject to further study by regulators .

regulators produced a consultative paper on the proposed otc derivatives regulatory regime , including a proposal to give regulators authority to make rules to implement a mandatory trading requirement .

hong kong indicates that it must adopt legislative amendments and engage in further market consultation before finalizing the detailed regulations regarding a mandatory trading requirement .

transparency and trading .

dealer functionality is under consideration , with a view toward international developments .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is under consideration for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is under consideration for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

a regulatory proposal has been reviewed by a committee of the legislative council and legislation is being drafted to be adopted in early 2013 to build the regulatory regime for otc derivatives ( pending detailed rules subject to international developments ) .

hong kong intends to take a phased approach , beginning with interest rate swaps and non - deliverable forwards .

regulations that require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository are being developed by the hong kong monetary authority for submission to the legislative council .

legislative amendments must be adopted and further market consultation is also needed before finalizing the detailed regulations on the mandatory reporting requirement .

otc derivatives transactions that have a bearing on hong kong's financial market will be required to be reported to the local trade repository to be developed by the hong kong monetary authority .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements covering all asset classes are being phased in .

mandatory clearing is expected to cover standardized interest rate swaps and non - deliverable forwards initially .

additional measures to extend these clearing requirements eventually to cover other types of instruments will be determined after the initial roll - out .

hong kong's current proposal is to cover financial institutions holding positions above a certain clearing threshold , which is to be determined .

hong kong's regulators are prepared to consider the possibility of introducing clearing exemptions in respect of intra - group transactions .

specific details on exemptions from clearing will be provided when the regulators consult on the detailed requirements in early 2013 .

india standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

the clearing corporation of india ( ccil ) is expected to start guaranteed settlement in various derivatives .

india is planning a gradual approach to developing new legislation .

india has achieved standardization relevant to terms of coupon payment , maturity dates , and master agreements for certificates of deposit .

foreign exchange derivatives are essentially standardized .

central clearing .

no central clearing .

india has no had non - guaranteed settlement of interest rate swaps since november 2008 .

despite not having requirements that interest rate swaps be centrally cleared , 70% of such derivatives are centrally cleared .

india is taking progressive steps toward the central clearing of otc derivatives transactions .

india is transitioning to a system of guaranteed settlement of interest rate swaps , but has no immediate timeframe for the guaranteed settlement of credit default swaps .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

india does not have a law or regulation in place requiring all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

india , however , has mandated a trading requirement for all repurchase agreements in government securities , interest rate swaps , forward rate agreements , and foreign exchange forwards .

explicit authority is required to approve otc derivatives trading platforms .

transparency and trading .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

single dealer and multi - dealer facilities are available for foreign exchange derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

banks and primary dealers should report interest rate swaps ( irs ) and forward rate agreements ( fra ) and foreign exchange derivatives transactions to the ccil reporting platform .

credit default swaps ( cds ) all market makers must report trades on the centralized reporting platform within the stipulated time after execution of the trade .

in addition to regulatory guidelines adopted in 2007 and 2011 , india issued regulatory guidelines in 2012 for reporting trades of certain forwards , swaps , and options .

india is considering a phased in approach to bring any remaining otc derivatives under the reporting framework .

recommendations have been made to the financial sector legislative reform commission to provide appropriate statutory authority for the regulation of trade repositories and for facilitating reporting to and dissemination of information from trade repositories to the appropriate members and regulators .

india does not require reporting to a government authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

interest rate swaps are being reported to the ccil and the details are accessible to the reserve bank of india .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing facility is available for interest rate swaps , foreign exchange forwards , and repurchase agreements in government securities .

central clearing for credit default swaps is being considered , depending on market developments .

central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities .

current laws or regulations provide for intra - group transactions , provided that the accounts are held separately .

indonesia standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

indonesia has approved the exchange trading of standardized derivatives products on the surabaya stock exchange since 2003 .

rules on futures contracts and options on securities or on indexes must be traded on an exchange .

indonesia is expected to consider additional legislation in the 2013-2015 timeframe .

central clearing .

currently , derivatives trading in indonesia is a relatively low volume activity and takes place only on exchanges , there are no plans to establish a central clearing requirements for otc derivatives .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

indonesia does not have a law or regulation that requires all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

also , indonesia does have a rule in place on futures contracts and options on securities or on securities indexes .

a revision of the current rules is expected in 2012-2013 .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is required .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

in indonesia , derivatives can only be traded on exchanges .

current regulations require that otc derivative transactions be reported to trade repositories .

that requirement , however , covers only debt instruments ( non - derivatives ) .

banks are required to report interest rate derivatives and foreign exchange derivatives to the central bank .

there are no proposed changes to laws or regulations .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements are under review .

central clearing requirements for all types of financial entities are under review .

japan standardization .

a considerable portion of japan's derivatives markets is already standardized .

japan amended its financial instruments and exchange act in may 2010 to improve stability and transparency in the settlement of otc derivatives and in september 2012 for the use of an electronic trading platform .

a cabinet office ordinance was adopted and is being implemented on central counterparties ; use of an electronic trading platform is expected to be phased in over three years .

central clearing .

initially , central clearing requirements will apply only to yen interest rate swaps and credit default swaps .

japan's financial instruments and exchange act ( fiea ) was amended in may 2010 , as a step toward mandating clearing of standardized derivatives .

also , a cabinet ordinance will be implemented by november 2012 that will include a requirement for a central clearing parties to clear trades "that are significant in volume and would reduce settlement risks in the domestic market. .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

legislation was adopted that amended the financial instruments and exchange act requiring the use of exchange or electronic trading platforms .

the changes are expected to be phased in over a period up to three years .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is expected , but single - dealer functionality is accepted .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is being determined for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is being determined for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

the financial instruments and exchange act was amended to introduce the legislative framework for reporting otc derivatives transactions to trade repositories .

trade data not reported to trade repositories , primarily data on exotic otc derivatives , will be reported to the japan financial services authority ( jfsa ) .

a cabinet ordinance is expected to be completed by november 2012 .

data reported to jfsa will be limited to information not accepted by a trade repository , such as exotic otc derivatives trades .

application of central clearing requirements .

a cabinet ordinance on central clearing requirements for all asset classes is expected to be implemented by november 2012 .

initially , the requirements will apply to yen interest rate swaps and certain credit default swaps .

after november 2012 , applicable products will be further expanded based on a review .

central clearing requirements apply to major "financial intermediaries business operations" and financial institutions .

the new cabinet ordinance is not expected to cover intra - group transactions .

mexico standardization .

most otc derivatives products are already highly standardized .

mexican financial authorities are developing a general framework on financial markets that is expected to be concluded by year - end 2012 .

financial authorities are considering specific legislation to regulate derivatives markets .

central clearing .

mexican authorities expect to enact a law and or secondary regulations to require all standardized otc derivatives be cleared through central counterparties .

the mexican financial authority is expected to develop a general framework and submit it for approval by the legislature .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

authorities plan to enact a law and secondary regulation relative to a subset of standardized derivatives that are to be traded on electronic trading platforms .

financial authorities also are developing a general framework based on the amendments to the secondary regulation to be concluded in 2012 .

in addition to the regulatory framework , the financial authorities are considering the need for specific legislation to regulate derivatives markets .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is required .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is not required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

authorities plan to enact laws or secondary regulations to require all otc derivatives transactions be reported to a trade repository .

under current law , banks report otc derivatives transactions to the central bank ; legislation is expected to be adopted that will require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories by year - end 2012 .

financial authorities are developing a general framework based on amendments to the secondary regulations to be completed by year - end 2012 .

in addition , financial authorities are considering developing specific new legislation to regulate the derivatives market .

currently , local financial intermediaries are required to report otc derivatives to local authorities , but financial authorities intend to have entities report to specifically designated trade repositories .

application of central clearing requirements .

as an initial step , peso - denominated interest rate swaps ( currently 90% of the domestic otc derivatives ) will be subject to mandatory central clearing .

all derivatives determined as standardized by the central bank will be subject to the central clearing requirement .

initially , central clearing requirements will only apply to banks and brokerage houses .

current laws or regulations do not provide for intra - group transactions and no exemptions are planned .

russia standardization .

russia adopted laws on clearing and clearing services that creates a legal basis for a master agreement , standardized otc contracts and tax preferences for agreements on standardized terms .

certain tax preferences apply only to agreements on standard terms and close - out netting .

as a first step , it introduced classification codes for otc derivatives .

implementing regulations expected to be in place by year - end 2012 .

central clearing .

existing laws provide for clearing and clearing services and create a legal basis for adopting regulations dealing with central clearing of standardized otc derivatives .

russia is implementing regulations that are needed to implement central clearing , including close - put netting of contracts concluded under a master agreement and aligning close - out netting rules with the master agreement .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

russia has adopted a law requiring platform trading of all or any subset of standardized derivatives .

it is gaining practical experiences before proceeding with further regulatory measures .

current laws provide authority to adopt implementing regulations .

transparency and trading .

dealer functionality is being determined .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required only for exchange - traded derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is being determined for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 that will require those transactions that are conducted by professional market participants and transactions that are subject to close - out netting and that are executed under master agreements be reported to trade repositories .

such transactions as corporate repurchase agreements , derivatives , and other securities must provide a repository with the information on the transactions .

the repository is responsible for maintaining a register of the transactions and for providing the register to the federal financial markets service .

additional legislative or regulatory steps are needed for a reporting requirement to be effective .

regulations require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements cover all asset classes .

central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities .

current laws or regulations cover intra - group transactions .

saudi arabia standardization .

banks already use standardized contracts , known as customer treasury agreements ( cta ) .

a revised version of the cta is being developed that will incorporate the international swaps and derivatives association ( isda ) and international islamic financial markets standards and tahawwut ( hedging ) master agreement ( tma ) to standardize sharia law compliant swap - based hedging transactions .

the adoption and implementation of the tma agreement and the requirement by the saudi arabian monetary authority ( sama ) for all counterparties to use the tma in place of the cta will ensure that all counterparties will use a standard contract .

central clearing .

regulations for central clearing have not been proposed , but the issue is being examined by the saudi banking authority .

a self - assessment conducted by saudi arabia indicated that the current and future trading volumes of derivatives are unlikely to justify establishing a domestic clearing counterparty ( ccp ) .

instead , the saudi bank is being encouraged to establish clearing relationships with global ccps .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

saudi arabia does not have laws or regulations that require all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

saudi arabia has determined to establish a local trade repository under the supervision of the saudi arabian monetary authority .

the proposed tr will provide a mechanism for increasing transparency of otc derivatives market activity , commitments , and balances .

the tr is also expected to serve as the future foundation for any electronic trading on exchanges should the need for such a mechanism arise .

saudi arabia contends that the tr in tandem with the standardization of the otc market through the tma will address regulatory requirements for greater transparency and disclosure .

transparency and trading .

saudi arabia has determined that the existing and future volumes do not require setting up electronic trading of exchanges .

a self - assessment indicates that the volumes currently be traded do not require pre - trade price and volume transparency or post - trade price and volume transparency for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

as a result of a self - assessment , saudi arabia is planning on establishing a trade repository under the supervision of the saudi arabian monetary authority .

officials expect that appropriate regulations will be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements are under review .

central clearing requirements covering all types of financial entities are under review ; intra - group transactions are under review .

singapore standardization .

major dealers in the market are the 14 dealers committed to the "roadmap" plan to increase standardization .

singapore has considered draft legislation to implement basel iii capital requirements and has finalized provisions to be implemented by the end of 2012 .

central clearing .

central clearing is in place .

public consultation concerning proposed policies governing central clearing is expected to be followed by legislation by year - end 2012 .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

singapore is expected to introduce legislation in 2012 that will require all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

transparency and trading .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is not yet determined for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is being determined for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

legislation is expected to be introduced by year - end 2012 to implement reporting and licensing requirements .

officials are developing detailed regulations , subject to international developments .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements cover all asset classes , accounting for systemic risk to the local market and the degree of standardization in the local market .

central clearing requirements will cover all types of financial entities and non - financial entities above a specified threshold that are licensed and regulated by the monetary authority of singapore .

measures being considered would exempt intra - group transactions , subject to the application of stringent risk mitigation requirements .

south africa standardization .

south africa has adopted a phased - in approach , although the increased use of standardized otc derivatives is intended , but not expected to increase substantially by the end of 2012 .

the south africa financial services board amended its securities services act to strengthen the regulation of unlisted securities , which includes otc derivatives .

a financial markets bill was adopted to improve market supervision , to provide additional protections to investors , and to regulate financial markets to be fair , efficient , and transparent .

central clearing .

central clearing is in place .

a financial markets bill establishing central clearing procedures was submitted to the national treasury for cabinet and parliamentary approval .

the financial markets bill and implementing regulations are expected to be adopted by the end of 2012 .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

south africa does not have a law or regulation in place requiring all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

currently does not anticipate that electronic trading of otc derivatives will be required .

transparency and trading .

no decision has been made regarding requirements for electronic trading of otc derivatives .

if a decision is made to require electronic trading , regulators will consider the characteristics of eligible platforms , developments in other jurisdictions , and guidance from the international organization of securities commissions ( iosco ) .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded derivatives , but not for otc derivatives until they are traded on an exchange .

reporting to trade repositories .

the financial markets bill ( fmb ) was submitted for approval by the treasury , cabinet and the parliament that will establish reporting requirements .

the fmb and additional legislation is expected to be in effect by the end of 2012 .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements are under review .

central clearing coverage requirements are under review .

current laws or regulations regarding intra - group transactions are under review .

south korea standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

amended its financial investment services and capital markets act to include standardization of otc derivatives .

additional amendments are expected to be submitted to the national assembly related to enforcement of ordinances and supervisory regulations .

central clearing .

central clearing is in place , but the national assembly is expected to adopt amendments to the financial investment services and capital markets act to provide detailed provisions of enforcement ordinances and supervisory regulations and the establishment and pilot - testing of domestic central clearing .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

south korea does not have a law or regulation in place requiring all or any subset of standardized derivatives to be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms .

currently , it is reviewing its policy options .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is required .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

laws currently are in place or are expected to be in place by year - end 2012 to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

the financial investment services and capital markets act and the foreign exchange transactions act require the reporting of all otc derivatives transactions to authorities .

additional legislative or regulatory steps are needed to improve some parts of the reporting system to meet international standards .

current regulations require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements cover all asset classes .

central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities .

switzerland standardization .

switzerland has experienced a greater use of standardized derivatives , it two major banks have committed to increase their use of standardized contracts , and it is making adjustments to comply with the basel iii capital requirements .

the swiss federal council decided on a legislative reform package to fully implement the fsb principles regarding otc derivatives and to improve the regulation of financial market infrastructures .

the draft legislation is scheduled for public consultation through the end of 2012 .

central clearing .

central clearing is not yet in place , but legislation is in progress .

draft legislation has been approved by the swiss federal council and is expected to be implemented by the end of 2012 that will implement the fsb principles in the area of otc derivatives and amend the regulation of financial market infrastructure .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

switzerland's stock exchange act requires exchanges to establish a trade repository of trade details and to publish quotes and volumes of on - exchange and off - exchange transactions ; for collateralized certificates .

switzerland has introduced collateralized securities instruments ( cosi ) services to allow for automated trading , clearing without risk transfer , and settlement of these instruments .

application to otc derivatives trading is currently under review .

the swiss federal council has decided on a legislative reform package to fully implement the fsb principles in the area of otc derivatives and to improve the regulation of financial market infrastructure based on the analysis of a working group .

draft legislation is scheduled for public consultation in the first half of 2013 .

transparency and trading .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is under review for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is under review for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

exchanges currently are required to provide pre - trade transparency .

reporting to trade repositories .

the legislative process is progressing toward adopting measures to require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories .

the stock exchanges and securities trading act ( sesta ) applies to derivatives traded on exchanges and requires securities dealers to report all the necessary information to ensure a transparent market .

the swiss federal council decided on a legislative reform package to fully implement the fsb principles in the area of otc derivatives and to improve the regulation of financial market infrastructures .

draft legislation is scheduled for public consultation in the first half of 2013 .

regulations are under review to require reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository .

application of central clearing requirements .

swiss authorities are reviewing central clearing requirements with consideration toward covering .

central clearing requirements that cover all types of financial entities are under review .

current laws or regulations for intra - group transactions are under review .

turkey standardization .

investment firms are prohibited from trading in otc derivatives , while banks use standardized derivatives with standardized features .

a draft capital markets law was submitted to the parliament to introduce otc derivatives as capital market instruments .

it is expected to be adopted by early 2013 .

additional measures are being reviewed to prepare a legislative framework that complies with the fsb principles .

central clearing .

no central clearing is in place , but the capital markets law was introduced in parliament in july 2012 and is expected to be adopted .

the measure will allow the capital markets board to designate clearing agents to centrally clear otc derivatives transactions or to require the establishment of central counterparties in certain markets .

a working group has been established to develop a legislative proposal to comply with the fsb principles .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

policy options are under review .

transparency and trading .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is under review for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is under review for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

reporting to trade repositories .

a proposed capital markets law that was introduced to the parliament will give the capital markets board ( cmb ) the authority to require capital markets transactions , including otc derivatives , to be reported directly to the cmb or to an authorized trade repository .

although not currently required , equity linked otc derivatives transactions and leveraged foreign exchange transactions are reported to the istanbul stock exchange ( ise ) or the ise custody and settlement bank .

legislation is under review to implement a reporting requirement .

a working group was established to prepare a legislative framework that is consistent with fsb principles .

the proposed capital markets law is expected to give the cmb the authority to require capital markets transactions , including otc derivatives , to be reported directly to the cmb or to an authorized tr .

application of central clearing requirements .

turkish authorities are reviewing if central clearing requirements cover all asset classes .

authorities are also reviewing central clearing requirements covering all types of financial entities .

current laws or regulations for intra - group transactions are under review .

united states standardization .

the share of otc derivatives composed of standardized derivatives is expected to have increased substantially by the end of 2012 .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) and the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) developed implementing rules as a result of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) regarding processes for determining whether specific derivatives contracts will be subject to mandatory clearing .

the cftc finalized a rule that establishes a schedule for compliance with mandatory clearing requirements for swaps and proposed new rules to require that swaps in four interest rate swap classes and two credit default swap classes be required to be cleared by registered derivatives clearing organizations .

the cftc and sec have proposed , but not finalized , additional rules designed to promote standardization .

final rules by the cftc and the sec are expected to be adopted , including cftc rules to establish processes to determine whether swaps have been made available to trade and consequently subject to mandatory execution on designated contract markets or swap execution facilities .

central clearing .

with adoption of the dodd - frank act in july 2010 , the united states has a law in force requiring all standardized otc derivatives to be cleared through ccps , according to the fsb assessment .

the cftc and sec have adopted final rules regarding processes related to determining whether specific derivatives contracts will be subject to mandatory clearing .

the cftc finalized a rule establishing a schedule for compliance with mandatory clearing requirements and proposed new rules to require that swaps in four interest rate swap classes and two credit default swap classes be required to be cleared by registered derivatives clearing organizations .

the cftc also has finalized rules on clearing documentation , the timing for acceptance of cleared trades , core principles applicable to cftc - registered derivatives , clearing organizations , and the exception to mandatory clearing for certain non - financial entities using swaps to hedge or mitigate commercial risk .

exchange or electronic platform trading .

the united states has completed a legislative step toward implementing a trading requirement for standardized derivatives , as the dodd - frank act requires any swap or security - based swap subject to the clearing requirement to be traded on a registered trading platform , such as an exchange or swap execution facility registered with the cftc , or security - based swap execution facility registered with the sec .

the cftc has finalized rules and regulations with regard to designated contract markets .

in addition , the cftc has proposed regulations with regard to swap execution facilities and regulations defining the process by which a swap is "made available to trade," by a designated contract market or swap execution facility .

the sec has proposed rules pertaining to the registration and operation of trading platforms .

final rules must be implemented for the trading requirement to be effective , the fsb assessment found .

transparency and trading .

multi - dealer functionality is required .

pre - trade price and volume transparency is being determined for all exchange or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

post - trade price and volume transparency is required for all exchanges or electronic - platform - traded and otc derivatives .

the dodd - frank act required that market participants have the ability to execute or trade swaps or security - based swaps subject to clearing and trading mandates by accepting bids and offers made by multiple participants on an exchange or swap execution facility .

the cftc and sec have proposed rules to implement this requirement , the fsb assessment found .

reporting to trade repositories .

there are laws currently in place that require all otc derivatives transactions to be reported to trade repositories , according to the fsb assessment .

the main legislative approach is through the dodd - frank act , adopted in july 2010 .

the cftc has finalized registration requirements , duties , and core principles applicable to cftc - regulated trs and rules on the reporting of swaps to trs , including swaps entered into before the dodd - frank act was enacted and which had not expired and swaps entered into on or after the date of enactment but prior to the relevant reporting compliance date .

compliance with these rules will be phased - in by swap class starting in fall 2012 with credit and interest rate swaps .

the cftc also has designated a provider of legal entity identities to be used by registered entities and swap counterparties in complying with the cftc's swap data reporting regulations and continues to assist the industry's efforts in the development of a universal product identifier and product classification protocol .

the sec has proposed implementing regulations towards this reporting requirement and specifying registration requirements , duties , and core principles of sec - regulated trs .

reporting to a governmental authority in place of a specifically designated trade repository is expected to be limited in scope , should no trade repository be available , the fsb survey found .

application of central clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements cover all asset classes , although the department of the treasury has proposed exempting foreign exchange swaps and forwards from mandatory clearing requirements .

central clearing requirements cover all types of financial entities , although the cftc has adopted a final rule that exempts banks , savings associations , farm credit system institutions , and credit unions with total assets of $10 billion or less from the definition of "financial entity," making such "small financial institutions" eligible to elect to use the end - use exception to mandatory clearing for swaps that hedge or mitigate commercial risk .

a similar exemption for such entities is being considered by the sec .

the sec is considering an inter - affiliate clearing exemption , while the cftc has proposed an inter - affiliate clearing exemption .

