the federal legislative framework for cybersecurity is complex , with more than 50 statutes addressing various aspects of it either directly or indirectly .

many observers have expressed doubt that the current statutory framework is sufficient to address the growing concerns about the security of cyberspace in the united states , especially with respect to critical infrastructure ( ci ) .

several legislative proposals were made in recent congresses to address those concerns .

while a few cybersecurity bills were enacted in the 113 th congress , they addressed only the security of federal information systems ( s. 2521 ) and workforce issues ( h.r .

2952 and s. 1691 ) and information - sharing activities ( s. 2519 ) at the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

within the executive branch , both the george w. bush and obama administrations have focused on improving the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure .

the bush administration created the classified comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative ( the cnci ) in 2008 .

the obama administration performed an interagency review of federal cybersecurity initiatives in 2009 , culminating in the release of its cyberspace policy review and the creation of the white house position of cybersecurity coordinator .

in the absence of enacted legislation , the obama administration began drafting a cybersecurity executive order in 2012 .

the development involved input from both federal agencies and stakeholders in the private sector .

on february 12 , 2013 , president obama issued executive order 13636 , improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity , along with presidential policy directive 21 ( ppd 21 ) , critical infrastructure security and resilience .

the issuance of the executive order in the absence of congressional action raises several questions that are addressed in this report: what are the kinds of threats to the national security and economic interests of the united states that the executive order is intended to address ? .

what steps does it take to address those threats , what is the status of their implementation , and what issues do they raise ? .

what is the legislative and constitutional authority for the executive order ? .

how do its provisions relate to those in legislative proposals in the 112 th and 113 th congresses ? .

what has been the reaction of stakeholders to the order and what issues does it raise ? .

repeated cyber intrusions into critical infrastructure demonstrate the need for improved cybersecurity .

the cyber threat to critical infrastructure continues to grow and represents one of the most serious national security challenges we must confront .

the national and economic security of the united states depends on the reliable functioning of the nation's critical infrastructure in the face of such threats .

cyberthreats to u.s. infrastructure and other assets are a growing concern to policy makers .

information and communications technology ( ict ) is ubiquitous and relied upon for government services , corporate business processes , and individual professional and personal pursuits — almost every facet of modern life .

many ict devices and other components are interdependent , and disruption of one component may have a negative , cascading effect on others .

a denial of service , theft or manipulation of data , or damage to critical infrastructure through a cyber - based attack could have significant impacts on national security , the economy , and the livelihood and safety of individual citizens .

the federal role in what is now called cybersecurity has been debated for more than a decade .

much of the recent debate has focused on two issues: sharing of cybersecurity - related information within and across sectors , and the cybersecurity of ci sectors , including federal systems .

e.o .

13636 attempts to address both of those issues , as well as others .

it uses existing statutory and constitutional authority to expand information sharing and collaboration between the government and the private sector , including sharing classified information by broadening a program developed for the defense industrial base to other ci sectors ; develop a voluntary framework of cybersecurity standards and best practices for protecting ci , through a public / private effort ; establish a consultative process for improving ci cybersecurity ; identify ci with especially high priority for protection , using the consultative process ; establish a program with incentives for voluntary adoption of the framework by ci owners and operators ; review cybersecurity regulatory requirements to determine if they are sufficient and appropriate ; and incorporate privacy and civil liberties protections in activities under the order .

the information - sharing and framework provisions in particular have received significant public attention .

e.o .

13636 was issued in the wake of the lack of enactment of cybersecurity legislation in the 112 th congress , apparently at least in part as a response to that .

that raises questions about what authority the president has to act on this matter through an executive order .

that issue is discussed below .

the issuance of an executive order frequently raises questions about whether the order exceeds the scope of the president's authority , in relation to the constitutional separation of powers and validly enacted legislation .

since the latter half of the 20 th century , these questions have typically been evaluated using the tripartite framework set forth by u.s. supreme court justice jackson in his concurring opinion in the case of youngstown sheet & tube company v. sawyer .

first , if the president has acted according to an express or implied grant of congressional authority , presidential "authority is at its maximum. .

second , in situations where congress has neither granted nor denied authority to the president , the president acts in reliance only "upon his own independent powers , but there is a zone of twilight in which he and congress may have concurrent authority , or in which its distribution is uncertain. .

third , in instances where presidential action is "incompatible with the express or implied will of congress," the power of the president is at its minimum .

in such a circumstance , presidential action must rest upon an exclusive article ii power .

as an example of the first category , congress has previously provided explicit statutory authority for the executive to regulate the security of private entities .

for example , chemical facilities are subject to chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) promulgated by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which include provisions requiring chemical facilities to take measures to protect against cyberthreats .

similarly , the maritime transportation security act ( mtsa ) gives the coast guard the authority to regulate the security of maritime facilities and vessels , including requiring security plans that contain provisions for the security of communications systems used in those facilities .

in these and other situations where congress has provided explicit regulatory authority to the executive branch related to cybersecurity , the president's authority to direct sector - specific agencies to coordinate , evaluate , develop , or implement appropriate cybersecurity standards pursuant to the executive order would appear to be at its maximum .

in other cases , where there may only be congressional silence regarding the president's authority to direct action on cybersecurity issues , an argument could be made that the issuance of such an executive order falls within the "zone of twilight," assuming that the action could be concurrently justified under some explicit or implied power granted to the president by the constitution .

for example , section 9 of e.o .

13636 directs the secretary of homeland security to use a risk - based approach to identify critical infrastructure where a cybersecurity incident could result in catastrophic effects .

while such identification is arguably authorized under the homeland security act of 2002 , it might alternatively be justified under the president's constitutional authority to request written opinions from the heads of executive departments .

however , some past legislative proposals may be beyond the reach of unilateral executive action .

for example , prior proposals to regulate the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure have also proposed limits on liability or safe harbors for regulated entities that comply with the regulatory schemes , because the creation of a regulatory scheme can have an adverse effect on the exposure of regulated entities to civil liability .

the scope of such proposed limits has ranged from complete immunity , to lesser restrictions such as prohibitions against the awarding of punitive damages .

such limits on liability may also be made dependent upon an entity's satisfaction of its regulatory obligations , in order to create a further incentive for compliance .

the abrogation of civil claims under common law or contract law without explicit congressional authorization may be difficult to justify on the executive's constitutional powers alone .

notably , the executive order does not purport to provide any similar liability safe harbors for private entities that comply with cybersecurity standards developed pursuant to the executive order .

while it does direct the secretary of homeland security to coordinate the establishment of a set of incentives to promote voluntary participation in the critical infrastructure program , it also acknowledges that some incentives may require legislation affirmatively authorizing such limitations .

this is not to say that the executive order will have no impact on liability .

the publication of recommendations or risk assessments , as provided under the executive order , may be used by litigants as evidence of the appropriate standard of care to apply in tort litigation resulting from a cybersecurity incident , even if such standards are not controlling .

similarly , it may not be possible for an executive order to authorize telecommunications providers to engage in more aggressive monitoring of communications networks to help identify cyber threats or attacks in real - time .

such an executive action would contravene current federal laws protecting electronic communications , and would be evaluated in the third category of justice jackson's youngstown framework , where the president's power is at its minimum .

such an executive order would not be effective , unless such action fell within a power exclusively granted to the executive by the constitution .

consistent with this analysis , e.o .

13636 does not purport to provide any authority for private telecommunications providers to engage in monitoring of their networks .

while e.o .

13636 does not purport to create new authorities , there are commonalities between some of its provisions and some of the cybersecurity proposals from the 112 th and 113 th congresses .

a comparison of a selection of the issues covered by those proposals and the executive order is below .

several comprehensive legislative proposals on cybersecurity in the 112 th congress received considerable attention , including a senate bill , a set of bill proposals by the obama administration , and a report with recommendations from a house republican task force , which informed several house bills .

the various proposals differed both in some of the issues they addressed and in how they approached them .

among the issues addressed were the following: cybersecurity workforce authorities and programs , cybersecurity r&d , data - breach notification , dhs authorities for protection of federal systems , fisma reform , information sharing , penalties for cybercrime , protection of privately held ci , including public / private sector collaboration and regulation of privately held ci , public awareness about cybersecurity , and supply - chain vulnerabilities .

e.o .

13636 mainly addresses two of those topics: information sharing and protection of privately held ci .

with respect to information sharing , the executive order does not provide exemptions from liability stemming from information sharing , which would require changes to current law .

several of the legislative proposals included such changes .

also , some proposals included the creation of new entities for information sharing , whereas the executive order uses existing mechanisms .

with respect to protection of critical infrastructure , the provisions on designation of ci and identification of relevant regulations are related to those in some legislative proposals in the 112 th congress .

the role of nist in developing the cybersecurity framework was not in the legislative proposals from that congress , although several would have expanded the agency's role in cybersecurity .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

624 and s. 2588 would address information sharing , and h.r .

3696 and s. 1353 would require nist to lead a public / private effort similar to the process by which the cybersecurity framework is being developed .

both house bills passed in the house , h.r .

694 in april 2013 and h.r .

3696 in july 2014 , but some provisions in each were controversial .

given the absence of enacted comprehensive cybersecurity legislation , some security observers have contended that the executive order is a necessary step in securing vital assets against cyberthreats .

proponents of the framework point to its ability to alleviate the problems created by a lack of understanding about cybersecurity issues and practices among different classes of stakeholders .

they claim that the framework provides a common , nontechnical basis for developing consensus on how best to approach cybersecurity needs .

other observers , however , have raised concerns .

common themes by such critics have included the following claims: the order offers little more than do existing processes .

such critics point out that , for example , the enhanced cybersecurity services program was in place before the release of the order , and that a variety of efforts have been underway to develop and adopt voluntary standards and best practices in cybersecurity for many years .

proponents of the order argue that it lays out and clarifies obama administration goals , requires specific deliverables and timelines , and that the framework and other provisions are in fact new with the executive order .

the order could make enactment of legislation less likely .

these critics express concern that congress might decide to wait until the major provisions of the order have been fully implemented before considering legislation .

proponents state that immediate action was necessary in the absence of legislation , and that changes in current law are necessary no matter how successful the executive order might be , to provide liability protections for information sharing and to meet other needs .

the process for developing the framework is either too slow or too rushed .

some observers believe that some actions to protect critical infrastructure are well - established and should be taken immediately , given the nature and extent of the current threat .

they state that the year - long process to develop the framework may have delayed implementation of needed security measures , creating unnecessary and unacceptable risks .

others counter that widespread adoption of the framework requires consensus , which takes time to achieve , and that the one - year timeframe may be insufficient , given that the process for developing and updating consensus standards often takes several years .

in fact , some ci entities have reportedly delayed implementation while waiting for additional federal guidance .

some also state that the framework process does not preclude entities from adopting established security measures immediately .

the framework risks becoming a form of de facto regulation , or alternatively , its voluntary nature makes it insufficiently enforceable .

another concern of some is that the executive order could lead to government intrusiveness into private - sector activities , for example through increased regulation under existing statutory authority , while others contend that voluntary measures have a poor history of success .

some others , however , have argued that changes in the business environment — such as the advent of continuous monitoring , more powerful analytical tools , and a better prepared workforce — improve the likelihood that a voluntary approach can be successful .

the order could lead to overclassification or underclassification of high - risk critical infrastructure by dhs .

some observers have expressed concern that the requirement in the order for dhs to designate high - risk critical infrastructure may be insufficiently clear and could lead to either harmfully expansive designations or inappropriate exclusions of entities .

this might be particularly a problem if the criteria are not sufficiently validated .

it appears to be too early in the implementation of the executive order to determine how effectively the concerns described above will be addressed and whether the responses will satisfy critics and skeptics .

overall , however , response to the order from the private sector — including critical - infrastructure entities , trade associations , and cybersecurity practitioners — appears to be largely positive .

some organizations and experts have urged adoption of the framework by ci entities .

in august 2014 , nist requested public comments on implementation of the framework and posted more than 60 it received from various companies , trade associations , and other organizations .

the responses demonstrate a range of understanding and implementation both across and within sectors and generally support the contention that additional experience will be necessary before the success of the framework at improving ci cybersecurity can be adequately assessed .

