medicare is a federal program that pays for covered health care services of qualified beneficiaries .

it was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act to provide health insurance to individuals 65 and older , and has been expanded over the years to include permanently disabled individuals under 65 .

medicare consists of four distinct parts: part a ( hospital insurance , or hi ) covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing care , and home health and hospice care .

part b ( supplementary medical insurance , or smi ) covers physician services , outpatient services , and some home health and preventive services .

part c ( medicare advantage , or ma ) is a private plan option for beneficiaries that covers all parts a and b services , except hospice .

part d covers outpatient prescription drug benefits .

medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) — medicare parts a or b — provides coverage in a beneficiary's home for certain services and treatments of an illness or injury .

beneficiaries entitled to benefits under part a do not need to enroll in part b to receive full coverage for home health visits ; however , beneficiaries must meet medicare's home health eligibility requirements .

beneficiaries who meet the home health eligibility requirements are entitled to a 60-day episode of home health coverage and then to an unlimited number of 60-day episodes , so long as they continue to meet the eligibility requirements .

this report describes home health eligibility criteria , home health services , characteristics of medicare beneficiaries who use home health services , and home health providers .

further , this report describes in detail the medicare home health prospective payment system ( hh pps ) , provides an overview of medicare home health payments , and discusses issues for congress related to the medicare home health benefit .

for information on major legislative changes to the home health benefit , see the appendix .

to be eligible for medicare - covered home health services , a beneficiary must meet three requirements: he / she must be homebound , he / she must need part - time or intermittent skilled nursing care and / or skilled rehabilitation , or , after establishing prior eligibility , a continuing need for occupational therapy , and he / she must be under the care of a physician and need reasonable and necessary home health services that have been certified by a physician and established in a 60-day plan of care .

the following sections describe each of these requirements in greater detail .

medicare beneficiaries who meet the home health eligibility criteria are entitled to a 60-day episode of home visits by skilled health care professionals .

beneficiaries can be recertified for an unlimited number of episodes so long as they continue to meet the home health benefit's eligibility criteria .

there are no beneficiary cost - sharing requirements associated with the home health episode ; however , a 20% coinsurance is required for all covered durable medical equipment and covered part b drugs and biologics .

roughly 9.5% ( or 3.4 million ) of medicare ffs beneficiaries used home health services in 2011 .

for beneficiaries who meet the eligibility criteria , covered services include skilled nursing care ( eg , administering iv injections , wound care ) ; physical therapy ( eg , range of motion exercises ) ; occupational therapy ( eg , wood working activities to restore range of motion loss ) ; speech and language pathology services ( eg , tasks to restore speech / voice production ) ; medical social work services ( eg , assessment of the beneficiary's social and emotional factors related to the illness ) ; and home health aide services ( eg , bathing , dressing ) .

the home health benefit also provides coverage for items such as medical supplies , osteoporosis drugs , durable medical equipment , and items provided on an outpatient basis which cannot be made readily available in the beneficiary's residence .

since 2000 , the proportion of visits has shifted towards more skilled nursing and therapy services .

in 2000 , roughly 49% of home health visits were for skilled nursing services , 19% for therapy services , 31% for home health aide services , and 1% for medical social services .

in 2011 , roughly 51% of home health visits were for skilled nursing services , 33% for therapy services , 15% from home health aides , and 1% for medical social services .

while the distribution of visits has shifted towards greater therapy , the number of visits home health users receive has been relatively constant , with an average 36.2 visits per home health user in 2011 compared to an average of 36.8 visits per user in 2000 .

however , prior to payment reductions in the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 , p.l .

105-33 ) , the average number of visits per home health user was much higher — 72.6 visits per user .

this decrease in home health visits per user has important implications since the current medicare home health payment system uses a base payment rate that was constructed from 1997-1998 medicare hha cost reports and home health claims data , as discussed subsequently in this report .

similar to other medicare post - acute care services , there is wide variation across the united states in the percentage of beneficiaries who receive medicare - covered home health services .

geographic variation in home health admissions may in part be explained by demand factors , such as health and illness of residents in a state or treatment preferences , or supply factors , such as the number of home health agencies in the area , local practice preference , reduced nonmonetary costs ( eg , shorter distances for patient travel , shorter wait times ) .

as shown in figure 1 , in 2011 , medicare - covered home health admission rates were relatively higher in the west south central region ( i.e. , arkansas , louisiana , oklahoma , and texas ) .

in 2011 , the rate of beneficiaries who received covered home health services per 1,000 part a enrollees was highest in louisiana ( 144 ) and texas ( 144 ) , followed by florida ( 143 ) .

the three states with the lowest rates of home health admissions were hawaii ( 23 ) , alaska ( 36 ) , and south dakota ( 36 ) .

medicare has covered home health benefits since enactment , and it has been traditionally categorized as a "post - acute care" benefit — providing limited skilled coverage following a beneficiary's hospitalization .

however , while more beneficiaries who have been discharged from hospitals or snfs are certified to receive their first episode of home health coverage ( 1.9 million episodes in 2010 ) than beneficiaries admitted from the community ( 1.3 million episodes in 2010 ) , most home health episodes in a year are provided to beneficiaries who did not have a prior hospitalization .

in 2010 , for home health users who had a prior hospital or snf stay , medicare covered roughly 500,000 subsequent ( second or greater ) home health episodes following the beneficiaries' initial episode and roughly 3.2 million subsequent home health episodes for home health users admitted from the community .

overall , in 2010 , the share of home health episodes for beneficiaries who had a prior hospitalization before beginning home health coverage was 34% .

the remaining 66% of home health episodes were for beneficiaries already living in the community who were certified as requiring home health services .

overall , home health services provide coverage for beneficiaries across a wide variety of conditions and / or diseases .

table 1 shows the percentage of home health users , as well as average medicare payment per episode ( s ) and the average number of visits per episode ( s ) received by the most common primary diagnoses .

as shown in table 1 , for beneficiaries receiving covered home health services who did not have a prior institutional stay , diabetes was the most common primary diagnosis , at 9.8% of all ffs home health users in 2011 .

other common diagnoses were essential hypertension ( i.e. , high blood pressure ) at 8.7% , heart failure at 7.5% , and chronic skin ulcer at 4.4% of all ffs home health users .

a home health agency ( hha ) is an organization that primarily provides skilled nursing and rehabilitation services to beneficiaries in their homes .

to be certified by medicare , hhas must be licensed and approved by state and local law ( if necessary ) and meet federal requirements and conditions of participation ( eg , informing a patient of his / her rights ) .

most medicare - certified hhas ( 85% ) are freestanding — not a part of a larger institution ( such as a hospital or nursing home ) .

as noted by medpac in their march 2009 report to the congress , payment reductions from bba 97 had an effect on the supply of hhas — decreasing the number of agencies by 34% between 1997 and 2000 .

since the implementation of the home health prospective payment system ( hh pps ) in 2000 , the number of hhas has grown steadily with a large majority of the increase in freestanding for - profit hhas .

between 2000 and 2011 , the number of medicare - certified hhas increased by 62% , from 7,528 to 12,199 .

hhas have also come under scrutiny due to allegations of fraud within the home health industry .

according to the gao , in 2010 , hhas were under investigation by the hhs - oig , department of justice , or u.s. attorney's office in roughly 13% of criminal cases involving health care fraud among entities — a business or organization ( as opposed to an individual ) .

investigations for health care fraud included fraud in medicare , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

in general , a pps reimburses providers using a predetermined payment formula that adjusts payments based upon a beneficiary's expected care needs and area wage differences , among other factors .

the medicare hh pps was implemented for home health services beginning on or after october 1 , 2000 .

under the hh pps , medicare provides a payment to hhas for covered home health services on a 60-day per episode basis .

this method is in contrast to the prior medicare payment method that reimbursed hhas for each home health visit performed on the basis of "reasonable costs. .

the hh pps requires hhas to bill medicare part a or part b for covered home health services provided during the course of the beneficiary's home health episode .

for beneficiaries with only part a coverage , part a will provide payment for all covered home health services .

for beneficiaries with only medicare part b coverage ( because they have exhausted their part a benefit and they are enrolled in part b ) , part b will provide payment for all covered home health services .

if a beneficiary is entitled to medicare part a and is enrolled in part b , had a three - day inpatient hospital stay , and received his / her first medicare - covered home health visit within 14 days after discharge from a hospital or snf , part a will provide payment for the first 100 home visits in a series of adjacent episodes and part b will provide payment for any subsequent home visits .

part b would also provide payment for covered home health services in all other instances for beneficiaries who are entitled to part a and enrolled in part b .

in 2011 , part a home health expenditures totaled $6.9 billion while part b home health expenditures totaled $11.6 billion .

for hhas that do not provide some of the home health services directly , but instead contract certain services to be furnished by an outside provider ( eg , physical therapist contractor ) , the hha is still responsible for submitting a bill to medicare ( not the outside provider ) .

any agreement on the reimbursement amount the hha provides to the outside provider is negotiated between the hha and the outside provider .

this practice is referred to as "consolidated billing" and avoids multiple providers billing for the same service .

the following sections explain in greater detail the components of an hha's medicare reimbursement under the hh pps , recent changes to some of the components , and how the payment is calculated .

components within the hh pps are: the episode base rate and its annual update and other adjustments ; a case - mix adjustment by assigning beneficiaries into one of 153 home health resource groups ( hhrgs ) , which adjusts payments based upon a beneficiary's expected care needs ; an area wage adjustment , which adjusts payments based upon area wage differences ; the final episode rate and any applicable adjustments ; and a low utilization payment amount ( lupa ) for episodes with f our or fewer home health visits .

total medicare ffs home health payments increased from $8.5 billion in 2001 to roughly $18.4 billion in 2011 — an average annual rate of growth of 8.0% .

between 2001 and 2011 , the rate of ffs enrollees who used the medicare home health benefit increased by 33.8% , from a rate of 71 per 1,000 ffs enrollees to 95 per 1,000 ffs enrollees .

while the episode base rate increased by a total of 3.7% from fy2001 to cy2011 ( $2,115.30 to $2,192.07 ) , the medicare home health payments per user increased from $3,545 in 2001 to $5,357 in 2011 , a 51% increase at an average rate of growth of roughly 4.2% per year .

the change in home health payments per user may reflect the increase in case - mix classification and the increase in the number of episodes per home health user ( from 1.6 episodes per home health user in 2002 to 2.0 in 2011 ) .

recent efforts to increase payment efficiency and improve quality for the medicare home health benefit have been recommended to congress for consideration .

various deficit reduction proposals have recommended cost - sharing for beneficiaries receiving covered home health episodes in an effort to encourage appropriate utilization .

additionally , as required by aca , cms recently issued a plan to implement a value - based purchasing ( vbp ) program for hhas in addition to the existing medicare vbp programs currently being implemented for acute - care hospitals and physicians .

the home health vbp program is an effort to base medicare payments on quality of care delivered to beneficiaries and has been recommended by medpac .

further , additional issues for congressional consideration stems from a proposed settlement agreement , which requires cms to revise its existing medicare benefit guidelines as a result of a recent class - action lawsuit between hhs and the center for medicare advocacy , and the temporary moratoria on new hhas in targeted geographic areas .

these issues are explained in more detail below .

with the establishment of medicare , the home health benefit has been traditionally categorized as a "post - acute care" benefit .

however , home health coverage is provided to beneficiaries whether or not they have had a recent hospitalization .

prior regulatory and legislative changes have expanded medicare's home health services and eligibility requirements , as well as eliminated cost - sharing requirements .

many of the changes to the home health benefit were in response to efforts of deinstitutionalization , moving individuals out of nursing facilities and back into the community , as well as avoiding hospitalizations .

in 2001 , beneficiaries with a prior hospitalization represented 48% of all home health episodes .

by 2010 , only 34% of home health episodes were for beneficiaries who had a prior hospitalization .

while more initial home health episodes are certified to beneficiaries who were recently hospitalized ( 1.9 million episodes in 2010 ) than for beneficiaries admitted from the community ( 1.3 million episodes in 2010 ) , most home health episodes over an entire year are provided to beneficiaries who did not have a prior hospitalization .

in 2010 , for home health users who had a prior hospitalization , medicare covered roughly 500,000 subsequent ( second or greater ) home health episodes following the beneficiaries' initial episode , an increase from 300,000 in 2001 .

for home health users admitted from the community , medicare covered roughly 3.2 million subsequent home health episodes , an increase from 1.3 million subsequent episodes in 2001 .

these figures may suggest that medicare is providing a greater amount of home health coverage to beneficiaries suffering from chronic illnesses , who may require longer treatment plans than beneficiaries recovering from acute illnesses .

additionally , since the implementation of the hh pps in october 2000 , medicare ffs home health payments have grown rapidly at an average annual rate of 8.0% between 2001 and 2011 .

additionally , the aggregate medicare margin for freestanding hhas has remained consistently high: 13.6% in 2003 and 14.8% in 2011 .

the high rate of medicare margins may suggest that estimating the costs of home health services through the hh pps proves to be difficult .

this difficulty may arise from large variation in agency costs of home health care , even after controlling for a beneficiary's clinical and functional factors .

further , the decline in the share of home health services that are related to prior hospital and snf stays and the resulting rise in medicare part b expenditures and the notable difference in geographic variation of part b per user payments , as shown in figure 7 , may illustrate the changing care needs and geographic differences in health status among medicare beneficiaries .

however , it may also point to potential overutilization , as noted by medpac , and the potential complexity in administering home health eligibility criteria where some may look to changes in the medicare home health benefit and home health payment policy that address greater payment efficiencies .

the appendix summarizes selected key changes to the home health benefit that have been included in the following pieces of legislation .

social security amendments of 1965 ( p.l .

89-97 ) title xviii of the social security amendments of 1965 established the medicare program .

the legislation provided eligible medicare beneficiaries with up to 100 "post - hospital" home health visits each year under part a and up to 100 home health visits each year under part b. medicare provided payment for each covered home health visit based on reasonable costs the hha incurred , up to certain limits .

to be eligible for home health visits under part a or part b , beneficiaries must have been in need of part - time or intermittent skilled nursing care or physical , occupational , or speech therapy , with a plan of care established 14 days after discharge .

at that time , to be eligible for home health visits under part a , beneficiaries must have had a three - day inpatient hospital stay .

no hospitalization requirement was necessary for part b home health coverage ; however , beneficiaries were required to enroll in part b to receive home health coverage under part b .

home health services covered under part b were subject to the part b deductible and a 20% coinsurance of the medicare - approved cost of care .

social security amendments of 1972 ( p.l .

92-603 ) a provision in the social security amendments of 1972 eliminated the 20% coinsurance requirement for part b covered home health services beginning on or after january 1 , 1973 .

omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1980 ( obra 80 , p.l .

96-499 ) obra 80 eliminated the annual 100 home health visit limitation for both parts a and b .

the part a 3-day inpatient hospitalization requirement was eliminated and part b home health services were no longer subject to the part b deductible .

with the elimination of the 3-day hospitalization requirement , both parts a and b had the same home health eligibility requirements .

the parity in eligibility requirements transferred nearly all of medicare part b home health expenditures ( except for beneficiaries who were only covered under part b ) to part a because section 1833 ( d ) of the social security act prohibits part b paying for services that could also be covered under part a .

balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 , p.l .

105-33 ) with the passage of bba 97 , congress reallocated some of medicare home health expenditures from part a to part b. medicare part a provided payment if a beneficiary did not enroll in part b and / or received home health services 14 days after discharge from a 3-day inpatient hospitalization or snf .

part b provided payment for covered home health services in all other instances .

beginning october 1 , 1997 , bba 97 established an interim payment system that reduced the medicare reimbursement limits for home health services .

beginning on or after october 1 , 1999 ( but implemented on october 1 , 2000 ) , bba 97 required a home health prospective payment system ( hh pps ) to supplant the interim payment system and reimburse home health agencies ( hhas ) based upon a beneficiary's expected care needs and geographic location , among other factors .

benefits improvement and protection act of 2000 ( bipa , p.l .

106-554 ) bipa established a 10% increase to the episode base rate for home health services furnished in rural areas on or after april 1 , 2001 , and before april 1 , 2003 .

additionally , congress specified that beneficiaries may not be disqualified from meeting the homebound requirement for home health care as a result of leaving their home to attend adult day care or religious services or to receive medical treatment .

medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) mma reestablished the rural add - on by including a one - year increase of 5% to the episode base rate for home health services furnished to beneficiaries living in rural areas beginning on april 1 , 2004 , and before april 1 , 2005 .

further , mma changed home health payment rates to be updated on a calendar year basis instead of a fiscal year basis and reduced the home health market basket update by 0.8 percentage points beginning with services provided on or after april 1 , 2004 , through december 31 , 2006 .

deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) dra reestablished the rural add - on as a 5% increase to medicare payments for home health services provided to beneficiaries living in rural areas provided on or after january 1 , 2006 , and before january 1 , 2007 .

dra also eliminated the market basket update for 2006 and , as implemented by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , required hhas to submit quality data from patient assessments and surveys beginning in 2007 .

hhas that did not submit quality data would receive a two percentage point reduction in their market basket update .

patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) aca included modifications to the current hh pps .

provisions in aca reduced the episode base rate by 1.0 percentage point in each of 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 , and by a productivity adjustment starting in 2015 .

aca reestablished the rural add - on which increases the episode base rate by 3% for home health services provided to beneficiaries in rural areas between april 1 , 2010 , and january 1 , 2016 .

aca also requires the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to update or "rebase" the home health payment rate with more recent cost report and home health claims data beginning cy2014 .

the provision requires a four - year phase - in of the rebased rate with each phase - in limited to a 3.5% change of the 2010 reimbursement rate .

further , aca also requires physicians to include documentation that a face - to - face encounter had occurred between an approved medical practitioner and the beneficiary for initial home health episodes of care .

while physicians are not required to perform the face - to - face encounter , the physician must be the individual who certifies the encounter occurred and that the home health services are reasonable and necessary .

