congressional interest in u.s. energy policy has often focused on ways through which the united states could secure more economical , reliable , and cleaner fossil fuel resources both domestically and internationally .

recent expansion in natural gas production , primarily as a result of new or improved technologies ( eg , hydraulic fracturing ) used on unconventional resources ( eg , shale , tight sands , and coalbed methane ) , has made natural gas an increasingly significant component in the u.s. energy supply .

while the practice of hydraulic fracturing is not new , relatively recent innovations have incorporated processes such as directional drilling , high - volume slick - water injection , and multistage fractures to get to previously unrecoverable resources .

as a result , the united states has again become the largest producer of natural gas in the world .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) projects natural gas to account for nearly 39% of u.s. energy production by 2050 , with shale gas and tight oil plays projected to grow .

in addition , some analysts believe that by significantly expanding the domestic gas supply , the exploitation of new unconventional resources has the potential to reshape energy policy at national and international levels — altering geopolitics and energy security , recasting the economics of energy technology investment decisions , and shifting trends in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

many in both the public and private sectors have advocated for the increased production and use of natural gas because the resource is domestically available , economically recoverable , and considered a potential "bridge" fuel to a less polluting and lower ghg - intensive economy .

natural gas is cleaner burning than other fossil fuels , emitting , on average , about half as much carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) as coal and one - quarter less than oil when consumed in a typical electric utility plant .

further , natural gas combustion emits no mercury — a persistent , bioaccumulative neurotoxin — virtually no particulate matter or sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , and less nitrogen oxides , per unit of combustion , than either coal or oil .

for these reasons , pollution control measures in natural gas systems have traditionally received less attention relative to those in other hydrocarbon industries .

however , the recent increase in natural gas production , specifically from unconventional resources , has raised a new set of questions regarding environmental impacts .

these questions centered initially on water quality issues , including the potential contamination of groundwater and surface water from hydraulic fracturing and related production activities .

they have since incorporated other issues , such as water management practices ( both consumption and discharge ) , land use changes , induced seismicity , and air pollution .

these questions about hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs have led , in part , to the rise of various grassroots movements , some political opposition , and calls for additional regulatory actions , moratoria , and / or bans on the practice at the local , state , and federal levels .

currently , the development of natural gas in the united states is regulated under a complex set of local , state , and federal laws that addresses many aspects of exploration , production , and distribution .

state and local authorities are responsible for virtually all of the day - to - day regulation and oversight of natural gas systems .

the organization of this oversight within each gas - producing jurisdiction varies considerably .

in general , each state has one or more regulatory agencies that may permit wells — including their design , location , spacing , operation , and abandonment — and may regulate for environmental compliance .

with respect to pollution controls , state laws may address many aspects of water management and disposal , air emissions , underground injection , wildlife impacts , surface disturbance , and worker health and safety .

furthermore , several federal statutes address pollution control measures in natural gas systems , and , where applicable , these controls are largely implemented by state and local authorities .

for example , the clean water act regulates surface discharges of water associated with natural gas drilling and production as well as contaminated storm water runoff from production sites .

the safe drinking water act regulates the underground injection of wastewater from crude oil and natural gas production and the underground injection of fluids used in hydraulic fracturing if the fluids contain diesel fuel .

the clean air act ( caa ) limits emissions from associated engines and gas processing equipment as well as some natural gas extraction , production , and processing activities .

several federal agencies have authorities to set standards on the natural gas industry that could have the effect of controlling air emissions .

this report summarizes some of the more significant actions taken by epa , the u.s. department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) , and the u.s. department of transportation's pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) .

the expansion of both industry production and government regulation of natural gas systems has sparked discussion on a number of outstanding issues .

some of the more significant debates involving air quality concerns are outlined in the following sections .

u.s. natural gas production has grown markedly in recent years .

this growth is due in large part to increased activities in unconventional resources brought on by technological advance .

many have advocated for the increased production and use of natural gas in the united states for economic , national security , and environmental reasons .

they argue that natural gas is the cleanest - burning fossil fuel , with fewer emissions of co 2 , no x , so 2 , pm , and mercury than other fossil fuels ( eg , coal and oil ) on a per - unit - of - energy basis .

for these reasons , many have looked to natural gas as a "bridge" fuel to a less polluting and lower ghg - intensive economy .

however , the recent expansion in natural gas production in the united states has given rise to a new set of concerns regarding human health and environmental impacts , including impacts on air quality .

to address air quality and other environmental issues , the oil and gas industry in the united states has been regulated under a complex set of local , state , and federal laws .

currently , state and local authorities are responsible for virtually all of the day - to - day regulation and oversight of natural gas systems , and many states have passed laws and / or promulgated rules to address air quality issues based on local needs .

further to this , organizations such as the state review of oil and natural gas environment regulations ( stronger ) are available to help states assess the overall framework of environmental regulations supporting oil and gas operations in their regions .

at the federal level , epa has promulgated minimum national standards for emissions of methane , vocs , so 2 , and haps for some source categories in the crude oil and natural gas sector .

additionally , blm has promulgated rules to reduce potential waste of public resources and loss of royalty revenue .

the federal standards focus primarily on the production and processing sectors of the industry and were drawn , in part , from existing requirements found in the codes of states such as colorado and wyoming .

these federal standards are currently under reconsideration by the trump administration .

blm rescinded many of the novel requirements of its rule on september 28 , 2018 .

further , many producers in the crude oil and natural gas sector have set forth a series of recommended practices .

these practices are sustained by the economic incentives provided by capturing the fugitive releases of natural gas and its byproducts to be sold at market .

several voluntary partnerships sponsored by various federal and international agencies also serve to facilitate recommended practices for emissions reductions in the oil and gas industry .

epa's natural gas star program , the global methane initiative ( formerly the methane to markets partnership ) , and the world bank global gas flaring reduction partnership are three such programs .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget proposed eliminating the natural gas star program and the global methane initiative "as part of the administration's commitment to return epa to its core work. .

debate continues over the regulation of methane , voc , so 2 , and hap emissions from the crude oil and natural gas sector .

information and technology are rapidly evolving .

conflicts between federal and state governments remain , and the argument that environmental regulations hinder economic growth continues to be made .

complicating this debate is the fact that a comprehensive national inventory of fugitive emissions from natural gas systems does not exist due to many factors , including costs and technical uncertainties .

for these reasons , the choice of policy that returns the most efficient , flexible , cost - effective , and environmentally sound emissions controls on the sector has remained an open question .

