recognizing the potential harm that a large , sudden release of hazardous chemicals poses to nearby people , state and federal governments have long regulated safety practices at chemical facilities .

historically , chemical facilities have engaged in security activities on a voluntary basis .

even before the terrorist attacks of 2001 , congressional policy makers expressed concern over the security vulnerabilities of these facilities .

after the 2001 attacks and the decision by several states to begin regulating security at chemical facilities , congress again considered requiring federal security regulations to mitigate these risks .

in 2006 , the 109 th congress passed legislation providing the department of homeland security ( dhs ) with statutory authority to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

subsequent congresses have extended this authority , which currently expires on december 13 , 2014 .

advocacy groups , stakeholders , and policy makers have called for congress to reauthorize this authority , though they disagree about the preferred approach .

the 113 th congress has passed h.r .

4007 , which provides new statutory authority through the homeland security act and extends the termination date of this authority for four years .

the explosion on april 17 , 2013 , at the west fertilizer company fertilizer distribution facility in west , tx , has led to additional focus on dhs's ability to identify noncompliant facilities .

the west fertilizer company had not reported to dhs under the cfats program , though it appeared to have possessed more than screening threshold quantities of chemicals of interest .

while dhs had engaged in previous activity to identify facilities that had not complied with cfats reporting requirements , dhs did not identify the west fertilizer company .

congressional policy makers have questioned the sufficiency of dhs efforts to identify these noncompliant "outlier" facilities .

this report provides a brief overview of the existing statutory authority and implementing regulation .

it describes several policy issues raised in previous debates regarding chemical facility security and identifies policy options for congressional consideration .

for additional analysis of cfats implementation , see crs report r43346 , implementation of chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) : issues for congress .

the 109 th congress provided dhs with statutory authority to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

the statute explicitly identified some dhs authorities and left other aspects to the discretion of the secretary of homeland security .

the statute contains a "sunset provision" that causes the statutory authority to expire on december 13 , 2014 .

this section reviews the chemical facility security statute and regulation , focusing on the regulatory compliance process .

the 113 th congress has passed h.r .

4007 , which will provide new statutory authority through the homeland security act to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

the regulations issued by dhs under the authority of previous statutory authority may be used to implement the new authority , and dhs may issue additional regulation to implement the new authorities .

on april 9 , 2007 , dhs issued an interim final rule regarding the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) .

this interim final rule entered into force on june 8 , 2007 .

the interim final rule implements statutory authority explicit in p.l .

109-295 , section 550 , and authorities dhs found that congress implicitly granted .

in promulgating the interim final rule , dhs interpreted the language of the statute to determine what dhs asserts was the intent of congress .

consequently , much of the rule arises from the secretary's discretion and interpretation of legislative intent rather than explicit statutory language .

under the interim final rule , the secretary of homeland security determines which chemical facilities must meet regulatory security requirements , based on the degree of risk posed by each facility .

the dhs lists 322 "chemicals of interest" for the purposes of compliance with cfats .

the dhs considers each chemical in the context of three threats: release ; theft or diversion ; and sabotage and contamination .

chemical facilities with greater than specified quantities , called screening threshold quantities , of chemicals of interest must submit information to dhs to determine the facility's risk status .

see figure 1 .

the statute exempts several types of facilities from this requirement: facilities defined as a water system or wastewater treatment works ; facilities owned or operated by the department of defense or department of energy ; facilities regulated by the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) ; and those facilities regulated under the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-295 ) .

based on the information received from the facility , dhs determines whether a facility is or is not high - risk .

facilities that dhs deems high risk must meet cfats requirements .

the dhs assigns high - risk facilities into one of four tiers based on the magnitude of the facility's risk .

facilities in higher risk tiers must meet more stringent requirements .

the statute mandated the use of performance - based security requirements .

the dhs created graduated performance - based requirements for facilities assigned to each risk - based tier .

all high - risk facilities must perform a security vulnerability assessment , develop an effective site security plan , submit these documents to dhs , and implement their security plan .

the security vulnerability assessment serves two purposes under the interim final rule .

one is to determine or confirm the placement of the facility in a risk - based tier .

the other is to provide a baseline against which to evaluate the site security plan activities .

the site security plans must address the security vulnerability assessment by describing how activities in the plan correspond to securing facility vulnerabilities .

additionally , the site security plan must address preparations for and deterrents against specific modes of potential terrorist attack , as applicable and identified by dhs .

the site security plans must also describe how the activities taken by the facility meet the risk - based performance standards provided by dhs .

the dhs must review and approve the submitted documents , audit and inspect chemical facilities , and determine regulatory compliance .

the dhs may disapprove submitted security vulnerability assessments or site security plans that fail to meet dhs performance - based standards , but not because of the presence or absence of a specific security measure .

in the case of disapproval , dhs must identify in writing those areas of the assessment and / or plan that need improvement .

owners or operators of chemical facilities may appeal disapproval of site security plans to dhs .

similarly , if , after inspecting a chemical facility , dhs finds the facility not in compliance , the secretary must write to the facility explaining the deficiencies found , provide an opportunity for the facility to consult with dhs , and issue an order to the facility to comply by a specified date .

if the facility continues to be out of compliance , dhs may fine and , eventually , order the facility to cease operation .

the interim final rule establishes the process by which chemical facilities can appeal such dhs decisions and rulings , but the statute prohibits third - party suits for enforcement purposes .

the statute requires certain protections for information developed in compliance with this act .

the interim final rule creates a category of information exempted from disclosure under the freedom of information act ( foia ) and comparable state and local laws .

the dhs named this category of information "chemical - terrorism vulnerability information" ( cvi ) .

information generated under the interim final rule , as well as any information developed for chemical facility security purposes identified by the secretary , comprise this category .

judicial and administrative proceedings shall treat cvi as classified information .

the dhs asserts sole discretion regarding who will be eligible to receive cvi .

disclosure of cvi may be punishable by fine .

the interim final rule states it preempts state and local regulation that "conflicts with , hinders , poses an obstacle to , or frustrates the purposes of" the federal regulation .

states , localities , or affected companies may request a decision from dhs regarding potential conflict between the regulations .

since dhs promulgated the interim final rule , congress amended p.l .

109-295 , section 550 , to state that such preemption will occur only in the case of an "actual conflict. .

the dhs has not issued revised regulations addressing this change in statute .

the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) within dhs is responsible for chemical facility security regulations .

in turn , the office of infrastructure protection , through its infrastructure security compliance division ( iscd ) , oversees the cfats program within nppd .

this section reviews implementation of the chemical facility security regulations , focusing on funding , the number of regulated facilities , rate of facility inspection , and reviews of dhs implementation efforts .

previous congressional discussion on chemical facility security raised several contentious policy issues .

some issues will exist even if congress extends the existing statutory authority without changes .

these include whether dhs has sufficient funding and capabilities to adequately oversee chemical facility security ; whether federal chemical facility security regulations should preempt state regulations ; and how much chemical security information individuals may share outside of the facility and the federal government .

other issues , such as what facilities dhs should regulate as a chemical facility and whether dhs should require chemical facilities to adopt or consider adopting inherently safer technologies , may be more likely addressed if congress chooses to revise or expand existing authority .

the existing statutory authority for cfats expires on december 13 , 2014 .

the 113 th congress has passed h.r .

4007 , which authorizes dhs to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes through the homeland security act .

this bill will repeal the existing statutory authority on the effective date of the act ( 30 days after enactment ) .

many of the existing authorities are present in h.r .

4007 , but it also provides dhs with new authorities , such as the ability for certain covered chemical facilities to self - certify the sufficiency of their security plans .

the dhs may use the existing regulations and issue new regulations as necessary to implement the new authority .

the 113 th congress may address chemical facility security through several options .

congress may continue its oversight of dhs's efforts to implement this program .

congress might also take legislative action to extend further the existing statutory authority by revising or repealing its sunset provision ; codifying the existing regulations ; amending the existing statutory authority ; addressing existing programmatic activities ; or restricting or expanding the scope of chemical facility security regulation .

if congress does not act and allows the statutory authority to expire , regulated entities may question the application and enforcement of the cfats regulations .

in the case where congress allows the statutory authority to expire , but congress appropriates funds for enforcing the cfats program , dhs will likely be able to enforce the cfats regulations .

the gao has found that in the case where a program's statutory authority expires , but congress explicitly appropriates funding for it , the program may continue to operate without interruption .

if congress allows the statutory authority to expire and also does not appropriate funding for implementing the cfats program , the cfats regulations will likely also lapse .

in this case , the states would likely become the primary source of any chemical facility security regulation .

the annual appropriations process provides funding for implementation of chemical facility security regulation .

the 113 th congress , through h.j.res .

130 , extended the statutory authority through december 13 , 2014 , and provided appropriations for cfats implementation .

the 113 th congress has passed h.r .

4007 , which authorizes dhs to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes through the homeland security act .

this bill will repeal the existing statutory authority on the effective date of the act ( 30 days after enactment ) .

many of the existing authorities are present in h.r .

4007 , but it also provides dhs with new authorities , such as the ability for certain covered chemical facilities to self - certify the sufficiency of their security plans .

the dhs may use the existing regulations and issue new regulations as necessary to implement the new authority .

other chemical facility security legislation has also been introduced in the 113 th congress .

legislation in the 113 th congress has been introduced in the house that would modify the existing authority .

of this legislation , the 113 th congress has passed h.r .

4007 .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the senate , passed the house on december 11 , 2014 .

this bill will repeal section 550 of p.l .

109-295 on the effective date of the act ( 30 days after enactment ) , but dhs may use the existing regulations and issue new regulations as necessary to implement the new authority .

h.r .

4007 , the protecting and securing chemical facilities from terrorist attacks act of 2014 , as amended , passed the senate on december 10 , 2014 .

the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs reported the bill on september 18 , 2014 .

the act would establish a chemical facility anti - terrorism standards program within dhs .

it would require the secretary of homeland security to establish risk - based performance standards through the program and mandate that the secretary identify chemical facilities of interest and covered chemical facilities .

chemical facilities of interest would be those chemical facilities possessing certain chemicals in greater than threshold quantities .

covered chemical facilities would be chemical facilities of interest designated by the secretary as meeting certain security risk criteria .

facilities regulated under mtsa ; public water systems ; wastewater treatment works ; facilities owned or operated by the department of defense and department of energy ; and facilities regulated by the nuclear regulatory commission would be excluded from the definitions of chemical facility of interest and covered chemical facility .

chemical facilities of interest would submit top - screen information to dhs , while covered chemical facilities would also submit a security vulnerability assessment , and develop , submit , and implement a site security plan .

the act would require the secretary to review and approve or disapprove such security vulnerability assessments and site security plans , though not on the basis of the presence or absence of a particular security measure .

it would allow the secretary to approve alternative security programs if the programs meet dhs requirements .

the act would allow the secretary to recommend additional security measures so that an alternative security program would meet dhs requirements .

the act would also provide a mechanism for tier 3 and tier 4 chemical facilities to self - certify the sufficiency of their site security plans to dhs .

the act would prohibit dhs from disapproving the site security plans of such "expedited approval facilities. .

it would allow dhs to assess facility compliance with the risk - based performance standards and the self - certified site security plans .

the act would allow the secretary to recommend additional security measures so that a self - certified site security plan would meet dhs requirements and allow the secretary to develop templates for use in developing self - certified site security plans .

the secretary would be required to evaluate this aspect of the chemical facility security program and report the results to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on homeland security .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the senate , would require the secretary to audit and inspect covered facilities .

it would explicitly allow the secretary to permit non - departmental and nongovernmental entities to perform such activities and would allow nongovernmental personnel to provide administrative and logistical services to dhs in support of audits and inspections .

it would limit approval of site security plans and determination of compliance with an approved site security plan to the secretary and the secretary's designees within dhs .

it would also require the secretary to set standards for departmental and nongovernmental inspectors .

also , the act would allow a covered facility to satisfy a personnel surety performance standard by using any federal screening program that periodically vets individuals against the terrorist screening database , including the dhs personnel surety program .

the act would provide a mechanism for addressing covered facility noncompliance including the issuance of penalties .

the secretary would also have the authority to issue certain emergency orders that would take effect immediately .

owners or operators of chemical facilities of interest that fail to comply with or knowingly submit false information under the cfats regulations would be liable for a civil penalty .

the act , as passed the senate , would require the secretary to consult with other federal agencies , relevant business associations , and public and private labor organizations to identify potentially noncompliant facilities .

the act would provide protections to information developed pursuant to the act and would explicitly exempt such information from the freedom of information act .

it would allow the secretary to share information with covered facilities , state and local government officials , as well as first responders through state and local fusion centers .

the act would also require the secretary to establish a reporting procedure for employees of a chemical facility to confidentially submit information to dhs .

in addition , the secretary would be required to acknowledge receipt of such information , review it , and take appropriate actions to address any substantiated problems or deficiencies .

the act would expressly prohibit retaliation against employees using this process .

the secretary would be granted the discretion to use existing and new regulations to implement these authorities .

in addition , it would direct dhs and gao to provide various reports on the program .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the senate , also would allow the secretary to provide guidance on recordkeeping , reporting , physical security , and cybersecurity compliance to regulated small chemical facilities .

finally , the bill would require the secretary to commission a third - party study on vulnerabilities associated with the existing cfats program .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the senate , would repeal section 550 of p.l .

109-295 on the effective date of the act ( 30 days after enactment ) .

it contains a sunset date , and the statute would expire four years after the effective date of the act .

it does not contain an authorization of appropriations .

h.r .

4007 , the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards program authorization and accountability act of 2014 , was passed by the house of representatives on july 8 , 2014 .

on june 23 , 2014 , the house committee on homeland security amended the bill as forwarded by the subcommittee on cybersecurity , infrastructure protection , and security technologies and reported it , as amended , to the house of representatives .

on april 3 , 2014 , the subcommittee on cybersecurity , infrastructure protection , and security technologies , of the house committee on homeland security , amended the bill as introduced and ordered it forwarded to the full committee with a favorable recommendation , as amended .

the act would establish a chemical facility anti - terrorism standards program within dhs .

it would require the secretary of homeland security to establish risk - based performance standards through the program and mandate that chemical facilities of interest and covered facilities submit security vulnerability assessments and develop and implement site security plans .

chemical facilities of interest would be those chemical facilities possessing certain chemicals in greater than threshold quantities .

covered chemical facilities would be chemical facilities of interest designated by the secretary as meeting certain security risk criteria , excluding facilities regulated under mtsa ; public water systems ; wastewater treatment works ; facilities owned or operated by the department of defense and department of energy ; facilities regulated by the nuclear regulatory commission ; and certain rail facilities regulated by the transportation security administration .

the act would require the secretary to review and approve or disapprove such security vulnerability assessments and site security plans , though not on the basis of the presence or absence of a particular security measure .

it would allow the secretary to approve alternative security programs if the programs meet dhs requirements .

also , the act would allow a covered facility to satisfy a personnel surety performance standard by using any federal screening program that periodically vets individuals against the terrorist screening database , including the dhs personnel surety program .

it also would prohibit the secretary from requiring a covered facility to submit information about individuals with access to the facility unless the individual was vetted under the dhs personnel surety program or had been identified as presenting a terrorism security risk .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the house , would require the secretary to audit and inspect covered facilities and explicitly allows the secretary to permit non - departmental and nongovernmental entities to perform such activities .

it would also require the secretary to set standards for departmental and nongovernmental inspectors .

the act would provide a mechanism for addressing covered facility noncompliance including the issuance of penalties .

also , it would require the secretary to consult with other federal agencies and relevant business associations to identify potentially noncompliant facilities .

the act would provide protections to information developed pursuant to the act .

it would allow the secretary to share information with covered facilities , state and local government officials , as well as first responders through state and local fusion centers .

the secretary would be granted the discretion to use existing and new regulations to implement these authorities .

in addition , it would direct dhs and gao to provide various reports on the program .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the house , also would require the secretary to make available information about protections for providing information to dhs , allow the secretary to provide guidance on physical security compliance to regulated small chemical facilities , and provide authorization of appropriations from fy2015 through fy2018 at $87.436 million .

finally , the bill would require the secretary to establish an outreach implementation plan , submit a plan to congress on cfats metrics , and commission a third - party study on vulnerabilities associated with the existing cfats program .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the house , does not contain a sunset date .

in february 2014 , secretary of homeland security , jeh johnson , testified that he was in support of h.r .

4007 , as introduced , stating: i have reviewed h.r .

4007 .

i think it is a good bill .

i'm very supportive of it .

indeed , my folks tell me , "we wish we could extend the period longer. .

we have a regulatory scheme that we have put in place .

i agree with you , that over the last year , it's gotten better .

that all stems from an appropriations measure , not an authorizations measure .

i've read this bill .

i think it's a good bill .

our critical infrastructure folks think it's a good bill .

and i support it .

in addition , several industry organizations have expressed support for h.r .

4007 .

in contrast , a labor representative asserted that the bill fails to address several weaknesses present in the current cfats program .

h.r .

68 was referred to the house committee on energy and commerce and the house committee on homeland security .

the act would prohibit the secretary of homeland security from approving a chemical facility site security plan if the plan did not meet or exceed existing state or local security requirements .

it would allow the secretary of homeland security to mandate the use of specific security measures in site security plans .

the bill would also cause cvi to be treated as sensitive security information in both general and legal proceedings .

finally , the act would no longer prohibit third - party individuals from bringing suit in court to require the secretary of homeland security to enforce chemical facility security regulations against a chemical facility .

s. 67 , the secure water facilities act , was referred to the senate committee on environment and public works .

the act would authorize the epa administrator to regulate community water systems and wastewater treatment facilities for security purposes .

s. 67 also would authorize implementation of methods to reduce the consequences of a chemical release from an intentional act .

among other provisions , the administrator would be directed to promulgate regulations as necessary to prohibit the unauthorized disclosure of controlled information .

s. 67 would authorize the administrator to provide grants or enter into cooperative agreements with states or regulated entities to assist in regulatory compliance .

s. 68 , the secure chemical facilities act , was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

the act would codify aspects of the cfats regulation .

it would require facilities to evaluate whether the facility could reduce the consequences of an attack by using a safer chemical or process .

the act would authorize dhs to require implementation of those safer measures if a facility has been classified as one of the highest - risk facilities , implementation of safer measures is feasible , and implementation would not increase risk overall by shifting risk to another location .

among other provisions , s. 68 also would increase the participation of employees and employee representatives in developing security plans .

s. 68 would alter the current information control regime , aligning it with that for sensitive security information .

finally , s. 68 would allow third - party individuals to file suit against the secretary of homeland security or submit a petition to the secretary to enforce compliance with statute .

s. 814 , the protecting communities from chemical explosions act of 2013 , was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

the act would levy a civil penalty on owners or operators of a facility that does not file top - screen information when possessing a chemical of interest at above the screening threshold quantity .

it would also establish a criminal penalty if a facility owner , a facility operator , or an officer of an entity that owns or operates a facility intentionally fails to file top - screen information when the facility possesses a chemical of interest at above the screening threshold quantity .

the current statutory authority to regulate security at chemical facilities expires on december 13 , 2014 .

historically , congress has extended this authority through appropriations acts .

the administration's budget requests that the statutory authority be extended to october 4 , 2015 .

h.j.res .

130 extends the current statutory authority to december 13 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-164 , continuing appropriations resolution , 2015 , extended the current statutory authority to december 11 , 2014 .

h.r .

4903 , department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 , would extend the current statutory authority to october 4 , 2015 .

in addition , the act would prohibit dhs from using any funds appropriated by the act for certain personnel surety activities at chemical facilities .

the dhs would not be able to require a chemical facility to employ or not employ a particular security measure for personnel surety if the facility has adopted certain personnel measures .

these personnel measures must be designed to verify and validate an individual's identification ; check an individual's criminal history ; verify and validate an individual's legal authorization to work ; and identify individuals with terrorist ties .

the act would expressly allow a facility to use any federal screening program "that periodically vets individuals against the terrorist screening database , or any successor to such database , including the personnel surety program of the department of homeland security" to satisfy the requirement to identify individuals with terrorist ties .

h.rept .

113-481 , the report accompanying h.r .

4903 , would recommend $83 million for infrastructure security compliance , $3.7 million less than the administration's request .

according to the house committee on appropriations , this recommended funding would "enhance critical efforts related to compliance with cfats , including developing an automated process for identification of cfats outliers , addressing concerns raised by gao regarding the risk - tiering methodology , and fulfilling other requirements. .

the report also expresses the committee's determination that "dhs should not mandate how a covered chemical facility meets the personnel surety standard if the facility has already adopted a rigorous process to verify and validate identity , check criminal history , verify and validate legal authorization to work , and identify individuals with terrorist ties by using a federal vetting program , such as one that periodically vets individuals. .

the report would also direct the under secretary of nppd to report to the appropriations committees within 120 days and semiannually thereafter on the implementation of the cfats program .

finally , the report would encourage dhs to work with the chemical sector coordinating council to disseminate information to the chemical sector , about proven next - generation sealing technologies .

s. 2534 , department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 , would extend the current statutory authority to october 4 , 2015 .

s.rept .

113-198 , the report accompanying s. 2534 , would recommend $87 million for infrastructure security compliance , $249 thousand less than the administration's request .

the report would also direct the under secretary of nppd to report within 90 days and semiannually thereafter on the implementation of the cfats program .

the report would be delineated by risk tier and include the number of facilities covered , inspectors , completed inspections , inspections completed by region , pending inspections , days inspections are overdue , enforcements resulting from inspections , and enforcements overdue for resolution .

the report also would direct nppd to brief the senate committee on appropriations within 90 days on the progress made on improving chemical facility security coordination among federal agencies and fulfilling the recommendations made in the report of the chemical facility safety and security working group established by executive order 13650 .

in addition , the report urges nppd to "find the best possible path to ensure safety while not overburdening the industry with excessive regulatory requirements .

in particular it is imperative that nppd work with industry on a viable solution to personnel surety. .

it also encourages nppd to consider chemical neutralization technologies when creating comprehensive and integrated standard operating procedures for a unified federal approach for identifying and responding to risks in chemical facilities .

finally , the report would direct nppd to consider the eligibility of chemical security inspectors for administratively uncontrollable overtime and keep the senate committee on appropriations apprised of developments in this area .

p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , became law on january 17 , 2014 .

it extended the statutory authority through october 4 , 2014 , and provided appropriations for the federal government for fy2014 .

a joint explanatory statement for p.l .

113-76 contained specific directions for the cfats program , as did the house and senate reports accompanying their respective passed and reported homeland security appropriations bills .

the joint explanatory statement for p.l .

113-76 provided $81.0 million for infrastructure security compliance , $4.8 million less than the administration's request .

the joint explanatory statement clarified that the language and allocations contained in the house and senate reports should be complied with and carry the same weight as the language included in this explanatory statement , unless specifically addressed to the contrary in the final bill or this explanatory statement .

the joint explanatory statement contained certain requirements for dhs with respect to chemical facility security and the cfats program .

it directed nppd to , as detailed in the house report , provide a report within 90 days of enactment to the appropriations and authorizing committees explaining how iscd will further improve the review process for regulated facilities .

the joint explanatory statement directed nppd to report to the appropriations and authorizing committees not later than april 15 , 2014 , on the steps nppd is taking to avoid costly duplication of programs , as detailed in the house report .

the report is also to describe how nppd is helping to ensure the safety of facilities and whether dhs intends to mandate how a covered chemical facility meets the personnel surety standard , particularly in cases where the facility has already adopted strong and identifiable personnel measures designed to verify identity , check criminal history , validate legal authorization to work , and identify individuals with terrorist ties .

the statement further directed the under secretary of nppd to provide a report within 90 days of enactment to the appropriations committees on the implementation of the cfats program , as detailed in the senate report .

this report shall be in lieu of language in the house report directing nppd to provide a detailed expenditure plan .

in lieu of the requirement in the senate report for the chemical sector coordination council to develop recommendations to improve coordination on chemical security and safety , the joint explanatory statement directed nppd to continue implementing the requirements designated in executive order 13650 .

the joint explanatory statement stated its expectation that nppd provide regular updates on the progress of implementing improvements , the status of corrective measures being taken to ensure awareness of facilities that fall under the purview of the cfats program , and the need for any additional funding requirements that emerge to address coordination needs .

in lieu of language in the house report , the joint explanatory statement directed nppd to report semiannually to the appropriations committees on progress in complying with all the dhs office of inspector general recommendations made on iscd's management practices related to cfats .

the joint explanatory statement also directed iscd to improve the compliance of current top - screen registrants , such as through ongoing , proactive risk monitoring , data management , and the verification of business information in lieu of language in the house report .

h.rept .

113-91 , the house committee on appropriations report accompanying h.r .

2217 , would have recommended $77.1 million for infrastructure security compliance , $8.7 million less than the administration's request .

the report cites "the continued delays in the implementation of the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) program" and "the infrastructure security compliance division's ( iscd ) inability to mitigate real risks" as the reason for the decrease .

the house committee report would direct dhs to perform certain activities and to provide several reports to congressional policy makers .

it would direct nppd to report on how it will further accelerate the site security plan review process and detail actions dhs is taking to better manage the cfats program .

the committee report also expresses the committee's expectation that nppd will comply with the recommendations of the dhs inspector general regarding the cfats program and would direct nppd to report to the committee on its compliance with those recommendations .

it would direct the under secretary for nppd to report on steps nppd is taking to leverage existing personnel surety infrastructure within dhs and industry and to ensure that dhs does not inadvertently compromise facility safety due to overzealous protection of criminal investigations .

it would direct dhs to review cfats program implementation and collaboration and communication within iscd and with the regulated community .

the review also would address improvement of facility identification methodology used by iscd , information sharing with state entities by iscd , and efforts to address stakeholder concerns .

the report also states the committee's expectation that nppd will provide it with a comprehensive update on measures being taken to ensure that facilities with chemicals of interest are notified by iscd when they fall within the purview of the cfats program , an estimate of the potential number of outlier facilities , and a detailed performance evaluation of cfats inspectors .

s.rept .

113-77 , the senate committee on appropriations report accompanying h.r .

2217 , would have recommended $85.5 million for the infrastructure security compliance , $0.2 million less than the administration's request .

the senate committee report would direct dhs to perform certain activities and to provide several reports to congressional policy makers .

it would require dhs to report semiannually on the coordination of chemical security efforts within dhs and across departments and agencies and direct dhs to work in conjunction with the office of management and budget to review and synchronize federal entities involved in chemical security activities .

in addition , the report would direct nppd to support the chemical sector coordination council in an effort to develop and provide to the committee recommendations to improve the coordination among federal agencies , streamline reporting requirements , and improve the cfats program .

the report would direct nppd to report semiannually on the implementation of the cfats program including the number of facilities covered , inspectors , completed inspections , inspections completed by region , pending inspections , days inspections are overdue , enforcements resulting from inspections , and enforcements overdue for resolution , with the data delineated by tier .

p.l .

113-73 , which made further continuing appropriations for fy2014 , became law on january 15 , 2014 .

it extended the statutory authority through january 18 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-46 , the continuing appropriations act , 2014 , became law on october 17 , 2013 .

it extended the statutory authority through january 15 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-6 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , became law on march 26 , 2013 .

it extended the statutory authority through october 4 , 2013 .

