in the wake of the explosion of the deepwater horizon offshore drilling rig on april 20 , 2010 , federal agencies , state and local government agencies , and responsible parties faced an unprecedented challenge .

never before had a subsea drilling system discharge of this magnitude , or an oil spill of this size — estimated at approximately 206 million gallons ( 4.9 million barrels ) — occurred in u.s. waters .

the incident tested the public and private response capabilities , as well as the legal framework of liability and compensation under the oil pollution act .

the oil spill cleanup , natural resource damage assessment ( nrda ) , and compensation processes continue today .

this report provides a summary update of selected issues related to the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill: oil spill response , fate of the oil , gulf coast restoration , economic claims and other payments , civil and criminal settlements , department of the interior regulatory developments , dispersant regulations , congressional activity , and investigations and reports .

more detailed analysis of these and other issues is addressed in other crs products , some of which are listed at the end of this report .

the uncontrolled discharge from the deepwater horizon continued for approximately 87 days until , following several attempts , responders gained control of the release on july 15 , 2010 .

the response involved multiple agencies .

as this spill occurred in the coastal zone , an on - scene coordinator from the u.s. coast guard continues to direct and coordinate the on - site activities of federal , state , local , and private entities ( eg , bp and its contractors ) .

this framework of multiple parties working together under the leadership of the federal government is referred to as the unified command .

during the height of operations in the summer of 2010 , response personnel levels reached 47,000 , and response vessel numbers approached 7,000 ; and the maximum extent of shoreline oiling involved almost 1,100 miles of shoreline .

response activities specific to the 2010 incident have diminished substantially: in june 2013 , the coast guard announced that the shorelines of alabama , florida , and mississippi returned to the pre - spill reporting system via the national response center .

in april 2014 , the coast guard announced that louisiana shoreline activities will transition to a "middle response" process , akin to the process in alabama , florida , and mississippi .

at that time , the federal on - scene coordinator stated that "this response is not over — not by a long shot .

the transition to the middle response process does not end clean - up operations. .

in february 2015 , a coast guard memorandum announced that in march 2015 , the gulf coast incident management team would "transition from phase iii ( operations ) ... and reconstitute as a phase iv documentation team. .

as part of that transition , coast guard field unit commanders would respond to reports of oil spills in their respective areas of responsibility .

the local commanders are to use their discretion to decide if sampling is needed to identify the source of the oil ( i.e. , related to the deepwater horizon incident ) .

as of april 2015 , 30 response personnel , including federal officials and civilians , are working on activities related to the deepwater horizon incident .

following the containment of the macondo well in july 2010 , satellite data began to reveal decreasing daily quantities of oil on the ocean's surface .

many stakeholders wondered where the oil went .

in november 2010 , the federal government released a peer - reviewed publication that provided an estimate of what happened to the oil .

the study concluded that approximately 50% of the oil had evaporated , dissolved , or been effectively removed from the gulf environment through human activities .

thus , at the time of the study , a substantial portion — over 100 million gallons — remained , in some form , in the gulf .

subsequent research has offered some insights into the fate of this "remaining" oil .

some research suggests that microbial organisms ( bacteria ) consumed a considerable amount of the oil in the water column .

other studies have found evidence indicating that a considerable amount of the oil settled on the sea floor .

as an identified responsible party , bp is liable for cleanup costs , natural resource damages ( discussed in a subsequent section ) , and various economic damages .

the total payments associated with the 2010 gulf spill have already surpassed those of the 1989 exxon valdez oil spill .

as of december 2014 , bp has spent over $14 billion in cleanup operations .

further payments made by bp to different parties for various purposes are identified in table 1 .

as noted in table 1 , the "court settlement program" is still ongoing .

in august 2010 , multiple lawsuits involving over 100,000 private claims against bp and the other defendants ( eg , transocean and haliburton ) were consolidated before the u.s. district court in new orleans .

on april 18 , 2012 , bp and many of the plaintiffs reached a settlement agreement , which was approved by the court on december 21 , 2012 .

the settlement establishes a court - supervised program to evaluate and award various economic claims from individuals and businesses but does not involve governments , shareholders , or claims related to the drilling moratorium .

except for a limit of $2.3 billion for seafood compensation , the settlement is not capped .

as indicated in table 1 , the settlement program had awarded over $5 billion as of march 31 , 2015 .

bp pursued legal action to suspend payments from the settlement program , arguing that parties are receiving payment for losses "not traceable to the deepwater horizon accident and oil spill. .

in march 2014 , the fifth circuit court of appeals upheld a federal district ruling , allowing the court - supervised program to continue paying claims .

bp asked the u.s. supreme court to review this decision , but in december 2014 the court declined to review the case .

other components of the consolidated litigation are still pending , such as claims against bp not included in the above settlement and claims involving the other defendants , including transocean and haliburton .

the department of justice ( doj ) has announced criminal and / or civil settlements with several parties involved in the 2010 oil spill .

settlements from various parties , to date , total almost $6 billion .

other settlements may be forthcoming .

as discussed below , the settlement payments will support several objectives .

the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill generated considerable interest in offshore drilling safety and related issues .

agencies within doi have the lead regulatory authority for offshore oil and gas development activities , including operational safety and environmental considerations .

this section highlights doi regulatory developments and other activities that have addressed some of the safety concerns and other issues raised during and after the 2010 oil spill .

epa issued a proposed rule on january 22 , 2015 , that would amend the existing dispersant regulations ( 40 cfr part 300 , subpart j ) .

dispersants are chemical agents that enhance the breakup of oil into small oil droplets that mix with the water column .

dispersants received considerable attention during the deepwater horizon oil spill response .

during the 2010 oil spill , responders used , in aggregate , 1.8 million gallons of dispersants on both the surface water and ( for the first time ) at the site of the uncontrolled well approximately 5,000 feet below the surface .

while dispersants have proven effective in breaking up the oil on the surface , stakeholders raised questions about the fate of the dispersed oil and the chemical dispersants and their short - and long - term environmental impacts .

cwa section 311 ( d ) requires epa , in cooperation with the states , to prepare a schedule of dispersants , other chemicals , and other spill - mitigating devices and substances .

this product schedule includes dispersants and other chemical or bioremediation products that may be authorized for use on oil discharges in accordance with the procedures set forth in the national contingency plan ( ncp ) .

epa may add products to the ncp product schedule after companies submit specific data to the agency .

data requirements include results from effectiveness and toxicity testing .

although epa reserves the right to verify testing data ( and to require additional information ) , the regulations do not establish a toxicity threshold for placement on the schedule .

epa's january 2015 proposed rule would , among other provisions: revise and expand the testing requirements that must be performed to determine eligibility for epa's product schedule ; establish minimum criteria for toxicity and revise the minimum criteria for efficacy for a dispersant to be listed on the product schedule ; amend and clarify the process for pre - authorization of dispersant use ; and require monitoring of various environmental parameters when dispersants are used in specific situations ( eg , subsurface application or extended surface application ) .

this section provides information about oil spill - related legislative activity from the 111 th congress to the 114 th congress .

interest and activity in oil spill matters was substantial during and soon after the 2010 oil spill response ( 111 th congress ) .

as time progressed , oil - spill - related legislative activity decreased and , in general , addressed topics not directly related to the deepwater horizon incident .

several investigations and commissions — both federal and private — were initiated to examine issues surrounding the deepwater horizon incident .

the following includes a list of the more prominent studies , investigations , and inquiries that have been completed or are underway ( listed in order of report publication date ) : thad allen , national incident commander's report: mc252 deepwater horizon , october 2010 .

u.s. coast guard , bp deepwater horizon oil spill: incident specific preparedness review , january 2011 .

national commission on the bp deepwater horizon oil spill and offshore drilling , deep water: the gulf disaster and the future of offshore drilling , report to the president , january , 2011 .

joint investigation of bureau of ocean energy management , regulation , and enforcement and u.s. coast guard .

volume i: u.s. coast guard , report of investigation into the circumstances surrounding the explosion , fire , sinking and loss of eleven crew members aboard the mobile offshore drilling unit deepwater horizon , april 2011 .

volume ii: bureau of ocean energy management , regulation , and enforcement , report regarding the causes of the april 20 , 2010 macondo well blowout , september 2011 .

u.s. coast guard , on scene coordinator report: deepwater horizon oil spill , september 2011 .

national academy of engineering and national research council , macondo well — deepwater horizon blowout: lessons for improving offshore drilling safety , december 2011 .

government accountability office , interior has strengthened its oversight of subsea well containment , but should improve its documentation , february 2012 .

oil spill commission action , assessing progress: implementing the recommendations of the national oil spill commission , april 2012 .

gulf coast ecosystem restoration council , the path forward to restoring the gulf coast: a proposed comprehensive plan , january 2013 .

u.s. chemical safety and hazard investigation board , investigation report: explosion and fire at the macondo well , two volumes , june 2014 .

crs report r41684 , enacted and proposed oil spill legislation in the 112 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41453 , oil spill legislation in the 111 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43380 , gulf coast restoration: restore act and related efforts , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41679 , liability and compensation issues raised by the 2010 gulf oil spill , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41531 , deepwater horizon oil spill: the fate of the oil , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41972 , the 2010 deepwater horizon oil spill: natural resource damage assessment under the oil pollution act , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41234 , potential stafford act declarations for the gulf coast oil spill: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33705 , oil spills in u.s. coastal waters: background and governance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43251 , oil and chemical spills: federal emergency response framework , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41266 , oil pollution act of 1990 ( opa ) : liability of responsible parties , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34209 , commercial fishery disaster assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33404 , offshore oil and gas development: legal framework , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22022 , disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

