the national mortgage settlement is an outgrowth of state and federal regulatory investigations into the foreclosure practices of large mortgage servicers that were initiated in late 2010 and early 2011 .

these investigations were prompted by the sworn statements of employees from several large mortgage servicers and other evidence that surfaced in various foreclosure - related litigation that raised concerns that the companies were systematically engaged in mortgage documentation and procedural improprieties , especially when handling mortgages in default .

these alleged transgressions included signing affidavits without personal knowledge of the facts presented in the legal documents submitted to courts to support the right to foreclose ; backdating mortgage documents to fabricate evidence to give the appearance of compliance with state foreclosure requirements ; failing to adhere to notarization requirements for foreclosure - related documents filed with courts ; losing mortgage paperwork ; assessing excessive fees against borrowers ; failing to properly account for borrower mortgage payments ; and failing to properly consider borrowers for eligibility in mortgage modification and other loss mitigation programs .

concerns about these illicit acts provoked a number of state and federal regulators to initiate multiple investigations , enforcement actions , lawsuits , and legal settlement negotiations .

of particular relevance to this report , all 50 state attorneys general , the attorney general for the district of columbia , the conference of state bank supervisors , the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) , the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) initiated an investigation into foreclosure - related state and federal law violations by the nation's top five mortgage servicers .

on february 8 , 2012 , these state and federal officials , with the exception of oklahoma's attorney general , announced a "national mortgage settlement" of certain legal claims with these five institutions .

the settlement is to result in the servicers providing about $25 billion of relief , primarily to homeowners and individuals who recently lost their homes through foreclosure .

in financial terms , it constitutes the second largest legal settlement ever reached by the attorneys general , behind only the settlement with tobacco companies in 1998 .

the agreements stipulate that , in exchange for a release of liability for legal claims that otherwise could have been raised against the servicers by the participating regulators , these five mortgage companies will provide five distinct forms of relief .

under the agreements , the mortgage companies shall: comply with specified servicing standards going forward ( "servicing standards" component ) ; provide various forms of mortgage - related consumer relief to current borrowers whose mortgages are owned and serviced by the five servicers ( "consumer relief" component ) ; provide certain relief to servicemembers who may have been harmed by violations of the servicemembers civil relief act ( scra ) and to improve the servicing of soldiers' mortgages to prevent future scra violations ( "scra" component ) ; provide compensation to certain individuals whose homes were previously foreclosed by the five servicers ( "borrower payment" component ) ; and make direct payments to federal and state governments to cover the resolution of legal claims ( "direct settlement payment" component ) .

individual homeowners are not parties to the agreements , and the terms of the agreements do not provide individual borrowers a private right of action to enforce the agreements .

similarly , the settlement agreements do not , in any way , limit any enforcement power held by state or federal regulators that are not parties to the agreements , including the authorities of the federal banking regulators , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( federal reserve board ) , and the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) .

the national mortgage settlement is just one of several avenues by which mortgage servicers are being held accountable for alleged mortgage - related transgressions .

notably , beginning in the fourth quarter of 2010 , the federal banking regulators began on - site examinations of the foreclosure processes and governance protocols of the 14 largest u.s. mortgage servicers .

the regulators reviewed a sampling of mortgage files for which there were foreclosure actions pending during calendar years 2009 and 2010 .

the examinations revealed "critical weaknesses in [the] servicers' foreclosure governance processes , foreclosure document preparation processes , and oversight and monitoring of third - party vendors , including foreclosure attorneys. .

as a result of these findings , the banking regulators , in april 2011 , entered into binding consent orders with all 14 mortgage servicers and several of the third - party service providers that the servicers used in various ways during foreclosure processes ( hereinafter , the "federal banking consent orders" ) .

numerous aspects of the federal banking consent orders overlap with the terms of the national mortgage settlement .

although the focus of this report is on the national mortgage settlement , at times , it will highlight the points of intersection with the federal banking consent orders .

the following is a synthesis of the substantive provisions of the national mortgage settlement's servicing standards , consumer relief , scra , borrower payment , and direct settlement payment and an analysis of how compliance with these substantive provisions may be overseen and enforced .

the servicing standards and consumer relief components are discussed together because they have similar oversight and enforcement terms .

the servicers' direct settlement payment to both the state and federal parties is approximately $5 billion .

the payment is intended to cover the release of the state and federal legal claims that the parties could have raised against the servicers , as well as to resolve certain specific lawsuits previously initiated against some of the servicers named in the settlement .

the payments to the federal government generally were distributed to the federal housing administration's capital reserve account ; the veteran housing benefit program fund , which is administered by the department of veterans affairs ; and the rural housing service , which is administered by the department of agriculture .

each individual state has received a specific amount of the direct settlement payment , as established in exhibit b1 .

exhibit b of the settlement agreements provides the general parameters by which the states may use these funds .

exhibit b states that , "[t]o the extent practicable," the state's portion of direct settlement payment "shall be used for purposes intended to avoid preventable foreclosures , to ameliorate the effects of the foreclosure crisis , to enhance law enforcement efforts to prevent and prosecute financial fraud , or unfair or deceptive acts or practices and to compensate the states for costs resulting from the alleged unlawful conduct of the [servicers]. .

additionally , each state party negotiated state - specific parameters , provided for in exhibit b2 of the agreements , that guide how the direct settlement payment is to be allocated .

the state - specific parameters vary widely in both specificity and flexibility .

for example , the approximately $100 million allocated for the state of georgia went to the state's general treasury fund , where it may be appropriated by the state's general assembly "for any purposes permitted under state law.... " in contrast , the terms of exhibit b2 detail specific allocations and the purposes of those allocations for north carolina's portion of the direct payment amount .

of the approximately $60 million allocated to north carolina , $5.74 million was designated to go to a civil penalty fund established under state law ; $30.6 million was designated to go the north carolina housing finance agency for specified purposes ; $6.69 million was designated to go to conference of district attorneys of the north carolina administrative office of the courts for certain specified purposes ; $2.87 million was designated to go to the state bureau of investigation to enhance its ability to investigation financial crimes ; $4.78 million was designated to go to the consumer protection division of the state's department of justice for certain purposes ; and $8.6 million was designated to go to the state's general treasury fund "as compensation for costs and economic losses sustained by the state due to mortgage fraud and foreclosure misconduct. .

the agreements do not explicitly establish a means of enforcing or overseeing the direct settlement payment terms .

as a result , the agreements seem to leave oversight and enforcement of the direct settlement payment terms to the political processes that typically apply to government spending at the federal level and within each of the 49 states and the district of columbia .

