in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007-2008 , the federal reserve ( fed ) reduced the federal funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25% by december 2008 , exhausting its conventional monetary tool .

with the economy still exhibiting large amounts of slack and recovery prospects weak , the fed experimented over the next few years with unconventional policies in an attempt to revive the economy .

these policies were pursued after the acute crisis phase , during which the fed created a series of emergency liquidity facilities ; a discussion of these facilities is beyond the scope of this report .

the dates and nature of the policy announcements are outlined in table 1 .

although the policies had never been used before the crisis , they had been considered for some time .

in a 2004 working paper , ben bernanke , then - fed governor , and co - authors found "some grounds for optimism about the likely efficacy of non - standard policies" that central banks could use for stimulating the economy when the short - term policy interest rate ( the federal funds rate , in the united states ) has hit the "zero lower bound" and cannot be reduced to provide further stimulus .

although the zero - bound problem had been present in japan for some time when the paper was published , "for more than a few generations of economists , [it] seemed to be a relic of the depression era" in the united states .

the paper grouped the non - standard policies into three classes: ( 1 ) using communications policies to shape public expectations about the future course of interest rates ; ( 2 ) increasing the size of the central bank's balance sheet , or "quantitative easing" ; and ( 3 ) changing the composition of the central bank's balance sheet through , for example , the targeted purchases of long - term bonds as a means of reducing the long - term interest rate .

in the aftermath of the crisis , the fed under bernanke would use all three types of policies .

for communication policies , the fed introduced "forward guidance," first announcing in december 2008 that it would likely keep the federal funds rate "exceptionally low … for some time. .

this eventually evolved into a specific time horizon for how long rates would be kept "exceptionally low. .

in its october 2012 statement , it anticipated that the federal funds rate would be exceptionally low "at least through mid - 2015. .

in december 2012 , the fed moved away from a time horizon for exceptionally low rates , instead tying the duration of exceptionally low rates to an economic threshold , namely as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5% and inflation and inflation expectations remain low .

for increasing the balance sheet , the fed has undertaken three rounds of large - scale asset purchases , popularly known as "quantitative easing" ( qe ) .

by purchasing treasury securities , agency debt securities , and agency mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) , the fed has increased the size of its balance sheet from less than $0.9 trillion in 2007 to about $4 trillion at the end of 2013 .

for changing the composition of the balance sheet , the fed has undertaken the "maturity extension program," under which the fed purchased $667 billion in long - term u.s. treasury securities , and sold an equivalent amount of short - term treasury securities .

since enactment of the mandate , congress has largely deferred to the fed on how to achieve the goals of maximum employment and stable prices , and therefore has had little input in the fed's decisions to pursue unconventional policies .

it maintains oversight responsibilities , however , and congress has been interested in whether the fed's unconventional policies have been consistent with its mandate .

the remainder of this report analyzes the economic effects of these programs , the current economic context in which these policies have been adopted , policy alternatives that the fed has not pursued to date and their potential effects , potential legislative options for restricting the fed's pursuit of unconventional monetary policy , and issues surrounding the eventual "exit strategy" from unconventional policy .

before 2007 , the fed's balance sheet consisted overwhelmingly of treasury securities , acquired through its normal open - market operations to target the federal funds rate .

the balance sheet grew very modestly over time .

beginning in december 2007 , the fed undertook a series of unprecedented policy steps to change the size and composition of its balance sheet , a fundamental departure from traditional policy measures .

the fed's balance sheet is composed of assets , liabilities , and capital ; the former is equal to the sum of the latter two .

the fed's assets consist primarily of securities it has purchased , and also include loans it has made through the discount window and , during the crisis , emergency lending facilities .

the fed's three main liabilities are federal reserve notes , bank reserves held at the fed , and treasury deposits held at the fed ; these three items are counted as liabilities because they are effectively "ious" from the fed to the bearer .

the sum of outstanding federal reserve notes and bank reserves form the "monetary base," or the portion of the money supply controlled by the fed .

when the fed purchases assets it can finance those purchases in two ways — by increasing its liabilities or by selling other assets .

in the former case , the size of the overall balance sheet increases ( which has been referred to as quantitative easing when done on a large scale ) ; in the latter case , the size of the overall balance sheet remains the same ( which economists sometimes refer to as "sterilization" ) .

since the crisis , the fed has pursued both options .

lending after september 2008 and the large - scale asset purchases announced in march 2009 , november 2010 , and september 2012 resulted in a larger balance sheet , as seen in figure 1 .

the maturity extension program ( "operation twist" ) and lending before september 2008 were sterilized , so the overall size of the balance sheet remained the same .

when the fed finances its asset purchases by increasing the size of the balance sheet , the primary type of liability that increases is bank reserves , as can be seen in figure 2 .

these additional reserves , in effect , finance the fed's asset purchases and loan programs .

in the case of lending facilities , reserves increase because the loan amounts are credited to the recipient's reserve account at the fed .

in the case of asset purchases , the funds to finance the purchase are credited to the seller's reserve account at the fed , or if the seller were not a member of the federal reserve system , the funds would eventually lead to an increase in a member bank's reserves when the proceeds were deposited into the banking system .

the rest of this section provides more detail on the fed's announcements , followed by analysis of the issues raised by qe .

until 1994 , the fed did not publicly disclose its federal funds target .

prior to then , changes to the target were inferred by market participants once the actual rate started changing .

beginning in 2003 , the fed began to announce in fomc statements ( in general terms ) whether it was likely to raise , lower , or maintain its federal funds target in the future .

since 2009 , the fed has become increasingly explicit about its future plans for the federal funds target , giving markets what some economists have called "forward guidance. .

in march 2009 , the fed announced that exceptionally low rates would be in place for an "extended period of time. .

beginning in august 2011 , the fed announced a specific time period ( mid - 2013 ) for how long it expected exceptionally low rates to remain in place .

this period was pushed back a few times over the next year , most recently to "at least through mid - 2015" in the october 2012 federal open market committee ( fomc ) statement .

since january 2012 , the fed has publicly released fomc members' forecasts of the "appropriate" federal funds rate target in its quarterly economic forecasts .

beginning in december 2012 , the fed replaced its target date for exceptionally low rates with an economic event — until the unemployment rate falls to 6.5% , "as long as ... inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the committee's 2 percent longer - run goal , and longer - term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. .

some have referred to this as a threshold rule or threshold guidance .

more recently , the fed has stated that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6.5% , especially if projected inflation continues to run below the committee's 2 percent longer - run goal .

since september 2012 , the fed has made a similar contingent policy decision for qe , stating that the asset purchases would continue until labor markets improved substantially , in a context of price stability .

once the fed returns to conventional monetary policy and the federal funds rate is no longer at its lower bound , it is unclear whether the fed will continue to announce a target date or economic phenomenon ( such as a target unemployment rate ) for when it expects to next change the federal funds rate .

to the extent that the current communication policy is motivated by a desire to further stimulate the economy at the lower bound , as discussed below , it would arguably be unnecessary to continue once the federal funds rate target is above zero .

for critics who believe that the fed has not been aggressive enough in counteracting the great recession and believe that the unconventional policies pursued to date have been relatively ineffective , the challenge is to formulate monetary policy alternatives that would be permitted under current statute ( assuming legislative changes are not pursued ) .

a number of proposals are briefly outlined in this section .

policy options that are beyond the fed's control , such as coupling the planned monetary stimulus with additional fiscal stimulus , are beyond the scope of this report .

congress has given the fed broad discretion to implement monetary policies as it sees fit to meet its statutory mandate "to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates. .

although critics believe that qe is incompatible with the mandate to maintain stable prices , the fed has argued that qe helps it meet its mandate .

for example , in its announcement of qeii , the fed stated to promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation , over time , is at levels consistent with its mandate , the committee decided today to expand its holdings of securities… .

the committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset - purchase program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability .

complicating any efforts to prevent the fed from using unconventional policy tools are two factors: ( 1 ) inflation has remained low , so unconventional policy has not proven inconsistent with the fed's mandate thus far ; and ( 2 ) limiting the fed's broad discretion could hamper its future ability to respond to unforeseen circumstances .

altering statute to prevent unconventional options while allowing normal open market operations would be challenging .

the distinction between the two is an economic one , not a legal one .

both involve the purchase and sale of securities .

current law already limits the types of securities that the fed may hold .

one approach would be to narrow the statutory list of permissible securities .

for example , agency securities could be removed from the list to eliminate purchases of mbs and gse debt .

in another variation of the proposal , h.r .

1174 / s. 238 would require that permissible securities other than treasury securities be purchased only if two - thirds of the federal open market committee found that there were "exigent and unusual circumstances," and would limit the holding of these securities to no more than five years .

narrowing this authority would not prevent the implementation of qe through purchases of treasury securities , however .

another approach would be to put numerical thresholds in statute that would allow conventional operations but prevent unconventional operations ( eg , set a dollar limit on the fed's securities holdings ) .

a potential problem with this approach is it could constrain the fed's discretion more than intended , particularly since the fed's securities holdings gradually increase under conventional policy .

this points to the underlying tension between the desire for the fed to have broad discretion to rapidly react to unforeseen circumstances and the potential for the fed to use that discretion in such a way that meets the disapproval of some or all members of congress .

analysis of more fundamental changes to the federal reserve's powers , such as a return to the gold standard , that would affect its ability to conduct qe are beyond the scope of this report .

although the fed has already begun to taper off its asset purchases , a larger than normal balance sheet would remain after asset purchases have ended , potentially complicating an eventual return to conventional monetary policy .

quantitative easing has the potential to lead to high inflation if banks decided to begin using their reserve holdings to rapidly increase their lending , which would lead to a rapid increase in the money supply .

in that case , the fed would need an "exit strategy" from qe that could be implemented relatively quickly .

the most straightforward method would be for the fed to withdraw those reserves from the banking system by selling some of its assets and not replacing assets as they mature .

this would reduce the size of its balance sheet on both the assets and liabilities side .

it is uncertain how many assets would need to be sold , but to give an order of magnitude , the balance sheet is more than four times larger than it was before the crisis .

by april 2010 , the fed's balance sheet consisted predominantly of securities that could be sold in secondary markets .

these can mostly be sold relatively quickly in theory , although there could be market volatility in practice .

given the fed's concerns about the fragility of housing markets , it is not clear how its mortgage - related holdings could be reduced quickly if the fed became concerned about rising inflation .

on june 19 , 2013 , ben bernanke stated that "a strong majority [of the fomc] now expects that the committee will not sell agency mortgage - backed securities during the process of normalizing monetary policy.... " selling only treasury securities might not reduce the balance sheet sufficiently , given the amount of treasury securities the fed might feel comfortable selling .

the furthest that the fed has reduced its treasury holdings in the past was to approximately $480 billion in 2008 .

another option would be to give banks incentives not to lend out reserves by raising the interest rate that the fed pays on reserves , thereby keeping the larger monetary base from increasing the broader money supply .

since there is no domestic and very little international experience with first increasing the monetary base and then tightening policy without reversing the increase in the monetary base , this strategy can be considered untested .

to better prevent these reserves from being lent out if necessary , the fed began offering "term deposits" with a one - to six - month maturity for bank reserves in 2010 .

the interest rate on these term deposits is set through auction ; banks would presumably be willing to bid for term deposits only if the interest rate exceeded the rate paid by the fed on normal reserves .

the fed could also reduce liquidity by lending its assets out through "reverse repos. .

this would change the composition of liabilities on the fed's balance sheet , replacing its other liabilities with reverse repos .

while the fed has experimented with this tool on a small scale , it is unlikely that reverse repos operations could be large enough to remove most of the new liquidity , however .

treasury cash balances held at the fed could also be used to tie up excess liquidity if needed .

the treasury announced the supplementary financing program on september 17 , 2008 , as an alternative method for the fed to increase its assistance to the financial sector without increasing the amount of money in circulation .

under this program , the treasury has temporarily auctioned more new securities than it needs to finance government operations and has deposited the proceeds at the fed .

 ( the operations do not affect inflation because the money received by the treasury is held at the fed and not allowed to circulate in the economy. ) .

since august 2011 , the balance in the supplementary financing program has been zero .

given that the size of this program is constrained by the debt limit , it would be insufficient to significantly reduce liquidity without a large increase in the debt limit .

when the time comes , the fed might decide to employ one or some combination of these tools to implement the exit strategy .

there has been some discussion of the proper sequencing of events , and whether the use of conventional and unconventional policy tools might overlap .

for example , chairman bernanke has stated that he anticipates that the fed will not sell securities until policy tightening is already under way .

in this scenario , raising the interest rate on reserves would presumably be crucial to the exit strategy , since the current size of the balance sheet ( and accompanying level of bank reserves ) is otherwise inconsistent with a higher federal funds rate .

it is unclear whether there is any economic benefit to pursuing an exit strategy that maintains a large balance sheet .

any stimulative effect of a larger balance sheet on the economy would be offset by the effects of paying interest on reserves , reverse repos , the treasury supplementary program , or issuing fed bonds .

the large balance sheet would have no positive effect on aggregate demand if it is offset by any of these actions that drain liquidity from the economy .

if investors have rational expectations , it is not clear how this strategy could flatten the yield curve either , because the long end of the yield curve is determined primarily by expectations of future interest rates , and sterilized purchases of assets in the present should not change those expectations , all else equal .

after the federal funds rate has been raised from the zero bound , it remains to be seen whether the fed would continue using balance sheet operations or would prefer to eventually return to using only conventional monetary policy tools .

to date , the public's inflationary expectations have not changed during quantitative easing .

if inflationary expectations remain low , it would be expected to make an exit strategy , and monetary policy generally , more effective .

on the other hand , one criticism of qe is that it could at some point undermine expectations of low and stable inflation , and the fed's credibility on inflation .

if inflationary expectations rise , larger - scale operations than would otherwise be needed could become necessary for an exit strategy .

in a worst case scenario , a rise in inflationary expectations could force the fed to pursue an exit strategy before the economy has recovered , thereby risking "stagflation" ( stagnant growth with high inflation ) .

the fed initially undertook its unconventional policies in 2009 in response to the deepest and longest recession since the great depression .

at the time , financial stability was still fragile , unemployment was in double digits , and inflation was very low , with fears among some economists that deflation would emerge .

since the second half of 2009 , the economy has expanded at a steady but slow pace that has gradually reduced unemployment .

over the same period , inflation has continued to remain low ( it was below the fed's longer - run goal of 2% in 2013 ) and inflation expectations have remained relatively steady .

the members of the federal open market committee project that the unemployment rate will be at or near full employment in 2015 , but most do not believe it would be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate above zero before then .

an individual's view on whether the fed's unconventional policies are currently justified , or whether the fed should be undertaking more or less stimulus than it has , depends in large part on whether one believes that the fed should do more or less in the face of slow but steady economic expansion .

some might feel comfortable with unconventional policy during periods of economic free fall , such as late 2008 , but feel uncomfortable with unconventional policy once the economy has stabilized .

although it is difficult to disentangle the effects of the fed's policies from other factors affecting interest rates , the fact that treasury and mbs yields are at their lowest levels in decades suggests that the fed's unconventional policies have had the direct effects that were intended .

it is less clear to what extent lower treasury and mbs yields have fed through to lower private interest rates , a greater supply of private credit , and more interest - sensitive spending .

corporate and household deleveraging and risk aversion following the crisis has driven interest - sensitive spending down , so lower rates can only accomplish so much in the face of these headwinds .

it is clear at this point that monetary policy alone is not potent enough to return the economy to full employment quickly , and there may be diminishing economic benefits from additional qe .

given that it is unlikely that the economy would return to full employment significantly sooner if the fed purchased assets at a faster pace , some have argued for policies that are even more unconventional as a means to additional monetary stimulus .

the economic benefits of such policies would need to be weighed against their costs — the economic risk that they would lead to high inflation and the political risk that they would undermine the fed's political support and possibly its credibility .

fed chair janet yellen has said that the benefits of unconventional policy should be weighed against the costs , and in her opinion the benefits to date have been substantial and the costs small .

while the economic benefits of unconventional monetary policy have not been sufficient to restore full employment , the main perceived risks ( higher inflation , higher inflationary expectations , or asset price bubbles ) have not yet materialized several years after qe began .

thus , while some might argue that there has been limited upside from these policies , it could be argued that there has been limited downside to date .

some critics fear that unconventional policy is undermining the fed's credibility , and this could harm the future effectiveness of monetary policy .

if unconventional policy were failing because it is undermining the fed's credibility , the evidence would be high interest rates , high inflation expectations , or both ; to date , neither has occurred .

at this point , the main drawback to unconventional policy is a hypothetical one: that it may complicate a smooth transition to conventional monetary policy when the economy has returned to normal , particularly because the "exit strategy" is untested .

