in the 113 th congress , members of congress introduced a wide range of longstanding gun control proposals .

some of these proposals gained renewed energy following the december 2012 newtown , ct , tragedy , and several other "mass shooting" incidents in that year .

the senate debated these proposals in april 2013 , but the leadership tabled that legislation rather than consider a wider range of firearms - related amendments .

in the house of representatives , members introduced similar proposals , but those proposals did not see the same level of action .

in both chambers , the committees on veterans' affairs reported legislation that addressed the issue of veterans , mental incompetency , and firearms eligibility , but that legislation saw no further action .

congress extended a ban on undetectable firearms for 10 years in december 2013 .

in addition , the house passed several amendments to appropriations bills , which were supported by many gun rights advocates .

some , but not all , of these provisions were included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

two major federal statutes regulate the commerce in and possession of firearms: the national firearms act of 1934 ( 26 u.s.c .

§5801 et seq. ) .

and the gun control act of 1968 , as amended ( 18 u.s.c .

chapter 44 , §921 et seq. ) .

supplementing federal law , many state firearms laws are stricter than federal law .

for example , some states require permits to obtain firearms and impose a waiting period for firearms transfers .

other states are less restrictive , but state law cannot preempt federal law .

federal law serves as the minimum standard in the united states .

as noted above , the president's plan to reduce gun violence included a legislative proposal to require "universal background checks. .

under current law , intrastate transfers between unlicensed persons , who are not "engaged in the business" of dealing in firearms "as a regular course of ... business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit," are not covered by the recordkeeping or the background check provisions of the gca .

nevertheless , such private transactions and other matters such as possession , registration , and the issuance of licenses to firearms owners may be covered by state laws or local ordinances .

proponents of greater gun control view the fact that unlicensed persons engaging in intrastate firearms transfers are not subject to the recordkeeping and background check requirements of the gca as a "loophole" in the law , particularly within the context of gun shows .

this circumstance arguably flowed from two developments .

one , in 1986 , congress amended the gca to allow ffls to transfer firearms to unlicensed persons at gun shows located within the state of their business ; however , prohibitions on interstate transfers still applied .

two , in 1994 , congress passed the "brady act" and amended the gca to require background checks be completed for all unlicensed persons seeking to obtain firearms from ffls .

as described above , in november 1998 , the fbi brought nics online to facilitate firearms background checks whenever an ffl transfers a firearm to an unlicensed person .

however , federal law does not require background checks for intrastate ( in - state ) firearms transfers between unlicensed persons .

in the 113 th congress , several proposals were introduced that would have required background checks for private , intrastate firearms transfers between unlicensed persons at gun shows or most other venues .

these proposals would have required an unlicensed transferor ( seller ) to engage the services of an ffl , who would have conducted a nics check on the unlicensed transferee ( buyer ) .

ffls facilitating such transfers would have also been required to maintain a record of all transfers in a bound volume , as well as individual transfers on a form prescribed by the attorney general .

for example , senator frank lautenberg and representative carolyn mccarthy introduced separate proposals to require background checks for firearms transfers between unlicensed persons at gun shows ( s. 22 and h.r .

141 ) .

representative james p. moran included a provision that would have required background checks for firearms transfers between unlicensed persons at any venue in the nra members' gun safety act of 2013 ( h.r .

21 ) , as did representative mccarthy in the fix gun checks act ( h.r .

137 ) .

in the wake of the april 2007 virginia tech tragedy , the 110 th congress passed the nics improvement amendments act ( niaa ) of 2007 ( p.l .

110-180 ) .

this act includes provisions designed to encourage states , tribes , and territories ( states ) to make available to the attorney general certain records related to persons who are disqualified from acquiring a firearm , particularly records related to domestic violence misdemeanor convictions and restraining orders , as well as mental health adjudications .

to accomplish this , the act establishes a framework of incentives and disincentives , whereby the attorney general is authorized to make grants , waive a grant match requirement , or reduce a law enforcement assistance grant depending upon a state's compliance with the act's goals of bringing firearms - related disqualifying records online .

under p.l .

110-180 , congress authorized the attorney general to make additional grants to states to improve further electronic access to records , including court disposition and corrections records , which are necessary to fully facilitate nics background checks .

under the act , the attorney general is required to report annually to congress on federal department and agency compliance with the act's provisions .

because doj's bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) administers this program , the bjs director is required to report annually on the progress that states are making in providing reasonable estimates of the number of firearms - related disqualifying records that they have jurisdiction over , as well as the number of those records that have been made accessible to the fbi for nics background check purposes .

bjs designated this grant program the "nics act record improvement program ( narip ) ," although congressional appropriations documents generally referred to it as "nics improvement. .

as shown in table 2 , section 103 ( e ) of the act included an authorization for appropriations for fy2009 through fy2013 .

the act directs that the grants provided under this authorization be made "in a manner consistent" with national criminal history improvement program ( nchip ) .

the act also requires that between 3% and 10% of each grant be allocated for a relief from disabilities program for persons adjudicated mentally defective or unwillingly committed to a mental institution .

also , as shown in table 2 , section 301 ( e ) of the act included an additional authorization for appropriations for the same fiscal years to improve state court computer systems to improve timeliness of criminal history dispositions .

under both authorizations , up to 5% of all grants may be set aside to provide assistance to tribal governments .

to be eligible for grants under either section , states must be certified by atf that they have established a relief from disabilities program for persons adjudicated "mentally defective" or committed to a mental institution , whereby they can petition to have their gun rights restored .

as an additional incentive , section 102 of p.l .

110-180 also provides that on january 8 , 2011 , any state that has provided at least 90% of disqualifying records was eligible for a waiver of the 10% match requirement under nchip for two years .

to be eligible for the waiver , as well as sections 103 and 301 grants , states are required to provide bjs with a reasonable estimate of the number of nics - related disqualifying records that they hold within 180 days of enactment ( july 6 , 2008 ) .

in consultation with the national center for state courts ( ncsc ) and search group , inc. , bjs has collected three rounds of reasonable estimates .

in the last round ( 2011 ) , 47 of 56 states and territories provided estimates , but the precision of these estimates collectively were deemed insufficient to determine whether the nchip 10% matching grant waiver ought to be awarded to any of these states or territories .

bjs , ncsc , and search are currently working on a statistical model with which to assess these estimates .

to further encourage compliance , section 104 of p.l .

110-180 included a schedule of discretionary and mandatory reductions in byrne justice assistance grants ( jag ) for states that did not provide certain percentages of disqualifying records: for a two - year period ( january 8 , 2011 , through january 8 , 2013 ) , the attorney general could have withheld up to 3% of jag funding from any state that provided less than 50% of disqualifying records ; for a five - year period ( january 8 , 2013 , through january 8 , 2018 ) , the attorney general may withhold up to 4% of jag funding from any state that provides less than 70% of disqualifying records ; and after january 8 , 2018 , the attorney general is required to withhold 5% of jag funding from any state that provides less than 90% of disqualifying records .

the act also allows the attorney general to waive the mandatory 5% cuts if a state provides substantial evidence that it is making reasonable compliance efforts .

for fy2014 and fy2015 , congress continued to appropriate funding for these purposes , but the committees on appropriations have merged the nchip and narip programs , and refocused the combined program on firearms - related background check records improvement .

under the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , congress appropriated $58.5 million for this program , renamed the "nics initiative," of which not less than $12.0 million was made available to make grants under p.l .

110-180 .

under the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , congress appropriated $73.0 million for the nics initiative , of which not less than $25.0 was made available to make grants under p.l .

110-180 .

through fy2014 , bjs has not provided any nchip 10% matching grant waivers .

nor has bjs levied any of the discretionary penalties described above .

nevertheless , house committee on appropriations report language indicated: the committee directs that grants made under the broader nchip authorities be made available only for efforts to improve records added to nics .

additionally , the department [doj] shall prioritize funding under narip authorities with the goal of making all states nics improvement amendments act of 2007 ( niaa ) compliant .

the department also shall apply penalties to noncompliant states to the fullest extent of the law .

senate report language and the explanatory statement accompanying the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) were silent on this issue of the reward and penalty provisions of p.l .

110-180 .

criminal "gun trafficking" essentially entails the movement or diversion of firearms from legal to illegal markets .

therefore , it follows that the entire gca is arguably a statutory framework designed to combat gun trafficking domestically , particularly interstate gun trafficking .

atf has developed a nationwide strategy to reduce firearms trafficking and violent crime by preventing convicted felons , drug traffickers , and juvenile gang members from acquiring firearms from gun traffickers .

gun trafficking cases include , but are not limited to , the following activities: straw purchasers or straw purchasing rings ; trafficking in firearms by corrupt federally licensed gun dealers ; trafficking in firearms by unlicensed dealers ( i.e. , persons who deal in firearms illegally as the principal source of their livelihood ) ; trafficking in stolen firearms ; and trafficking of secondhand firearms acquired from unlicensed persons at gun shows , flea markets , and other private venues .

unlike other forms of contraband , almost all illegal firearms used criminally in the united states were diverted at some point from legal channels of commerce .

atf works to reduce firearms - related crime with two approaches , industry regulation and criminal investigation .

under the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , congress banned for 10 years the possession , transfer , or further domestic manufacture of semiautomatic assault weapons ( saws ) and large - capacity ammunition feeding devices ( lcafds ) that hold more than 10 rounds that were not legally owned or available prior to the date of enactment ( september 13 , 1994 ) .

the saw ban prohibited the further manufacture for , and transfer to , private persons certain firearms that ( 1 ) were listed by make and model as saws , or ( 2 ) met a saw "military - style" features test for rifles , pistols , and handguns .

semiautomatic assault weapons and lcafds that were legally owned prior to the ban were grandfathered , meaning they were not restricted and remained available for transfer under applicable federal and state laws .

the saw - lcafd ban expired on september 13 , 2004 .

in the 113 th congress , senator lautenberg and representative mccarthy introduced the large capacity ammunition feeding device act ( s. 33 / h.r .

138 ) , a bill that would have prohibited the manufacture or importation of detachable magazines of over 10-round capacity .

while this proposal would have grandfathered existing magazines , it would have also made those grandfathered magazines non - transferable , meaning that those magazines could not have been sold or traded and would have become contraband upon the owner's death .

this bill would have required that any newly produced magazines , or large - capacity ammunition feeding devices , be identified by a serial number that clearly shows that the device was manufactured after enactment .

 ( senator lautenberg introduced a modified proposal , s. 691 . ) .

senator feinstein and representative mccarthy introduced similar proposals ( s. 150 and h.r .

437 ) , both titled the assault weapons ban of 2013 .

these similar proposals would have built upon and modified the expired federal ban .

these proposals , like s. 33 / h.r .

138 , would have banned ammunition magazines with a greater than 10-round capacity and would have grandfathered existing magazines , as did the expired federal ban , but they would have also banned any further transfer of those magazines .

for semiautomatic firearms , these proposals would have established separate "one military feature" tests for rifles , pistols , and shotguns that were in many ways similar to california state law , instead of the "two military features" tests that were included under the expired 1994-2004 federal ban ( see the tables below ) .

they would have prohibited the future manufacture and importation of firearms that fell under these tests , as well as 157 firearms specifically named in the proposal by make and model .

the proposals would have grandfathered any existing firearms that met the "one feature" tests , but they would have required background checks for any future transfers of grandfathered "assault weapons" by an unlicensed person to another unlicensed person .

finally , the proposals would have exempted from the ban over 2,200 firearms by make and model .

on march 14 , 2013 , the senate committee on the judiciary approved s. 150 .

several amendments offered by the minority were rejected during full committee markup .

as described above , senator reid included several other senate - reported bills in in the safe communities , safe schools act of 2013 ( s. 649 ) .

although s. 649 did not include the language of s. 150 , according to press accounts , senator feinstein indicated that senator reid had assured her that he would allow her to offer an "assault weapons" amendment when the senate considered the proposals described above .

on april 17 , 2013 , senator feinstein offered her proposal as an amendment ( s.amdt .

711 ) during senate consideration of s. 649 , but the amendment was rejected by a yea - nay vote: 40-60 ( roll call vote no .

101 ) .

in addition , senator blumenthal ( for senator frank lautenberg ) offered an amendment ( s.amdt .

714 ) that would have banned the further production and distribution of 10-round or greater magazines , or lcafds .

while it would have grandfathered in existing magazines , those magazines legally held by the public would have become non - transferable and would have essentially become contraband upon the owner's death , but it too was rejected by a yea - nay vote: 46-54 ( roll call vote no .

103 ) .

for the most part , federal law did not address open or concealed carry of firearms until 2004 .

and yet , in recent congresses , proposals were offered that addressed the carrying of firearms on public lands , in either an open or concealed fashion , as well as the issue of interstate concealed carry reciprocity .

for example , congress passed the law enforcement officers safety act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-277 ) .

this law provides qualified active and retired law enforcement officers with interstate concealed firearms carry privileges .

although this law supersedes state level prohibitions on concealed carry that otherwise apply to law enforcement officers , it does not override any federal laws .

nor does the law supersede or limit state laws that permit private persons or entities to prohibit or restrict the possession of concealed firearms on their property or prohibit or restrict the possession of firearms on any state or local government property , installation , building , base , or park .

in addition , the credit card act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-24 ) includes a provision that allows private persons to carry firearms in national parks and wildlife refuges , as long as the open or concealed carry of such firearms is in compliance with state and local laws ( effective february 22 , 2010 ) .

congress has also considered related proposals to ( 1 ) require agencies that manage federal public lands to facilitate access to and use of those lands for the purposes of recreational fishing , hunting , and shooting with certain exceptions set out in statute ( eg , national security , public safety , or resource conservation ) ; and ( 2 ) prohibit the secretary of the army from banning individuals from firearms possession , including an assembled or functional firearm , while traveling through or visiting water resources development projects ( eg , reservoirs at corps - operated dams and inland waterways ) managed by the army corps of engineers .

congress , moreover , has considered other proposals , such as the amendment ( s.amdt .

719 ) to s. 649 offered by senator cornyn , which would have mandated an increased level of reciprocity among states that have laws that allow civilians to carry handguns in a concealed fashion .

however , under a unanimous consent agreement that required a 60-vote threshold for passage , the senate rejected this amendment by a yea - nay vote: 57-43 ( roll call vote no .

100 ) .

as background , 38 states ( most recently wisconsin ) have "shall issue" concealed carry laws , meaning permits are issued to all eligible applicants .

ten states have more restrictive "may issue" laws , meaning state and / or local authorities have discretion whether to issue permits .

in those states , applicants usually must demonstrate a need to carry a concealed handgun to the authorities .

at one end of the spectrum , alaska , arizona , wyoming , and vermont allow concealed carry without a permit .

at the other end , illinois and the district of columbia allow no concealed carry of firearms by civilians .

with regard to interstate reciprocity , a handful of states have "recognition" statutes that recognize any state - issued concealed carry permit .

other states have "open" statutes that allow any resident of the united states , without regard to state residency , to apply for a concealed carry permit .

still other states have "hybrid" statutes that include elements of both the recognition and open statutes .

contiguous "shall issue" states often extend reciprocity to one another .

however , some "shall issue" states have opted not to extend reciprocity to other "shall issue" states for a variety of reasons , even though they might have extended reciprocity to arguably more restrictive "may issue" states .

the end result is a complicated array of state laws that arguably makes it challenging for an individual to discern his legal ability to carry a concealed firearm in another state .

under the cornyn amendment , a permit holder from state a would have been able to travel to state b with a concealed handgun as long as state b had a concealed carry law , no matter which type ( "shall" or "may" issue ) .

the permit holder from state a would have been required to comply with all other laws in state b , with the exception of the laws governing eligibility for and issuance of concealed carry permits .

several issues might have arisen , however .

first , the amendment made no allowance for the difference between more permissive "shall issue" and more restrictive "may issue" state laws .

therefore , the amendment could have been viewed as an imposition by "shall issue" states over "may issue" states .

depending upon the circumstances , the amendment could have also been viewed as an imposition by some "shall issue" states over other "shall issue" states , according to differences in their respective concealed carry laws .

for example , some "shall issue" states have good moral character clauses as part of their eligibility requirements , others do not .

some require "live fire" training prior to permit issuance , others do not .

some require a mental health evaluation , others do not .

several states issue permits to persons 18 years of age , while most states require applicants to be 21 years of age .

also related to concealed carry , senator john barrasso offered an amendment ( s.amdt .

717 ) that would have required the attorney general to make a 5% reduction in community oriented policy services grants to state and local governments that release information on gun owners — particularly concealed carry permit holders .

the amendment was adopted by a yea - nay vote: 67-30 ( roll call vote no .

104 ) .

