this question has dogged u.s. public policy debates for more than a decade .

there is no statutory definition of homeland security that reflects the breadth of the enterprise as currently understood .

although there is a federal department of homeland security , it is neither solely dedicated to homeland security missions , nor is it the only part of the federal government with significant responsibilities in this arena .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , which was signed into law on november 25 , 2002 .

the new department was assembled from components pulled from 22 different government agencies and began official operations on march 1 , 2003 .

since then , dhs has undergone a series of restructurings and reorganizations to improve its effectiveness and efficiency .

although dhs does include many of the homeland security functions of the federal government , several of these functions or parts of these functions remain at their original executive branch agencies and departments , including the departments of justice , state , defense , and transportation .

not all of the missions of dhs are officially "homeland security" missions .

some components have historical missions that do not directly relate to conventional homeland security definitions , such as the coast guard's environmental and boater safety missions , and congress has in the past debated whether fema and its disaster relief and recovery missions belong in the department .

some aspects of crime and justice could arguably be included in a broad definition of homeland security .

issues such as the role of the military in law enforcement , monitoring and policing transfers of money , human trafficking , explosives and weapons laws , and aspects of foreign policy , trade , and economics have implications for homeland security policy .

rather than trying to resolve the question of what is and is not homeland security , this report is limited to topics that generally fall within the four mission study areas used to develop the quadrennial homeland security review mandated by the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) : counterterrorism and security management , border security and trade , immigration , and disaster preparedness , response , and recovery .

a fifth section covering management issues at dhs rounds out the discussion .

as each topic is introduced , the lead expert and author of the section is listed , along with their contact information .

in many cases , a specific crs report is highlighted as a source of more detailed information .

the issues included in this report do not represent a comprehensive list of possible issues — they represent a broad array of issues likely to be addressed by congress in the coming months .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in transportation policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for more information , see crs report rl33512 , transportation security: issues for the 113 th congress .

bombings of passenger trains in europe and asia in the past several years illustrate the vulnerability of passenger rail systems to terrorist attacks .

passenger rail systems — primarily subway systems — in the united states carry about five times as many passengers each day as do airlines , over many thousands of miles of track , serving stations that are designed primarily for easy access .

the increased security efforts around air travel have led to concerns that terrorists may turn their attention to "softer" targets , such as transit or passenger rail .

a key challenge congress faces is balancing the desire for increased rail passenger security with the efficient functioning of transit systems , with the potential costs and damages of an attack , and with other federal priorities .

the volume of ridership and number of access points make it impractical to subject all rail passengers to the type of screening airline passengers undergo .

consequently , transit security measures tend to emphasize managing the consequences of an attack .

nevertheless , steps have been taken to try to reduce the risks , as well as the consequences , of an attack .

these include vulnerability assessments ; emergency planning ; emergency response training and drilling of transit personnel ( ideally in coordination with police , fire , and emergency medical personnel ) ; increasing the number of transit security personnel ; installing video surveillance equipment in vehicles and stations ; and conducting random inspections of bags , platforms , and trains .

the challenges of securing rail passengers are dwarfed by the challenge of securing bus passengers .

there are some 76,000 buses carrying 19 million passengers each weekday in the united states .

some transit systems have installed video cameras on their buses , and congress has provided grants for security improvements to intercity buses .

but the number and operation characteristics of transit buses make them all but impossible to secure .

the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) , passed by congress on july 27 , 2007 , included provisions on passenger rail and transit security and authorized $3.5 billion for fy2008-fy2011 for grants for public transportation security .

the act required public transportation agencies and railroads considered to be high - risk targets by dhs to have security plans approved by dhs ( §§1405 and 1512 ) .

other provisions required dhs to conduct a name - based security background check and an immigration status check on all public transportation and railroad frontline employees ( §§1414 and 1522 ) , and gave dhs the authority to regulate rail and transit employee security training standards ( §§1408 and 1517 ) .

in 2010 tsa completed a national threat assessment for transit and passenger rail , and in 2011 completed an updated transportation systems - sector specific plan , which established goals and objectives for a secure transportation system .

the three primary objectives for reducing risk in transit are to: mitigate risks to high - risk / high - consequence assets ; expand operational deterrence activities ; and enhance information sharing .

tsa surface transportation security inspectors conduct assessments of transit systems ( and other surface modes ) through the agency's baseline assessment for security enhancement ( base ) program .

the agency has also developed a security training and security exercise program for transit ( i - step ) , and its visible intermodal prevention and response ( vipr ) teams conduct operations with local law enforcement officials , including periodic patrols of transit and passenger rail systems , to create "unpredictable visual deterrents. .

the house committee on homeland security's subcommittee on transportation security held a hearing in may 2012 to examine the surface transportation security inspector program .

as discussed at the hearing , the number of inspectors had increased from 175 in fy2008 to 404 in fy2011 ( full - time equivalents ) .

issues considered at the hearing included the lack of surface transportation expertise among the inspectors , many of whom were promoted from screening passengers at airports ; the administrative challenge of having the surface inspectors managed by federal security directors who are located at airports , and who themselves typically have no surface transportation experience ; and the security value of the tasks performed by surface inspectors .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) provides grants for security improvements for public transit , passenger rail , and occasionally other surface transportation modes under the urban area security initiative program ( see table 1 ) .

the vast majority of the funding goes to public transit providers .

the transit security grant program ( tsgp ) did not receive a specified amount of funding in fy2012 , as congress left program funding allocations to the discretion of dhs .

in a february 2012 report , the government accountability office found opportunity for duplication among four dhs state and local security grant programs with similar goals , one of which was the public transportation security grant program .

the obama administration proposed consolidating several of these programs in the fy2013 budget .

this proposal was not supported by congressional appropriators , though appropriators have expressed concerns that grant programs have not focused on areas of highest risk and that significant amounts of previously appropriated funds have not yet been awarded to recipients .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in immigration policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) sources of further information , including additional crs experts covering specific aspects of this issue , can be found in footnotes throughout this section .

immigration policy has received substantial attention in both chambers during the 113 th session of congress .

in june 2013 , the senate passed the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , a "comprehensive immigration reform" ( cir ) bill that would increase immigration enforcement , require employers to use an electronic employment eligibility verification system similar to the current e - verify program , establish three different legalization programs for unauthorized immigrants , and revise rules for both permanent and temporary immigration to the united states .

in the house , the homeland security and judiciary committees took action on five different bills between may and july of 2013 addressing border security , employment eligibility verification , interior immigration enforcement , and employment - based immigration .

this portion of the report summarizes several homeland security issues related to immigration enforcement at ports of entry and along the international border by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the agency within dhs responsible for these activities .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) from the establishment of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in january 2003 through 2007 , the president and the secretary of homeland security used provisions of the homeland security act of 2002 , most notably section 872 , to implement a number of major and minor departmental reorganizations .

some reorganization activities under these authorities were carried out in conjunction with the implementation of the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 .

since may 2007 , congress has limited the use of appropriated funds for carrying out section 872 reorganizations .

section 3501 of the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 , enacted on may 25 , 2007 , instituted such limitations for the balance of fy2007 , stating: none of the funds provided in this act , or p.l .

109-295 [department of homeland security appropriations act , 2007] , shall be available to carry out section 872 of p.l .

107-296 [homeland security act of 2002] .

succeeding dhs appropriations acts up through and including that for fy2013 included similar provisions .

the scope and effect of this limitation were the subject of a july 2008 government accountability office ( gao ) opinion .

this opinion raised the question of whether a reorganization could be undertaken under authorities that , absent section 872 , might be available to the secretary .

these include the authorities identified by the department: implied authority to organize and manage the department ; redelegation authority ; and authority under 5 u.s.c .

section 301 , which authorizes an agency head to "prescribe regulations for the government of his department , the conduct of its employees , the distribution and performance of its business , and the custody , use , and preservation of its records , papers , and property. .

since the appropriations acts are annual , the decision of whether or not to carry over the limitation arises each year .

more broadly , the question of whether and how section 872 might be amended may be at issue as part of a reauthorization process .

such decisions might hinge , in part , on a congressional determination of the impact of section 872 and the appropriation limitation on the management and functioning of the department .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for more information , see crs report r42644 , department of homeland security: fy2013 appropriations .

title i of the homeland security appropriations bill contains the funding for the primary management functions of dhs .

originally envisioned as a skeleton staff , the headquarters and management functions have grown in response to criticism of the department's ability to effectively oversee its own activities .

in debates over departmental funding , questioning the size and effectiveness of the department's management cadre is a common theme .

in fy2003 , the first year of dhs operations , $195 million was provided for management accounts .

in fy2012 , those accounts were funded at $803 million .

this growth is due to several factors , including increases in staff size required to perform oversight functions , rising personnel costs , technology investments , and increasing real estate expenses for the department's headquarters offices .

in recent years , these accounts have been requested at higher levels than might otherwise be expected due to the inclusion of significant capital initiatives , such as headquarters consolidation and data center migration in these accounts , and personnel initiatives aimed at boosting the department's cadre of acquisition oversight staff and reducing the number of contractors in sensitive positions .

pre - sequester , these accounts received $643 million in fy2013 .

the administration requested funding for the management accounts for fy2014 at $651 million , not including $106 million for headquarters consolidation or $54 million for data center consolidation .

house and senate appropriations committees recommended $526 million and $633 million , respectively , for the management accounts with similar exclusions .

house amendments reduced the funding in the bill by $51 million from the committee's recommendation , and $176 million below the administration's requested level .

natalie m. keegan , analyst in american federalism and emergency management policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) , and [author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) from its inception , dhs has faced financial management challenges .

transferring components and their budgets between agencies is a complex process in the best of situations , but doing it in the process of establishing a new department that is performing important national security missions from its first day of operations adds additional complexity .

this was further compounded by inherited financial management problems that existed at several major legacy components , including the coast guard , fema , and elements that formed ice .

the department tried to develop its own financial management system in - house through a project known as "emerge2," but failed .

a second attempt was made to implement a department - wide system through contracting with outside developers under the transformation and systems consolidation initiative , or tasc .

after gao ruled that dhs had improperly awarded the initial $450 million contract — the latest result from a series of protests and legal challenges that had delayed the project — the award was cancelled and the project shelved .

although the department has been on the gao high risk list since it was created , progress has been made on reducing the number of material weaknesses in the department's financial controls .

fy2012 was the first year since its establishment that dhs was able to complete an audit of all its financial statements .

kmpg , the independent auditor , said that dhs was unable to represent that property , plant , and equipment ( pp&e ) balances were correct in its financial statements or provide adequate evidence to support the balances included .

nevertheless , the dhs oig considers even a qualified audit "a significant milestone. .

the independent auditor noted five deficiencies in internal controls that were significant enough to be considered material weaknesses: financial reporting ; information technology controls and financial system functionality ; property , plant and equipment ; environmental and other liabilities ; and budgetary accounting .

while all five of these material weaknesses persisted from fy2011 to fy2012 , the dhs oig noted significant progress with the coast guard's ability to account for its pp&e — an important step , as the coast guard has roughly half of dhs's pp&e .

gao noted the following in its audit of the government's fy2011 and fy2012 consolidated financial statements: it is important that dhs continue to remediate its internal control deficiencies and build on the progress it has made as it moves forward to achieve its ultimate goal of obtaining clean audit opinions on its fiscal year 2013 financial statements and on its internal control over financial reporting .

the 113 th congress will likely continue its interest in dhs's efforts to improve its internal financial systems , given the relative size of the department's budget , the interest expressed in this issue by authorizing committee leadership , and the current drive for stricter budgetary oversight .

these issues could be examined at the department , component , or program level .

oversight might include a review of the internal financial and administrative controls in the administration of specific grant programs , and improper payments made under the programs .

consideration of the internal financial and management controls might include the extent to which dhs is complying with existing control standards , penalties for noncompliance , and whether the standards should be adjusted to account for any unique elements in the dhs programs .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for additional information , see crs report r42753 , dhs headquarters consolidation project: issues for congress .

the department of homeland security's headquarters footprint occupies more than 7 million square feet of office space in about 50 separate locations in the greater washington , dc , area .

this is largely a legacy of how the department was assembled in a short period of time from 22 separate federal agencies which were themselves spread across the national capital region .

the fragmentation of headquarters is cited by the department as a major contributor to inefficiencies , including time lost shuttling staff between headquarters elements ; additional security , real estate , and administrative costs ; and reduced cohesion among the components that make up the department .

to unify the department's headquarters functions , the department approved a $3.4 billion master plan to create a new dhs headquarters on the grounds of st. elizabeth's in anacostia .

according to gsa , this is the largest federal office construction since the pentagon was built during world war ii .

$1.4 billion of this project was to be funded through the dhs budget , and $2 billion through the gsa .

thus far $460 million has been appropriated to dhs for the project and $908 million to gsa through fy2013 .

phase 1a of the project — a new coast guard headquarters facility — has been completed with the funding already provided by congress and is now in use .

in 2013 , a revised construction schedule was developed , projecting lower levels of appropriations and a longer timeline for the project .

under the new projection , the project would be completed in fy2026 at a cost $4.5 billion .

according to gsa , even with the cost increases from delaying funding , the project would still result in over $530 million in projected savings compared to leasing over the next 30 years .

this estimate does not take into account the costs gsa would have to incur to stabilize and maintain the st. elizabeths campus if the project were halted , or the efficiencies for dhs that a consolidate headquarters would generate .

with headquarters consolidation remaining a priority for the administration , the coast guard moving into its new facility on the campus , and current budgetary constraints altering both the growth projections that were the basis for dhs's consolidation plans and the prospects for funding in coming fiscal years , legislative action in the 113 th congress could help clarify the future for this project .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

for more information , see the section on departmental management in crs report r43147 , department of homeland security: fy2014 appropriations .

an essential consideration underlying the mission and performance of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is human resource management ( hrm ) .

responsibility for hrm is vested in the office of the chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , an entity organizationally and for appropriations purposes located within the under secretary for management .

the ochco plays a critical role in supporting and executing the department's "strategic plan for fiscal years 2012-2016. .

the current chief human capital officer assumed the position on august 4 , 2011 , and with the change in the appointment from political to career status , is the first career member of the senior executive service to hold the office .

during the 113 th congress , the house of representatives and the senate may conduct oversight of personnel issues at the department .

among the issues that have persisted since the establishment of dhs are those related to the recruitment and hiring of highly qualified candidates , diversity of the workforce , and employee morale .

current initiatives in each of these areas are discussed below .

dhs has struggled to develop and maintain a highly skilled workforce in a number of areas , including cybersecurity .

in a report published in fall 2012 , the cyberskills task force of the homeland security advisory council recommended that the department build a team of employees , numbering some 600 , with cybersecurity skills that are critical to the dhs mission .

the task force also recommended that a pilot dhs cyber reserve program be established to make certain that "dhs cyber alumni and other talented cybersecurity experts outside of government are known and available to dhs in times of need. .

the secretary of homeland security accepted the task force recommendations .

in an opinion piece published in april 2013 , she said that the department is: "creating and implementing standards of performance through a professional certification system," "creating a standardized and comprehensive training and development program to grow and retain our existing cybersecurity workforce," "establishing a dynamic cyber surge capacity force composed of certified cybersecurity professionals with critical skills in the private sector , who will be readily available for rapid support and deployment," and "extending the scope of cyber education beyond the federal workplace ... to include the public , as well as students from kindergarten through post - graduate school. .

dhs has requested legislative authority that would permit it to expedite the hiring process for and provide higher rates of compensation to cyber - skilled employees .

currently pending in the 113 th congress is legislation that would authorize the department to establish cybersecurity positions in the excepted service , directly appoint candidates to positions , and provide compensation and benefits beyond what title 5 , united states code would authorize .

in the absence of legislative action , dhs has launched a number of initiatives to help develop the workforce it needs , including in cybersecurity .

on october 24 , 2012 , the homeland security secretary announced the establishment of a secretary's honors program ( shp ) "to recruit exceptional recent graduates for careers" in dhs .

under the program , individuals with relevant graduate , undergraduate , or law degrees may apply for one - year or two - year fellowships in information technology , cybersecurity , policy , management , emergency management , and law .

individuals selected for the program will participate in rotations throughout dhs , be mentored , receive training , and participate in programs for professional development .

upon successful completion of the program , participants may be converted to permanent employees within the department .

on february 22 , 2013 , dhs launched the national initiative for cybersecurity careers and studies ( niccs ) , an online resource for cybersecurity career , education , and training information .

the initiative was developed through the close partnership of dhs , the national institute of standards and technology , the office of the director of national intelligence , the department of defense , the department of education , the national science foundation , and the office of personnel management .

it combines government , industry , and academia efforts to "provide a comprehensive , single resource to address the nation's cybersecurity knowledge needs. .

in april 2013 , the department began the shp cyber student initiative , "to engage exceptional community college students" in working at a u.s. immigration and customs enforcement's ( ice's ) , homeland security investigations ( hsi ) forensics lab .

the initiative offers "unpaid student volunteer positions to current two - year community college students and student veterans pursuing a program of study in a cybersecurity - related field. .

the department's strategic plan stated an objective of "pursu[ing] greater diversity in the workforce , especially at senior levels. .

other than specifying that a senior - level steering committee , chaired by the deputy secretary of dhs , will "direct a sustained effort to improve diversity," the plan did not provide any details on the initiative .

data reported by the office of personnel management ( opm ) provide some insight on the department's workforce characteristics .

as of march 2013 ( most current data available ) the on - board civilian workforce at dhs numbered 196,799 .

of this total , 82,468 , or 41.9% , were classified as minority .

among ethnicity and racial groups represented in the department's workforce were american indian or alaskan native ( 1,306 , or 0.7% of the total ) , asian ( 8,947 , or 4.5% of the total ) , black / african american ( 29,467 , or almost 15.0% of the total ) , native hawaiian / pacific islander ( 871 , or 0.4% of the total ) , and hispanic / latino ( 23,901 , or 12.1% of the total ) .

opm also reported that dhs had 24 employees on the senior - level ( sl ) pay schedule , and 610 employees on the senior executive service ( ses ) pay schedule .

none of the sl employees were classified as minority .

the ses total included 122 , or 20% minority , of which none were american indian or alaskan native , or native hawaiian / pacific islander ; 13 , or 2.1% , were asian ; 59 , or 9.7% , were black / african american ; and 29 , or 4.7% , were hispanic / latino .

women employed by dhs numbered 65,147 , or 33% of the department's workforce total .

 ( opm's database does not provide data on gender by ethnicity and race. ) .

six women were paid on the sl pay schedule ( 25% of the sl total ) and 173 ( 28.4% of the ses total ) are paid on the ses pay schedule .

the strategic plan stated that dhs would institute an exit survey department - wide to provide information on employee attrition and its impact on the diversity of the workforce , but information on the department's procedures are not publicly available .

the dhs website lists several reports related to diversity in the department .

in june 2013 , the secretary stated that the department had prepared its first diversity and inclusion strategic plan , but further information about the plan was not provided .

testifying before a march 22 , 2012 , hearing conducted by the subcommittee on oversight , investigations , and management of the house committee on homeland security , the department's chco , catherine emerson , stated that a concerted effort , characterized by "improved employee communication , training , emphasis on diversity and inclusion , and employee recognition," and strengthened leadership by managers and supervisors , was underway to improve morale among dhs employees .

particular steps to carry out the initiative were not provided .

results from the annual federal employee viewpoint survey conducted by opm have consistently found low morale at dhs .

the most recent survey results , released by opm on november 21 , 2012 , again reported a decline in the department's ratings .

in the ranking of agencies represented in the survey , according to four key indices , dhs placed low , and even lower than its relative positions in the 2011 survey .

specifically , the department's ranks ( out of 37 agencies ) and overall scores for the 2012 survey , as compared with the 2011 survey , were as follows: leadership and knowledge management — 36 / 52 ( 33 / 55 in 2011 ) , results - oriented performance culture — 36 / 46 ( 35 / 48 in 2011 ) , talent management — 35 / 50 ( 33 / 53 in 2011 ) , and job satisfaction — 35 / 61 ( 33 / 64 in 2011 ) .

a may 2013 report from the partnership for public service that was based on the results of the employee viewpoint survey ranked dhs in last place among seventeen other large agencies in terms of innovation .

the report gave the department an innovation score of 52.7% , a decline of - 2.6% over the previous year .

among the 292 agency subcomponents that were ranked in the report , the united states coast guard was the highest placed dhs component with a rank of 74 and an innovation score of 67.2% , an increase of 0.8% over the previous year .

congress could mandate that the department of homeland security provide periodic updates , during hearings on the budget request and other matters , on the progress of its initiatives to address each of these issues .

for example , the house committee on appropriations , in its report accompanying the fy2014 department of homeland security appropriations bill , directed the department to report to the relevant committees of jurisdiction on a corrective action plan to address concerns about morale and innovation .

in addition , review and evaluation of the ochco by congress on a regular basis throughout the year could continue to inform legislative oversight of current and developing hrm policies at dhs .

the chief human capital officer also could be directed to provide detailed information on the ochco webpage that would be updated at designated intervals and include copies of specific plans ( such as the diversity and inclusion strategic plan ) to fulfill the department's hrm initiatives ( such as those related to the recruitment and hiring , diversity , and employee morale issues ) and advances in accomplishing them .

for oversight purposes , congress may be interested in examining the department's procedures for exit interviews , the findings of the interviews , and any procedures established by dhs to consider the results .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) the department of homeland security ranked sixth among federal agencies in procurement spending in fy2012 .

in constant dollars ( 2012 ) , dhs spent $4.8 billion in fy2003 and $12.4 billion in fy2012 .

during this same time period , government - wide procurement spending increased from $381.7 billion ( 2012 constant dollars ) to $514.4 billion .

as the services acquisition reform act ( sara ) panel noted in its 2007 report , the federal acquisition workforce has "shortcomings in terms of size , skills , and experience," and dhs is no exception .

in 2008 , gao reported that the department did not have "adequate staff to effectively plan and execute contracts. .

in the same report , gao acknowledged that "dhs's initiatives are positive steps toward building an effective acquisition workforce," but also noted that the department needs to engage in long - term strategic workforce planning .

potentially positive steps include the department's development and implementation of a procurement staffing model and a strategic plan for its acquisition function , which includes several acquisition workforce initiatives .

dhs reported in june 2012 that it was implementing the staffing model , which was designed to provide "optimal numbers" of personnel needed to award and administer contracts .

additionally , the chief procurement officer's ( cpo's ) strategic plan for fy2012-fy2014 includes the following acquisition workforce initiatives: "continue [the] acquisition professional career program ... improve [the] quality of [the] contracting workforce ... and promote employee retention. .

responsible officials and performance metrics are identified for each initiative .

in early 2009 , dhs announced that , as part of its efficiency review , department components would examine how to achieve a proper balance between federal employees and contractor employees .

the strategy has three goals: complying with applicable statutes , regulations , and policies , through a repeatable , documented decision - making process ; determining the proper balance of federal and contractor employees for programs and functions ; and reducing mission risk , while as practicable , reducing or controlling cost .

the department's bws process involves identifying and analyzing the work ( eg , the statement of work ( sow ) included in a service contract ) , and implementing the sourcing decision that results from the analysis .

the department's balanced workforce program management office , and an affiliated departmental working group , lead the effort and provide oversight .

the topics discussed here suggest several questions that may be of interest to the 113 rd congress .

regarding the department's acquisition workforce , does the department have sufficient funding to recruit and retain the "optimal numbers" of acquisition staff it needs to conduct procurements properly ? .

what acquisition tasks , activities , and contracts are most likely to be affected by the lack of a fully staffed and trained acquisition workforce ? .

under its balanced workforce strategy , has dhs discovered contractor employees performing inherently governmental functions ? .

has the department identified any situations where it had ceded control over its mission and operations to contractor employees ? .

how many contractors , and which contracts , might be affected by the agency's efforts to achieve a balanced workforce ? .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for more information , see crs report r43064 , the dhs s&t directorate: selected issues for congress .

many stakeholders have identified advances in research and development ( r&d ) as key to creating new or improved technologies that defend against homeland security threats .

r&d is generally a multi - year endeavor with significant risk of failure .

additionally , it may take years to realize any benefits from r&d investments .

the administration and congress have differing visions regarding successful r&d performance in dhs , as indicated by marked differences in requested and appropriated funding .

in addition , some congressional and stakeholder expectations regarding the effectiveness and efficiency of agency performance have not been met .

the 113 th congress may continue to focus attention on whether investments in homeland security research and development net appropriate rewards , how the distribution of investments among homeland security topics and between r&d activities leads to a balanced portfolio , and what the appropriate funding level for dhs r&d is during a time of fiscal constraint .

the dhs homeland security r&d activities have substantial scope , as these activities must attempt to meet the needs of both dhs component agencies and other customers outside of the agency , such as first responders .

many stakeholders continue to debate the optimal approach to maximizing dhs r&d effectiveness .

some advocates call for substantial increases in particular areas of research and development , citing that a dedicated research effort with significant investments is more likely to yield technology breakthroughs .

some stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio with an increased focus on technology development , arguing that many prototypes under development in the private sector need only a small boost to convert them to procurable technologies .

still other stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio towards long - term research activities , warning that dhs will lack research outcomes to develop into prototypes if long - term research languishes .

finally , portions of the stakeholder community suggest using a high - risk , high - reward investment strategy similar to that undertaken by the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) so as to make "leap - ahead" advances relative to terrorist capabilities .

dhs is not the sole provider of federal funds for homeland security r&d , but the dhs under secretary for science and technology ( s&t ) is responsible for coordinating homeland security r&d activities within dhs and across the federal government .

the dhs under secretary for s&t has experienced challenges in attempting to coordinate these activities and has not issued a federal homeland security r&d strategy .

the gao has identified that dhs lacks an established definition for what constitutes r&d within the agency .

this may be a key barrier to coordination of r&d investment within dhs and across the broader federal effort .

congress has historically been interested in identifying and overcoming the barriers to such coordination .

the 113 th congress may conduct oversight of how any new strategic approaches taken by dhs address these long - standing concerns , set milestones for future performance , and project meeting the needs of dhs components and the first - responder community .

both the administration and congress have contemplated reorganizing dhs r&d activities .

for both fy2011 and fy2012 , dhs requested that congress transfer some research and development activities within the purview of the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) to the s&t directorate .

congress did not approve this transfer .

in contrast , the senate explanatory statement accompanying p.l .

113-6 directed dhs to consider the advantages of merging the office of health affairs and dndo , potentially transferring portions of these offices to other dhs components .

the results of the proposed merger , r&d reprioritization efforts , and consolidation might change the productivity of dhs r&d activities , which have been criticized by some stakeholders as having little to show for the federal investment .

other stakeholders , including some representatives of dhs operational components , indicate that r&d efforts undertaken by the s&t directorate have yielded value .

congressional appropriations for the s&t directorate have fluctuated in recent years .

this may indicate that some congressional policy makers find the slow rate of return shown by s&t directorate r&d investments unacceptable .

