during the past several decades , the united states has had a mixed relationship with the united nations educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) .

most recently , decisions by some unesco member states have led to increased congressional interest in u.s. funding of and participation in the organization .

established in 1946 in the aftermath of world war ii , unesco aims to contribute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among member states in the fields of education , science , and culture .

the organization , which has a specialized agency relationship with the united nations , is headquartered in paris , france , and composed of 195 member states .

with an annual budget of about $326 million , its programs and activities encompass a wide array of issues , including literacy , media and internet freedom , ocean management , and environmental and cultural preservation , among others .

the united states played a key role in unesco's establishment and has generally supported the overall objectives of the organization .

at the same time , u.s. policy makers — particularly some members of congress — have expressed concern with unesco's apparent politicization , lack of budget discipline , and perceived leanings toward anti - democratic countries .

these concerns led to the united states' withdrawal from unesco in 1984 .

since the united states rejoined the organization in 2003 , congress has demonstrated support for unesco — appropriating about $618.6 million in regular budget contributions and $9.5 million in voluntary contributions from fy2004 through fy2011 .

in october 2011 , unesco garnered significant attention from u.s. policy makers when a majority of member countries decided to admit "palestine" as a member .

 ( the decision to pursue unesco membership was part of a broader , ongoing effort by palestine liberation organization chairman and palestinian authority president mahmoud abbas to achieve membership or non - member observer state status in various u.n. bodies as a means for achieving recognition of palestinian statehood. ) .

as a result of this decision , the united states withheld its contributions to unesco in accordance with two laws enacted in the 1990s that prohibit funding to u.n. entities that admit the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) as a member ( p.l .

101-246 ) , or grant full membership as a state to any organization or group that does not have the internationally recognized attributes of statehood ( p.l .

103-236 ) .

from fy2012 through fy2014 , the united states withheld nearly $80 million per year , or 22% of the unesco annual regular budget .

the obama administration actively opposes palestinian membership in unesco .

it argues that palestinian statehood can only be realized through direct negotiation between israel and the palestinians , and not through membership in international organizations .

at the same time , the administration maintains that u.s. participation in unesco is in the interest of the united states and that the government should continue to fund and participate in the organization .

in his fy2013 and fy2014 budget proposals , president obama requested nearly $80 million in assessed contributions for unesco , and stated that the administration intended to work with congress to "waive" the funding restrictions .

in both fy2013 and fy2014 , congress did not enact a waiver .

critics argued that waiving the laws would undermine u.s. credibility and encourage the palestinians to continue to pursue membership in other u.n. entities .

as the debate over u.s. funding of and participation in unesco moves forward , congress may consider a number of issues , including unesco's role , if any , in u.s. foreign policy , as well as the organization's overall effectiveness and reform efforts .

it may also consider the long - and short - term implications , both positive and negative , of withholding funding to unesco .

more broadly , policy makers might consider the efficacy of laws restricting funding for u.n. entities that admit palestine as a member .

a particularly pressing question moving forward is how , if at all , the united states will engage with unesco given its ongoing financial withholding and loss of voting rights in the general conference .

unesco programs and activities encompass five sectors — education , natural sciences , social and human sciences , culture , and communication and information .

the organization sponsors international exchanges and meetings in science , education , and other fields ; promotes the free flow of ideas , including media freedom ; encourages the conservation of books , monuments , and works of art ; and assists member states in developing educational , scientific , and cultural programs .

it also provides a mechanism for the drafting , adoption , and review of several international conventions and commissions , including the convention concerning the protection of the world cultural and natural heritage ( often referred to as the world heritage convention ) , the intergovernmental oceanographic commission ( ioc ) , and the convention against discrimination in education .

more than 2,000 personnel from 170 countries work for unesco ; approximately 850 staff work in the organization's 65 field offices and institutes worldwide .

unesco's governing structure consists of three key mechanisms , described as follows .

the general conference ( gc ) , composed of representatives from all member countries , is unesco's primary decision - making body .

it meets every two years to determine the organization's policies , programs , and budget .

with a few exceptions , gc decisions on important questions are made by consensus ; consequently , approved resolutions are often not very specific , even those addressing budgetary issues .

the executive board , composed of 58 member state representatives , meets twice a year and is responsible for implementing the program adopted by the gc .

members are elected to the board by the gc for a four - year term .

the united states is currently a member of the board ; its term will expire in 2015 .

the director - general ( dg ) , currently irina bokova of bulgaria , heads the unesco secretariat .

the dg is appointed to a four - year term by the gc on the recommendation of the executive board .

she is charged with preparing the unesco program and budget , making proposals to the gc , creating the organizational structures of the secretariat , and appointing staff .

the dg can also play a key role in negotiations regarding budgets , resolutions , and programs .

the executive board and gc include various committees composed of member countries that consider issues related to the functioning of the organization or specific issues related to education , science , or culture .

unesco maintains relationships with non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , foundations , the private sector , and intergovernmental organizations ( igos ) .

more than 350 ngos and 20 foundations have an official relationship with unesco , and many more work with the organization on specific activities and programs at the local , national , and international level .

unesco also works with several hundred private companies and organizations through traditional philanthropic and sponsorship relationships , as well as strategic partnerships developed through shared resources and expertise .

in addition , it collaborates with more than 80 igos , including the european union ( eu ) and various multilateral development banks , on specific programs and projects through formal agreements or ad hoc arrangements .

unesco also partners and coordinates with other parts of the u.n. system through various system - wide coordination mechanisms and memoranda of understanding with other u.n. entities .

unesco's relationships with other organizations are strengthened by national commissions established by member governments in their respective countries .

the commissions aim to provide links among unesco and ngos , the private sector , local and national governments , and the public in each country .

commission members , who are appointed by governments , provide insight on unesco programs , and help implement training programs , studies , public awareness campaigns , and media outreach .

there are currently 199 national commissions worldwide , including one in the united states .

unesco activities are funded through a combination of assessed contributions by member states to the regular budget ; voluntary contributions by member states , organizations , and others to special programs ; and funds provided by partners such as other u.n. entities , ngos , and the private sector .

the u.s. share of unesco's regular budget is 22% , the largest among contributing members .

four countries — the united states , japan ( assessed at 15% ) , germany ( 8% ) , and france ( 6% ) — account for more than 50% of the assessed budget .

unesco's recent budget and cash flow have been significantly affected by member countries' october 2011 decision to admit palestine as a member .

as a result of palestine's membership , the united states began to withhold its contributions to unesco in fy2012 .

two laws enacted in the 1990s prohibit funding to u.n. entities that admit the plo as a member ( p.l .

101-246 ) , or that grant full membership as a state to any organization or group that does not have the internationally recognized attributes of statehood ( p.l .

103-236 ) .

the unesco budget for 2010-2011 was $653 million , or about $326.5 million annually .

the start of u.s. suspension of contributions , however , left unesco with immediate shortfall of $72 million by the end of 2011 .

funding for the 2012-2013 budget , which was originally $653 million , was also affected by the u.s. withholding .

it was decreased to $465 million , or about $232.5 annually — representing a $188 million ( or 29% ) funding reduction .

to cover these budget shortfalls , director - general bokova has introduced a number of initiatives and funding reductions , including: launching an emergency multi - donor fund for unesco priority programs and reform initiatives , which accepts financial contributions from countries , institutions , and individuals to cover the gaps left by u.s. withholdings ( as of late 2013 , the fund had received $75.1 million ) ; cutting staff mission travel costs by 73% , reducing consultant costs by 70% , and decreasing furniture and equipment costs by 64% ; and abolishing over 40 staff posts ( of the 1,854 staff posts funded under the regular budget , 311 remained vacant as of december 2012 , the last date for which information is available ) .

in a september 2013 address to the executive board , dg bokova stated that because of the aforementioned actions , unesco has "sustained the impact of the financial crisis [of the u.s. withholding]" and "balanced the books. .

at the same time , she argued that the new fiscal environment does not provide unesco with the resources to fulfill its broad mission .

bokova has also stated that fundraising efforts such as the multi - donor fund are not long - term solutions to the funding gaps .

many u.s. policy makers generally support unesco's aim of promoting international collaboration in the fields of education , science , and communication .

at the same time , some are concerned that the organization is not fulfilling its mission as efficiently or effectively as possible .

this section describes concerns expressed by unesco critics , including some members of congress , regarding the organization's alleged politicization and organizational and cultural weaknesses .

it also describes unesco's efforts to address some of these issues through internal evaluations and reform .

the united states was one of the original members of unesco and has generally supported the organization's overall objectives .

at the same time , u.s. policy makers , including some members of congress , have been critical of the organization , leading to the united states' nearly 20-year withdrawal in 1984 , followed by its subsequent decision to rejoin in 2003 .

 ( see text box for more details. ) .

the united states engages with unesco through the u.s. mission to unesco , which is located in paris , france , and headed by a u.s .

permanent representative .

mission staff , along with temporary staff from u.s. agencies and departments , work with other national delegations and subject - area experts to further u.s. policy priorities in unesco .

such priorities include combating illiteracy , improving water resource management , monitoring climate change , enhancing tsunami early warning systems , preserving world heritage sites , and promoting free media worldwide .

the united states also engages with and supports the u.s. national commission to unesco , which includes experts from non - governmental , federal , state , and local government sectors .

the controversy over palestinian membership and the broader political climate of fiscal austerity may prompt some policy makers to take stock of u.s. participation in and funding of unesco .

this section discusses selected issues that the 113 th congress may wish to consider .

the current and future role of unesco as an instrument of u.s. foreign policy remains unclear , and any number of events may influence u.s. actions toward the organization .

prospects for u.s. funding of unesco might be viewed in the broader context of fiscal austerity debates .

specifically , some policy makers might be less likely to pursue or advocate u.s. funding of or participation in unesco in the current economic climate .

the level and extent of unesco's response to the u.s. withholding may also influence u.s. policy toward the organization .

if unesco were to implement substantive reform , streamline its budget and programs , or rescind palestine's membership , lawmakers might be more likely to consider restoring u.s. funding for the organization .

one of the foremost issues policy makers may face is how , if at all , the united states will engage with the organization given the ongoing financial withholding and loss of a vote in the general conference .

the united states remains a member of the executive board ; however , its term will expire in 2015 .

many policy makers worry that the united states will lose its influence in the organization while continuing to accumulate arrearages .

some observers have suggested that the united states withdraw from the organization as it did in 1984 , while others — including the obama administration — maintain that the united states should remain engaged with the organization to the extent that it can .

