over the past decade , global health has become a priority in u.s. foreign policy , and u.s. appropriations for global health - related efforts have more than tripled .

neglected tropical diseases ( ntds ) have become an important part of these efforts .

congressional appropriations for ntds have grown from $15 million in fy2006 to $100 million in fy2014 .

the administration requested $86.5 million to support ntd programs in fy2015 .

heightened congressional interest in combating ntds has been reflected not only in higher appropriation levels but also in the development of caucuses on these issues .

in october 2009 , the house malaria caucus expanded its purview to include ntds , and in september 2012 , the senate malaria caucus did the same .

tropical diseases encompass all diseases that occur solely , or principally , in the tropics .

of these , the world health organization ( who ) describes 17 as "neglected," since resources for curing , controlling , and researching improved treatments for these were limited until recently .

the 17 ntds are found mostly among the poorest people in 149 countries and territories ( figure 1 ) , primarily where access to clean water , sanitation , and health services is limited .

some ntds are transmitted by people ; others are spread by vectors like snails , flies , or mosquitoes ; and several others proliferate in soil or water .

among the 17 ntds , 7 account for roughly 90% of the global ntd burden ( table 1 ) .

these are the three soil - transmitted helminths ( intestinal worms ) , schistosomiasis ( snail fever ) , lymphatic filariasis ( elephantiasis ) , trachoma , and onchocerciasis ( river blindness ) .

intestinal worms , or sth , account for roughly 80% of the seven most common ntds ( figure 2 ) .

since who coined the phrase "neglected tropical diseases" in 2003 , global efforts to address these ailments have accelerated .

in 2007 , who released the global plan to combat neglected tropical diseases , which outlined several goals and targets to reach by 2015 for global control , elimination , and eradication of ntds ( figure 3 ) .

in 2012 , who released a report , widely known as the roadmap , which highlighted progress in reaching the 2015 goals and established new ones for 2020 .

one year later , it released a report outlining progress in achieving the 2020 goals , as described in the roadmap .

according to the reports , guinea worm disease has been nearly eliminated and was endemic in only four countries by 2012: chad , ethiopia , mali , and south sudan .

nearly 97% of the 542 cases identified in 2012 occurred in south sudan , where instability remains a key threat to eradication .

since the 2012 report was released , who has noted further progress in addressing guinea worm disease , with 148 cases reported in 2013 and only 10 cases reported from january 1 , through april 30 , 2014. who has also since noted progress in other areas .

annual sleeping sickness cases , for example , fell by more than 70% from 1995 through 2012 ( figure 4 ) .

a variety of u.s. - based institutions support global efforts to control ntds .

these institutions include the federal government , pharmaceutical companies , philanthropic organizations , and ngos .

key u.s. government players include the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , national institutes of health ( nih ) , and department of defense ( dod ) .

ngos include groups like the carter center and rti international ; philanthropic organizations include the gates foundation and the sabin vaccine institute ; and private companies include merck , johnson & johnson and pfizer .

while each of these plays an important role in combating ntds , this section focuses exclusively on the usaid - managed ntd program .

the international community has made substantial progress in combating select neglected tropical diseases .

some ntds have been tackled more effectively than others .

guinea worm disease , for example , is on the cusp of eradication and with expanding mass drug administration campaigns , the prevalence of several ntds is declining , particularly in latin america .

despite these advancements , who cautions in the 2020 roadmap that these diseases cannot be banished without expanding global access to clean water and sanitation , improving hygiene practices , strengthening local health capacity ( veterinary as well as human ) , and intensifying case detection and management .

the united states has played an important role in combating ntds and will likely be a central player in global efforts to advance the 2020 ntd goals .

the section below discusses a range of issues u.s. and international organizations may face as they attempt to reach the who 2020 goals , as well as those set by the administration ( see " u.s. efforts to tackle ntds " ) .

some of the discussion includes an analysis of steps the 113 th congress might consider .

transmission of most ntds is facilitated by insufficient access to clean water , sanitation , and hygiene ( wash ) .

an estimated 880 million children are carrying soil - transmitted helminths , for example , which are spread primarily through openly defecating on the ground .

eggs of these intestinal worms , which account for roughly 80% of ntds , can persist in the environment for many years .

experts at the cdc assert that wash should be a central component of any effective and sustainable approach to controlling ntds .

one estimate indicates that improved sanitation and water safety can reduce the prevalence rates of other ntds as well , including schistosomiasis and blinding trachoma .

water and sanitation improvement are particularly important when addressing pathogens that cannot be eliminated by drugs alone , such as sth and schistosomiasis .

several experts urge greater investments in water and sanitation and see attainment of global water and sanitation goals as an important step towards eliminating ntds .

through the millennium development goals ( mdgs ) , the international community sought to halve the share of people without access to clean water and basic sanitation by 2015. who estimated that between 2005 and 2015 , it would cost $72 billion annually to implement and maintain enough water and sanitation schemes to meet global water and sanitation targets , of which $54 billion would need to be spent on maintaining the systems .

in 2010 , members of the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) committed $7.8 billion towards improving global access to clean drinking water and sanitation .

u.s. and global investments in sanitation would need to increase significantly to meet this funding gap .

investments in wash are considered important , as mass drug administration campaigns cannot be used in isolation to eliminate ntds .

the process of combating diseases by combining responses by practitioners across sectors , particularly those related to health , agriculture , water , construction , and waste disposal , is known as integrated vector management .

indeed , the united states was unable to control hookworm ( an sth ) within its own borders until the early 1900s , when an integrated vector management ( ivm ) approach was applied .

documents by the administration maintain the ntd program is part of a complete package of services the united states provides to improve the health of women and children across sectors .

the administration intends , for example , to expand the provision of drugs that treat sth in children within usaid - supported education programs .

similarly , the obama administration underscores the intersection between water and sanitation and categorizes it as a "cross - cutting area" under global health .

nonetheless , in reports to congress on progress towards advancing global health ( through congressional budget justifications , for example ) the administration provides little information about how water and sanitation programs advance global health efforts or how they are integrated within global health projects .

the structure of the fy2013 foreign operations budgetary request suggests some separation between these activities .

requests for water programs are made across a variety of accounts , primarily development assistance ( da ) and economic support fund ( esf ) .

in fy2013 , for example , the administration requested only 12% of water and sanitation funds through the global health programs account and 76% through the da and esf accounts .

these two accounts support a wide range of governance and economic development activities , which do not typically focus on health objectives .

despite the limitations of mass drug administration , the u.s. ntd program focuses almost exclusively on mda .

administration officials recognize the importance of a comprehensive ntd program , but maintain that "the directive from congress was to focus on mass drug administration .

[g]iven the limited resources , [mda] is the most efficient and cost - effective way to control [and] eliminate these diseases. .

the 113 th congress might debate the merits of applying an intersectoral approach to the ntd program .

broadening the u.s. approach may not necessarily entail raising spending , but could involve improving the integration of u.s. health and development programs .

the 113 th congress could , for example , request information on how key leaders at usaid ( eg , the deputy of the global health initiative and the water coordinator ) coordinate their programs .

although pharmaceutical companies have donated sufficient supplies of ntd medicines , more than 60% of those in need of ntd treatment lack access to the drugs .

broader issues associated with weak health systems within endemic countries can affect the delivery of drugs and the effectiveness of ntd programs .

since many endemic countries are largely responsible for disseminating the donated medicines , human resource constraints and supply chain deficiencies inhibit supply of the drugs and leave many without access to treatment .

streamlining and simplifying treatments are becoming increasingly important .

the international community is increasingly integrating treatments and services , particularly for multiple diseases that can be treated with one pill .

lymphatic filariasis and the three most common intestinal worms , for example , can be treated with the same medication .

health providers are partnering with schools to couple lf and sth treatment with school feeding programs .

some are concerned , however , that deworming treatment rates are declining among children who are not yet old enough to attend school ( figure b - 2 ) .

weak veterinary and public health systems limit the ability of several affected countries to enhance ntd programs or maintain them after international support wanes .

many critics of "vertical" or "disease - specific" programs see the poor conditions of health systems in several developing countries as an outcome of the burgeoning investments in vertical disease programs .

one argument is that disease - specific efforts divert investments from the very public health systems that are needed to support vertical programs .

supporters of disease - specific initiatives argue , on the other hand , that such activities facilitate dramatic , measurable progress .

advocates of this approach point to dramatic reductions in recent years of deaths associated with hiv / aids and malaria .

the merits of vertical disease programs have been long debated in the global health community and evidence supports both sides of the debate .

despite support by health analysts and scientists for increasing drug and vaccines for ntds , funding for pharmaceutical r&d is considered by many to be insufficient .

to date , efforts to encourage private development of ntd vaccines and drugs have met tepid responses , due in part to the belief that there is no viable commercial market for these products .

it is widely understood that ntds affect primarily the poorest in developing countries , most of whom lack resources to afford drugs .

without guarantees of cost recovery , drug manufacturers appear reluctant to initiate the lengthy , and potentially costly , discovery process .

estimates indicate that the average time for a drug to reach approval in the united states ranges from 6 to 10 years .

some analysts question whether the prv provides sufficient financial incentives for ntd products .

to date , only two companies have received the voucher , novartis ( for the drug coartem , which treats malaria ) and johnson and johnson ( for the drug sirturo , which treats drug - resistant tb ) .

novartis failed to see any market return on its voucher as it used the voucher for a product whose new drug application failed to win fda approval .

johnson & johnson has not yet used its voucher , which it earned in 2012 .

some market analysts believe that the utility of the voucher will remain uncertain until a prv is sold and has a clear market value .

it remains to be seen whether the prv , on its own , will provide a strong enough incentive to encourage drug development .

for example , in the development of sirturo , johnson and johnson applied for a prv as well as two other fda development incentives .

congressional interest in this issue may focus on the strategic investments that could spur added drug treatments , vaccines , and diagnostic tools .

for example , some might prioritize ntds with serious clinical outcomes that are difficult to treat and manage ( eg , buruli ulcer , chagas disease , human african trypanosomiasis , the leishmaniases , leprosy and yaws ) .

others might focus on diseases that lack any drug treatment , such as dengue , or diseases that affect the greatest number of individuals , such as sth .

vaccines do not exist for ntds except for rabies , and diagnostic measures are limited , so that vaccines could be prioritized .

there is a case for developing diagnostic tools for diseases that are difficult to detect , such as buruli ulcer .

finally , another potential investment could advance promising treatments that are already in development , such as a vaccine for certain filarial infections ( onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis ) .

appendix a. london declaration: table of donor commitments appendix b. map of usaid ntd progra .

