the results of scientific studies are used in making many governmental policy decisions .

while the studies are often published , the data on which they are based may not be , even for federally funded research .

before 1999 , academic and nonprofit performers of such research were permitted but not required to make their data available to the public through provisions of the freedom of information act ( foia , 5 u.s.c .

552 ; see also crs report r41933 , freedom of information act ( foia ) : background and policy options for the 112th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

in october 1998 , a provision in p.l .

105-277 changed that , requiring that such data be made publicly available ( 112 stat .

2681-495 ) .

to implement the new requirement in 1999 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) had to reconcile potentially competing public interests .

on the one hand , the public has an interest in verifying the soundness of the science underlying policy decisions .

that may require open access to data from government - funded research , especially if those data are used in developing federal regulations .

on the other hand , the public has an interest in ensuring that government - funded research is performed efficiently and effectively and that the rights of individuals involved in that research are protected .

requiring foia access to federally funded research could impose additional costs and other burdens on researchers and risk making information about individual research subjects public .

this report provides background on the 1999 revisions to federal policy , a discussion of the impacts of those changes , and an analysis of the issues raised by them .

the first section describes the basis for the legislative provision and how the resulting changes affected access to federally funded research data .

following that is a discussion of agency policies and examples of access , although information available on the impacts of implementation was limited .

the final section discusses issues raised by the changes and their current status .

the disposition of records from federally funded research by academic and nonprofit institutions is governed by omb circular a - 110 , which applies to federal "grants to and agreements with institutions of higher education , hospitals , and other nonprofit organizations. .

it does not apply to grants and agreements with state and local governments , but does apply to subawards to covered organizations , and "[f]ederal agencies may apply [it] to [grants awarded to] commercial organizations , foreign governments , organizations under the jurisdiction of foreign governments , and international organizations. .

omb circulars are "[i]nstructions or information issued by omb to federal agencies [with an]… expected … continuing effect of two years or more. .

omb requires all agencies to observe the provisions of relevant circulars .

both before and after the 1999 revision , circular a - 110 had provisions on retention of and access to records , including data , pertinent to an award: records must be kept for a minimum of three years from the date an awardee submits the final expenditure report , and agencies must request transfer of records with long - term retention value to their custody .

unless required by statute , awarding agencies are prohibited from limiting public access to recipient records unless the agency can demonstrate that such records must be kept confidential and would have been exempted from disclosure by foia if they belonged to the agency .

agencies can also "obtain , reproduce , publish or otherwise use the data first produced under an award," and authorize "others to receive , reproduce , publish , or otherwise use such data for federal purposes. .

the p.l .

105-277 provision , commonly referred to as the shelby amendment , mandated omb to modify circular a - 110 "to require federal agencies to ensure that all data produced under an award will be made available to the public through the procedures established under the freedom of information act. .

pursuant to the changes made to circular a - 110 , if a request is made under foia , agencies will be required to obtain certain types of research data from grantees and provide the requester access to the data , if foia exemptions do not apply .

also , to the extent permitted by foia , the agencies may collect research data in anticipation of public requests for data .

foia and the circular also provide for cost reimbursement via fees charged to persons who request data under foia .

passage of the shelby amendment is rooted in a two - year effort , begun in 1997 in house committee discussions , to make federally funded research data accessible to the public .

a key element contributing to the effort was debate over the scientific basis of environmental protection agency regulations to strengthen national ambient air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter .

in particular , dispute focused on the unavailability of data underlying harvard's "six cities" study , funded by the national institutes of health , that found a link between particulate air pollution and health .

industry groups requested to review the data , but the researchers refused , citing confidentiality agreements with the subjects .

subsequently , a procedure by which an independent group of scientists could review the data was developed , but the law's supporters believed that better access was needed .

the amendment's supporters said that two issues were raised by the epa dispute .

one was the need for transparency — that the public should have access to data that they paid for and that affects policy .

the second related to accountability — that the public , not only peer reviewers or scientists , should have a right to examine the data on which agency regulations are based , since the data or interpretations of it might be incorrect , and regulations can be very expensive to implement and to comply with .

proponents argued that data access is important to ensure that regulations are well - supported scientifically and do not carry an undue burden .

those issues were not new , but they had been relatively quiet since the u.s. supreme court ruled in 1980 that a grantee's data were not agency records within the meaning of foia because the data had not been created or obtained by a federal agency .

the case was forsham v. harris .

the legal issue presented was whether records that were created and retained by nonagencies , but which are in some way affiliated with an agency , may be classified as agency records .

in forsham , the court established the minimum requirements for determining agency record status in the context of records created by nonagencies .

the plaintiffs were a private organization of physicians who had sought to obtain the data underlying the report of a department of health , education , and welfare ( hew ) grantee funded to conduct a study of diabetes treatment regimens .

they alleged that the data they sought were agency records because ( 1 ) they were records of the grantee , which received its funds from a federal agency and was subject to some supervision in the use of those funds ; ( 2 ) the federal agency had authority under its grant agreement to have obtained the data had it chosen to do so ; and ( 3 ) the data formed the basis of the grantee's reports which were relied upon by the agency .

the court found that congress had purposely excluded federal grantees from foia , and held that the private grantee was not an agency subject to foia .

the court also concluded that the required data were not agency records within the meaning of foia because the data had not been created or obtained by a federal agency ; and "foia applies to records which have in fact been obtained and not to records which merely could have been obtained. .

the court suggested that the grantee's data could become agency records if it could be shown that the agency directly controlled the grantee's day - to - day activities .

the legislative history of the shelby amendment is sparse because no hearings were held on it before passage .

the major indication of legislative intent , other than the language in the provision itself and the report language , is from senate floor statements made at the time the senate adopted the amendment .

however , in the 106 th congress , on july 15 , 1999 , the subcommittee on government management , information , and technology of the house committee on government reform held a hearing on h.r .

88 , a bill that would have repealed the amendment .

that hearing provided additional background .

proponents of the amendment cited the costs of compliance with federal regulations coupled with the lack of public review of the data used by agencies in developing regulations .

they also cited concerns about the adequacy of peer and agency review mechanisms to validate scientific data for setting regulations .

opponents cited concerns about possible violation of the privacy of human subjects , risks to confidential proprietary information , misinterpretation of data , inhibitory effects on the research enterprise , and costs of compliance .

research performers funded by federal grants have long been required to provide the agency with grant completion reports and copies of publications resulting from the research .

agencies have also developed policies to encourage researchers to share their data with other researchers .

however , agencies did not traditionally require researchers to provide the data used or collected to the federal agency that sponsored the research .

therefore , those data were not generally available to the public .

those practices are based on principles and policies about governmental support of science .

many of the principles about federal support for science were discussed first in science , the endless frontier , by vannevar bush , a science adviser to presidents franklin roosevelt and harry truman .

that document is considered by many observers to have established the basis of policy for governmental support of , and accountability for , extramural , especially academic , research by grants .

after world war ii , congress initiated large programs to fund scientific research because of its perceived immediate or future value to the nation .

post - world war ii enactments ( creating the national science foundation , the national institutes of health , and so forth ) led to the development of programs of governmental grants for research and for education and training of scientists in u.s. colleges and universities .

scientists were largely given responsibility through the research funding agencies to select research grantees by means of peer and merit review procedures ; many of the responsibilities for administrative and financial accountability for grants research were shifted to universities .

also in the postwar period , additional federal intramural laboratories were established to enable the conduct of applied or mission - relevant research , and private companies began research and development ( r&d ) for the federal government .

in fy2009 about half of the $133 billion in federal funding for r&d was for research .

more than three - quarters of the r&d funds were extramural — provided to nonfederal researchers .

universities were the single largest performer of federally funded research , receiving half of research funds , and industry was the largest performer of development , receiving more than two - thirds of those funds .

in short , congress , "in some instances , made a conscious decision to finance this research in the private sector [that is , in academic institutions , other nonprofit institutions , and industry] , rather than to create an alternative state system of research .

in so doing it has attempted to preserve value peculiar to private systems ... ," including grantee autonomy , while incorporating federal interests .

a legal interpretation of these private interests relevant to grant research was discussed in forsham , including "the values of competitive priority and peer recognition ..." and the preservation of "grantee autonomy. .

the system of federal grants to support scientific research reflects principles that scientists consider important to the conduct of research .

those include scientific peer review of data and findings , replication of research results , use of publications to award credit for discovery and interpretation of data , and protection of the process of scientific inquiry .

especially important to scientists is public discussion of preliminary findings and research data without the potential for interference by political interests that might act to oppose research in progress .

even before passage of the shelby amendment , circular a - 110 allowed agencies to obtain and use the data produced under an award and authorized others to use "such data for federal purposes" ( omb circular a - 110 , 36 ( c ) ) .

however , neither circular a - 110 nor other instruments set overall federal policy about ownership of data produced under grant awards .

in general researchers acted as owners , and agencies permitted them to act as owners , of data in that they retain them and control access to them .

over time , federal agencies developed their own separate policies that generally endorse sharing by the researchers of recorded information following publication of research results , with access limited to other researchers and with adequate safeguards for protection of confidential information relating to human subjects or confidential commercial information .

some agencies allow public access to research data via databases .

several major research funding agencies — such as the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) — encourage or require researchers to share raw data , slides , or physical samples with other researchers , usually , but not in all cases , after publication of research results .

agencies stipulate a variety of time periods for researchers to retain data , ranging from three to seven years ; some require researchers to provide data automatically to other researchers ; others do not .

for instance , the 1994 policy governing the national institutes of health , the federal agency that provides the largest amount of federal research funds ( predominately in the life sciences ) to universities and colleges , required supported researchers "to make results and accomplishments of their activities available to the public," although there was no specific requirement with respect to data per se .

however , nih grantees and contractors were required to make "unique research resources," including physical samples such as specific cell lines and cloned dna , available to other researchers following publication or fulfillment of a contract .

in certain cases researchers are expected to deposit data in data banks to permit efficient access to the scientific community .

in 2003 , nih released a policy on sharing research data , requiring grant applications for amounts over $500,000 to address data sharing .

the final notice states that "nih expects and supports the timely release and sharing of final research data from nih - supported studies for use by other researchers. .

the plan must take into account relevant privacy requirements and other laws and regulations , which require , for example , removal of personally identifiable information .

nih does not require that data be released while the research is in progress , but it must be made available by the time of publication of the main results from the data .

nsf is the second largest federal funder of research at universities and colleges .

it supports research in all areas of science .

from its inception in 1950 until 1989 , nsf had no written policy on data sharing ( except relating to automated data processing ( adp ) , software and large databases , which were written beginning in 1969 ) .

its early policies allowed nongovernmental scientist / grantees to use their own professional procedures and incentives to promote sharing of information .

it expected grantees to share data consonant with the principles of scientific exchange and replication in scientific research .

in 1984 , the nsf national science board adopted a data sharing policy .

in 1989 , the findings of an nsf committee were incorporated into a written data sharing policy that appeared in nsf's grant and management documents .

since the 1990s , nsf grantees have been expected to promptly submit findings for publication , and to "share with other researchers , at no more than incremental cost and within a reasonable time , the primary data , samples , physical collections and other supporting materials created or gathered in the course of [the] work. .

grantees are also "encouraged to share software and inventions. .

one prominent move toward increased public access was a statement of principles from an international group of genomics researchers in 1996 .

it called for freely available public access to all information on the human genome that was produced at research centers performing genome sequencing at large scales .

some nongovernmental science policy groups have also long advocated the disclosure of research data to other researchers after publication if disclosure is balanced by protections for privacy and intellectual property rights .

in 1985 , a report from the national research council states , "data relevant to public policy should be shared as quickly and widely as possible , in time with public release and following appropriate review. .

a 1998 statement of the three academy presidents urged professional societies , academic leaders , and industry to develop clear and workable standards of open communication in scientific research .

presaging the public pressures that would come with the enactment of the shelby amendment , the council on governmental relations ( cogr ) , an association of research universities , issued a paper in 1996 urging senior university officials to develop policies to respond to increasing pressures for public access to data from federally sponsored research .

noting that the tradition of foia exemptions might weaken , it stated , "scientists may not be able to defend their 'rights' in the public's view , unless they can argue convincingly that reasonable limitations of release are actually in the public's interest. .

the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) council , in early 1999 , adopted a resolution stating that "it supports the public disclosure of scientific findings and regulatory decisions , at the appropriate time and with appropriate safeguards.... " aaas requires that authors submitting articles for publication in science make "all data necessary to understand , assess , and extend the conclusions of the manuscript … available to any reader of science , " as well as all computer codes "involved in the creation or analysis of data. .

it also requires that large data sets be deposited in and made available through a repository .

various other professional groups , such as the american sociological association , the american economic association , and other scientific associations , developed policies encouraging or requiring sharing of data cited in articles published in their journals .

in 2009 , the publishers of nature adopted , as a condition of publication , a requirement of authors " to make materials , data and associated protocols promptly available to readers without preconditions. .

a 2009 academy report presented a broad "data access and sharing principle: research data , methods , and other information integral to publicly reported results should be publicly accessible. .

the report goes on to recommend , all researchers should make research data , methods , and other information integral to their publicly reported results publicly accessible in a timely manner to allow verification of published findings and to enable other researchers to build on published results , except in unusual cases in which there are compelling reasons for not releasing data .

in these cases , researchers should explain in a publicly accessible manner why the data are being withheld from release .

it also recommended that each research field have a set of standards for sharing data , developed through a process involving not only researchers and their institutions but other stakeholders , such as sponsors , journals , and public interest organizations .

also in 2009 , a report for the national science and technology council by an interagency working group referred to digital scientific data as "national and global assets" and recommended the development of a structured approach to preservation of and access to such data throughout the life cycle of the data .

it stated that "preservation and access capabilities are critical to the progress of individuals , nations , science , and society. .

the report recommended that agencies develop data policies "to maximize appropriate information access and utility and to provide for rational , cost - efficient data life cycle management. .

the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) required the director of the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , via a working group , to coordinate agency policies "related to the dissemination and long - term stewardship of the results of unclassified research , including digital data and peer - reviewed scholarly publications , supported wholly , or in part , by funding from the federal science agencies" ( sec .

103 ( a ) ) .

the act required a report to congress , which was submitted in march 2012 .

the report summarized results of a request for information soliciting public input on public access to digital data .

responses showed broad support for increasing public access and requiring funding proposals to include data management plans .

the report also stated that most federal agencies did not have policies on public accessibility for "data generated through federal grants , cooperative agreements , and some other types of funding mechanism. .

in a february 2013 memorandum to federal agency heads , the ostp director affirmed the obama administration's commitment "to ensuring that … the direct results of federally funded scientific research are made available to and useful for the public , industry , and the scientific community .

such results include peer - reviewed publications and digital data. .

it requires federal agencies funding more than $100 million in r&d annually to develop and implement plans for increasing public access to data generated after the effective date of the memorandum from unclassified research funded at least in part by federal funds .

foia provides a procedure for any individual to obtain access to information in records held by federal executive agencies .

foia does not require the requester of information to give a reason for the request .

it presumes that the public has a right to information held by government agencies and allows access for any purpose , with the following exemptions ( 5 u.s.c .

552b ) : 1. information that is properly classified to be kept secret in the interests of national defense or foreign policy , 2. information on internal personnel issues , 3. information that is exempted from disclosure by other statutes , 4. trade secrets and commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential , 5. internal agency memos available only by litigation , 6. personnel , medical , or similar files , whose release would constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy , 7. records or information compiled for law enforcement and whose release would compromise impartial adjudication or disclose information about law enforcement processes and related issues , 8. information related to the supervision of financial institutions , and 9. geological and geophysical information and data , including maps , concerning wells .

the law allows , but does not require , the agencies to withhold or redact agency records pursuant to these exemptions .

in many cases , agencies may make discretionary disclosures of exempt information "as a matter of good public policy. .

the exemptions do not include any specific "public interest" provision , and the act "does not authorize withholding of information or limit the availability of records to the public , except as specifically stated. .

also , some observers say that the courts have interpreted the exemptions narrowly , promoting disclosure .

foia also permits agencies to charge requesters for the cost of complying , although agencies do not retain the reimbursements , which go to the treasury .

only direct costs can be reimbursed , and they are limited at most to search , duplication , and review .

lower charges apply to certain classes of requesters , such as educational institutions and the media .

before passage of the shelby amendment , private performers of federally funded research were not required to provide federal agencies with raw data and related information in response to foia requests .

however , if the funding agency obtained the data for "federal purposes," such as to investigate possible scientific misconduct , the data became agency records subject to foia .

in addition , intramural research , performed directly by federal agencies , is accessible to the public , provided that none of the foia exemptions apply .

all states have laws on public access to government information .

some laws provide broader access to information from nongovernmental researchers than the changes to circular a - 110 would allow , but others are more restrictive .

some observers have cited experience with those laws in commenting on the changes .

for instance , georgia's open records law allowed r.j. reynolds tobacco company to try to obtain the data records of a georgia researcher's study showing that children between the ages of 3 and 8 identified the company's cartoon camel and linked it to cigarettes .

the researcher refused to allow the children to be identified and interviewed as the company wanted .

the case involved litigation and a conflict between the university administration and the researcher regarding the applicability of the state law .

subsequently the state passed a law to prohibit invasion of the children's privacy , but the researcher resigned his position and abandoned the line of research he had been pursuing .

some state laws allow the release of specific kinds of scientific research data .

california , massachusetts , and michigan have laws permitting the release of epidemiological data .

the laws vary and some are more restrictive than the changes permitted by the language of shelby amendment .

for example , the california public records act , unlike foia , permits an agency to withhold a record if "on the facts of the particular case the public interest served by not making the record public clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of the record. .

the law also apparently allows researchers to negotiate directly with the requesting party to protect sensitive data .

the shelby amendment required omb to revise circular a - 110 by september 30 , 1999 .

omb published a proposed revision on february 4 , 1999 , and provided a 60-day comment period .

after reviewing more than 9,000 comments , the agency published a second proposed revision on august 11 , 1999 , and provided an additional 30-day comment period .

language in both the draft and final revisions arguably restrict the application of the term data more narrowly than in the shelby amendment , which included "all data produced under an award" ( table 1 ) .

the first version would have applied only to data from research that had been both published and used in the development of policies or rules .

the second was somewhat more restrictive ; it would have applied only to research that is used in the development of regulations , for which notice and comment is required under the administrative procedure act ( 5 u.s.c .

553 , et .

seq. ) .

the final revision was released on september 30 , 1999 , and published in the federal register on october 8 , 1999 .

it was effective on november 8 , 1999 .

it broadened the applicability of the provision from "regulations" to research that has been published and used in "developing an agency action that has the force and effect of law.... " the second proposed revision sought comments on whether the revision should apply only to regulations with impacts of $100 million or more .

the final revision defined the term published as in the second proposed revision , but defined research data slightly more restrictively , replacing the term files with information , to prevent the release of video or audio tapes of research subjects .

the implications of these differences in language are discussed below in the section on issues .

the shelby amendment provides specifically for cost reimbursement via "a reasonable user fee equaling the incremental cost of obtaining the data" "if the agency obtaining the data does so solely at the request of a private party. .

the omb language pertaining to this issue , which did not change through the three versions of the revisions , allows an agency to obtain reimbursement of the "full incremental cost of obtaining the research data," including the costs incurred by "the agency , the recipient [of the research funding] , and applicable subrecipients," provided that the agency obtains the data "solely in response to a foia request. .

the supplementary information attached to the second proposed revision said agencies would be allowed to retain that fee "to reimburse themselves , recipients , and applicable subrecipients , for the costs they incur. .

omb also requested comments on estimates of such incremental costs and on the ways that grant recipients might charge such costs to their awards .

the supplemental information attached to the final revision explained a procedure agencies could use to obtain reimbursements for grantees but contained the same cost - reimbursement provisions as in the first and second proposed revisions .

the final revised circular became effective in november 1999 .

federal agencies that subsequently issued conforming agency regulations allowed the public and interested parties to provide additional comment , as governed by the administrative procedure act .

the use of the freedom of information act to provide access to data from federally funded research has produced arguments for both potential benefits and potential disadvantages .

a frequently cited benefit is that the mechanisms , federal infrastructure , and case law for foia are well - established .

opposition has focused on such issues as timing of access , need for access , the cost of administration , possible inadequacy of the protections provided by foia's exemptions , and potential for abuse .

some have suggested that requests should meet a public interest test before data are released .

while a number of the early concerns expressed about the revision to circular a - 110 do not appear to have materialized , some discussion of the issues raised may be useful , especially in the event that the provision becomes more widely used .

the issues raised by the amendment and the omb revisions to circular a - 110 can be divided into four categories: whether the revision of circular a - 110 has made the desired information available to the public , whether the procedures established adequately protect proprietary information and the privacy of human subjects , what the benefits and costs of fulfilling the provisions are , and how the changes affect the research process .

the shelby amendment was controversial at the time of enactment , but both claims of benefits and concerns about negative impacts do not appear to have materialized .

the broader movement by federal funders , researchers , and other stakeholders toward increased public access to data from federally funded scientific research may have contributed to the apparently low impact of the amendment .

the extent to which the amendment's enactment influenced that trend could not be determined .

while many of the issues raised , although of historical interest , may seem moot or otherwise resolved at present , a significant increase in foia requests under this provision might revive them in the future .

