the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) has been in effect since january 1 , 1994 .

nafta was signed by president george h. w. bush on december 17 , 1992 , and approved by congress on november 20 , 1993 .

the nafta implementation act was signed into law by president william j. clinton on december 8 , 1993 ( p.l .

103-182 ) .

nafta continues to be of interest to congress because of the importance of canada and mexico as trading partners , and because of the implications nafta has for u.s. trade policy under the administration of president donald j. trump .

during his election campaign , president trump stated his desire to renegotiate nafta and that he would examine the ramifications of withdrawing from the agreement once he entered into office .

he has also raised the possibility of imposing tariffs or a border tax on products from mexico .

this report provides an overview of north american market - opening provisions prior to nafta , provisions of the agreement , economic effects , and policy considerations .

on may 18 , 2017 , the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) sent the 90-day notification to congress of its intent to begin talks with canada and mexico to renegotiate the nafta , as required by the 2015 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) ( p.l .

114-26 ) .

some trade issues that congress may address in regard to nafta , and the prospective renegotiation of the agreement , include the economic effects of withdrawing from the agreement , the impact on relations with canada and mexico , the demands that canada and mexico may bring to the negotiations , and an evaluation of how to "modernize" or renegotiate nafta .

another issue relates to the consequences of the u.s. withdrawal from the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , a proposed free trade agreement among the united states and 11 other countries , including canada and mexico .

some tpp participants support moving forward on a similar agreement without the participation of the united states , which may have implications for u.s. competitiveness in certain markets .

it also has implications for nafta renegotiation as it addressed several new issues not in nafta .

some trade policy experts and economists give credit to nafta and other free trade agreements ( ftas ) for expanding trade and economic linkages between countries , creating more efficient production processes , increasing the availability of lower - priced consumer goods , and improving living standards and working conditions .

others blame ftas for disappointing employment trends , a decline in u.s. wages , and for not having done enough to improve labor standards and environmental conditions abroad .

nafta influenced other ftas that the united states later negotiated and also influenced multilateral negotiations .

nafta initiated a new generation of trade agreements in the western hemisphere and other parts of the world , influencing negotiations in areas such as market access , rules of origin , intellectual property rights , foreign investment , dispute resolution , worker rights , and environmental protection .

the united states currently has 14 ftas with 20 countries .

as with nafta , these trade agreements have often been supported or criticized on similar arguments related to jobs .

the concept of economic integration in north america was not a new one at the time nafta negotiations started .

in 1911 , president william howard taft signed a reciprocal trade agreement with canadian prime minister sir wilfred laurier .

after a bitter election , canadians rejected free trade and ousted prime minister laurier , thereby ending the agreement .

in 1965 , the united states and canada signed the u.s. - canada automotive products agreement that liberalized trade in cars , trucks , tires , and automotive parts between the two countries .

the auto pact was credited as a pioneer in creating an integrated north american automotive sector .

in the case of mexico , the government began implementing reform measures in the mid - 1980s , prior to nafta , to liberalize its economy .

by 1990 , when nafta negotiations began , mexico had already taken significant steps towards liberalizing its protectionist trade regime .

at the time that nafta was implemented , the u.s. - canada fta was already in effect and u.s. tariffs on most mexican goods were low , while mexico had the highest protective trade barriers .

under the agreement , the united states and canada gained greater access to the mexican market , which was the fastest growing major export market for u.s. goods and services at the time .

nafta also opened up the u.s. market to increased imports from mexico and canada , creating one of the largest single markets in the world .

some of the key nafta provisions included tariff and non - tariff trade liberalization , rules of origin , services trade , foreign investment , intellectual property rights protection , government procurement , and dispute resolution .

labor and environmental provisions were included in separate nafta side agreements .

most economists contend that trade liberalization promotes overall economic growth and efficiency among trading partners , although there are short - term adjustment costs .

nafta was unusual in global terms because it was the first time that an fta linked two wealthy , developed countries with a low - income developing country .

for this reason , the agreement received considerable attention by u.s. policymakers , manufacturers , service providers , agriculture producers , labor unions , non - government organizations , and academics .

proponents argued that the agreement would help generate thousands of jobs and reduce income disparity between mexico and its northern neighbors .

opponents warned that the agreement would create huge job losses in the united states as companies moved production to mexico to lower costs .

estimating the economic impact of trade agreements is a daunting task due to a lack of data and important theoretical and practical matters associated with generating results from economic models .

in addition , such estimates provide an incomplete accounting of the total economic effects of trade agreements .

numerous studies suggest that nafta achieved many of the intended trade and economic benefits .

other studies suggest that nafta has come at some cost to u.s. workers .

this has been in keeping with what most economists maintain , that trade liberalization promotes overall economic growth among trading partners , but that there are both winners and losers from adjustments .

not all changes in trade and investment patterns within north america since 1994 can be attributed to nafta because trade has also been affected by a number of factors .

the sharp devaluation of the peso at the end of the 1990s and the associated recession in mexico had considerable effects on trade , as did the rapid growth of the u.s. economy during most of the 1990s and , in later years , the economic slowdown caused by the 2008 financial crisis .

trade - related job gains and losses since nafta may have accelerated trends that were ongoing prior to nafta and may not be totally attributable to the trade agreement .

on may 18 , 2017 , the u.s. trade representative robert lighthizer sent a 90-day notification to congress of the administration's intent to begin talks with canada and mexico to renegotiate the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

as noted above , president trump advocated for the renegotiation of nafta in the 2016 election campaign , or , perhaps , even withdrawing from the agreement itself .

the following is a discussion of the procedural aspects of reopening nafta and the respective roles of the president and congress .

a key issue for the 115 th congress is the direction of u.s. trade policy under the trump administration , especially the prospective renegotiation of nafta .

congress may wish to consider ways in which nafta could be modernized and renegotiated , the congressional role in the prospective renegotiation , the negotiating positions of mexico and canada , and the ramifications of a possible withdrawal from nafta .

congress could also consider new "21 st century" issues addressed in recent u.s. ftas , such as the u.s. - korea free trade agreement and tpp , and whether these could be potential topics of discussion in regard to nafta .

if the united states were to completely withdraw from nafta , it could result in significant disruptions to extensive north american production chains and cause job losses in all three countries .

on the other hand , depending on how the president and congress choose to move forward , there could be opportunities to review the successes of nafta and where it has not met expectations .

many economists and business representatives generally look to maintain the trade relationship with canada and mexico under nafta to improve overall relations and economic integration within the region .

however , labor groups and some consumer - advocacy groups argue that the agreement has resulted in outsourcing and lower wages that have had a negative effect on the u.s. economy .

some proponents and critics of nafta agree that the three countries may wish to look at what the agreement has failed to do as they look to the future of north american trade and economic relations .

policies could include updating or "modernizing" provisions to include commitments in more recent u.s. ftas .

nafta parties have not specifically stated how nafta should be renegotiated , or what changes they may seek if the agreement is amended .

the agreement is more than 20 years old and renegotiation may provide opportunities to address issues not currently covered in nafta .

the following selective topics could be some areas of discussion .

the united states , canada , and mexico may seek to negotiate new rules of origin to address modern developments in auto and auto parts manufacturing or to encourage more production in the north american auto manufacturing industry by raising the rules of origin requirement .

nafta phased out mexico's restrictive auto decree and opened the mexican auto sector to foreign investment from the united states .

it liberalized north american auto trade and was instrumental in the integration of the north american auto industry .

nafta phased out all u.s. tariffs on automotive imports from mexico and mexican tariffs on u.s. and canadian products as long as they met the rules of origin requirements of 62.5% content for autos , light trucks , engines and transmissions ; and 60% for all other vehicles and automotive parts .

the united states has a highly competitive services sector and has made services trade liberalization a priority in its negotiations of ftas , including nafta .

nafta covers core obligations in services trade in a separate chapter , but because of the complexity of the issues , it also covers services trade provisions in several other related chapters , including financial services and telecommunications services .

nafta parties may consider new services commitments , such as those in tpp , including commitments to remove barriers to electronic payment card services , electronic signatures , mobile telecommunications , international roaming rates , and additional market access in areas such as audiovisual services and allowing firms to transmit data across borders .

the role of the internet in international commerce has expanded dramatically since nafta's implementation over 20 years ago .

while technological advancements have fundamentally changed how firms trade and do business across international borders , some companies argue that new barriers have also emerged , which existing trade rules fail to address .

nafta parties could consider discussions on issues related to cross - border transfer of information by electronic means or forced localization of data centers .

such provisions could provide north american firms more flexibility in where they process and store data relevant to their business .

some of these issues were addressed in tpp .

nafta was the first fta to contain an ipr chapter .

the wto trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement that came into effect a year later was modeled after the nafta ipr chapter .

the chapter also predated widespread use of the internet .

since nafta , ipr provisions in u.s. ftas have evolved in several ways and nafta parties may consider expanded provisions .

for example , the tpp included ipr provisions on copyright in the digital environment , additional patent protections for pharmaceuticals , criminal penalties for trade secret theft , provisions for customs agents to have ex officio authority to seize counterfeit and pirated goods , and requirements for countries to provide criminal penalties for copyright and trademark infringement in the digital environment .

nafta includes provisions on state - owned enterprises , but they are limited in scope .

a possible area of renegotiation could include discussions on soes to address issues such as those negotiated in tpp .

these could include addressing potential commercial disadvantages to private sector firms from state - supported competitors receiving preferential treatment .

all three countries may have an interest in revising the nafta investment chapter to reflect more recent agreements .

u.s. ftas , including nafta , and bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) maintain core investor protections reflecting u.s. law , such as obligations for governments to provide investors with non - discriminatory treatment , a minimum standard of treatment , and protections against uncompensated expropriation , among other provisions .

since nafta , investment chapters in ftas and the u.s. model bit have undergone changes in order to clarify certain provisions and generally to affirm a government's right to regulate to pursue environmental , health , or safety outcomes .

investment chapters , especially the investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) provision , have drawn increased scrutiny in recent u.s. ftas .

nafta was the first fta to contain isds , which allows investors to bring arbitration against a host government to binding arbitration to resolve disputes over alleged violations of a host government's investment obligations .

alone among current u.s. ftas , nafta contains a binational dispute settlement mechanism ( chapter 19 ) to review anti - dumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) decisions of a domestic administrative body .

this mechanism was created as a compromise with canada in the cfta , which had sought to eliminate ad / cvd between the two countries .

mexico also supported including the provision during the negotiation of nafta .

however , some u.s. industry groups that have been adversely affected by chapter 19 decisions have sought elimination of the nafta binational review panel provisions .

nafta also created a state - to - state mechanism ( chapter 20 ) to resolve disputes arising from the agreement .

this dispute settlement mechanism has rarely been used , in part because the provisions of nafta substantially overlap with those of the wto , which came into force a year after nafta .

wto dispute settlement has been used extensively — over 500 cases brought — due to perceived advantages including an appellate mechanism and a growing body of precedent .

however , if nafta is revised with provisions not in wto agreements , nafta panels may be used more and their ability to function properly may be examined in any renegotiation .

nafta marked the first time that worker rights provisions were associated with an fta .

the united states may seek to strengthen nafta provisions related to the protection of worker rights .

the tpp , and more recent u.s. trade agreements , such as the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement , include stronger provisions in which parties must adopt , enforce , and not derogate from laws incorporating internationally recognized principles for the protection of worker rights , in a manner affecting trade and investment .

nafta only includes provisions for parties to enforce their own labor laws .

after tpp negotiations were concluded , mexico was reportedly developing labor reforms independent of the tpp to address concerns raised by organized labor .

according to the ustr , mexico had agreed to develop "parallel reforms" to make its labor laws consistent with tpp labor provisions in protecting collective bargaining and reforming its system for administering labor justice .

nafta was the first u.s. fta that included provisions related to the environment .

the united states could seek to hold nafta parties to more enforceable environmental provisions such as those in more recent ftas that require parties to adopt , enforce and not derogate from their environmental laws to attract trade and investment , implement specified meas they have joined , among other provisions .

nafta parties could also seek to increase cooperation to address trans - national threats and police environmental crimes such as endangered species trade and illegal fishing ; and support inclusive and transparent policymaking in the future through rules requiring publication of laws and regulations , and through promoting broad public participation in policymaking .

nafta's provisions on investment include exemptions in the energy sector in mexico in which the mexican government reserved the right to prohibit foreign investment .

the united states may seek greater access to mexico's oil sector or to enhance bilateral cooperation on energy production and security .

in regard to canada , cfta and nafta energy chapters contain a so - called "proportionality" provision .

this provision provides that a domestic restriction on canadian energy exports cannot reduce the proportion of exports delivered to the united states .

the chapter also prohibits pricing discrimination between domestic consumption and exports to the united states .

some canadians maintain that this provision restricts the ability of canada to make energy policy decisions and may seek to change this provision .

given the magnitude and frequency of u.s. trade with nafta partners , changes in the customs procedures on either side of the border could have a significant impact on companies engaged in bilateral trade .

discussions could address customs automation procedures , the creation of a single - access window at one entry point for importers and exporters , automated risk analysis and targeting , expeditious responses to requests for information on quotas or country of origin markings , special customs procedures for express shipments , or publicly available customs laws .

sanitary and phytosanitary standards refer to commitments relating to scientifically - based human health and animal / plant safety in the trade of agriculture products .

nafta parties could consider commitments agreed to under the proposed tpp that went beyond both nafta and world trade organization commitments , such as science - based and transparent regulatory activities , including the use of risk analysis to improve the scientific basis of sps regulation , notifications to importers or exporters of shipments detained for sps issues , or consultative mechanisms to seek quick resolution of such detentions .

mexico has stated that it would consider modernizing nafta , but it is not clear how this would take place .

mexican government officials have alluded that mexico may seek to broaden nafta negotiations to include bilateral or trilateral cooperation on various issues , especially security and immigration .

in january 2017 , tensions developed between the two countries due to concerns about u.s. policies toward mexico and mexican president enrique peña nieto canceled an upcoming meeting with president trump .

president trump has stated that he would seek to impose tariffs on imports from mexico .

mexico responded that it would retaliate "immediately" if the united states increases tariffs on mexican products .

president enrique peña nieto has commented that mexico is willing to discuss nafta but only under the premise that all parties have mutual respect for the national sovereignty of each nation .

his administration has also declared that mexico may consider withdrawing from nafta if negotiations are not favorable to the country , although the priority for the mexican government would be to improve the agreement rather than withdraw from it .

it is possible that a renegotiation of nafta may address trucking provisions .

the implementation of nafta trucking provisions was a major trade issue between the united states and mexico for many years because the united states delayed its trucking commitments under the agreement .

nafta provided mexican commercial trucks full access to four u.s. - border states in 1995 and full access throughout the united states in 2000 .

citing safety concerns , the united states delayed the implementation of these provisions for many years .

the two countries cooperated to resolve the issue over the years and engaged in numerous talks regarding safety and operational issues .

by 2015 , the trucking issue had been resolved .

the international brotherhood of teamsters subsequently filed a lawsuit over the implementation of the trucking provisions and may seek to revise nafta's trucking provisions under a potential renegotiation .

the united states and canada have not specifically stated publicly what they may seek from each other in a potential nafta renegotiation .

some discussions may include dairy , softwood lumber or buy american provisions .

canada administers a restrictive supply management system for dairy , poultry , and eggs , a program that was specifically excluded from nafta and wto commitments .

u.s. dairy producers may seek greater market access into canada .

possible negotiations could also address trade in softwood lumber .

canadian provinces own the majority of the timberlands and administratively set the price of timber through a stumpage fee , a per unit volume fee charged for the right to harvest trees .

u.s. industry asserts that the stumpage fees charged by the canadian provinces are subsidized to promote employment or regional development , rather than based on market forces .

canada denies these practices , and maintains that canada has a comparative advantage in timber production .

another issue relates to buy american policies in the united states .

canada has been dissatisfied with application of these policies in u.s. government procurement .

while canadian firms are able to bid on a wide range of u.s. federal procurements through commitments made by under nafta and the wto government procurement agreement , it has been excluded from "pass - through" procurements — state - tendered contracts using federal funds .

canada maintains that many industries are north american in scope and rely parts and components sourced from both countries .

congress may wish to consider the effect of imposing tariffs on certain goods if nafta is renegotiated .

as stated previously in this report , nafta was instrumental in the development of supply chains throughout north america , especially in the auto industry .

many north american automotive assembly lines and parts makers work together as one integrated production region from cities such as toronto in canada through detroit and into numerous regions of mexico .

labor intensive parts can be manufactured in mexico , where production costs are lower , while more complex parts are made in the united states .

according to some estimates , the entire north american auto industry employs more than 1.5 million people and contributes significantly to the u.s. economy .

tariffs or trade barriers have the potential of disrupting these production chains .

proponents contend that it would bring back a share of global production to the united states .

opponents argue that it could cause thousands of lost jobs in all three countries and benefit countries such as germany and japan as they would move their factories from mexico back to their countries .

the united states , canada , and mexico participated in the negotiations for the proposed tpp among 12 countries in the asia - pacific region .

on january 23 , 2017 , president trump directed the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to withdraw the united states as a signatory to the tpp .

the acting ustr gave notification to that effect on january 30 .

the agreement had not entered into force at the time because it requires ratification by member countries accounting for 85% of the region's gdp .

tpp cannot enter into effect without u.s. participation .

implementing legislation , the vehicle for u.s. ratification , was not submitted by the president for consideration by congress , in part due to the contentious debate over the agreement .

congress may wish to address the implications of president trump's decision to withdraw from tpp and its consequences .

some tpp partners have announced their intention to move forward on a similar agreement without the united states , which may have implications for u.s. competitiveness in certain markets .

canada and mexico have numerous ftas with other countries and may continue to seek to diversify trade through ftas .

mexico's economy minister stated that mexico is willing to negotiate a new agreement with the asia - pacific region that may be similar to tpp and include china in the discussions .

the government of chile also announced that it would continue to pursue trade deals with the asia - pacific region and has invited ministers from other tpp countries , as well as china and south korea , to a summit in chile in march to discuss how to proceed .

numerous countries are expected to attend .

