each year , congress considers appropriations measures that provide funding for various federal government activities .

such measures are commonly referred to as "regular" appropriations bills .

because of the importance of these measures , the standing rules of the house establish special terms for their consideration , including making them privileged for consideration and providing restrictions on the amendment process to which they are subject .

in practice , however , the extent to which these procedures are applicable to a specific regular appropriations bill is often dependent on whether the house chooses to consider it under these standing rules or to adopt alternate procedures for the individual case .

in recent years , the house has typically considered a regular appropriations bill only after first reaching agreement on the procedural terms of its consideration .

since at least the mid - 1990s , the house has provided for consideration of nearly all regular appropriations bills under special rule s , which are simple resolutions reported by house rules committee that set the terms for considering a measure .

during this period , the house has also occasionally initiated consideration under the terms of unanimous consent agreement s ( ucas ) , which have typically resembled special rules in form and effect .

rarely have regular appropriations bills been considered under their status as privileged business .

house rule xiii allows a motion to be made to provide for consideration of a general appropriations bill .

when regular appropriations bills are brought to the floor as privileged business by this method , there are no restrictions on the amendments that may be offered beyond what is provided in the standing rules of the house .

such rules affect both the content and timing of amendments but do not provide significant restrictions on debate or the number of amendments that may be offered .

consequently , the consideration of a regular appropriations bill under its privileged status may be time consuming .

since about the 80 th congress ( 1947-1948 ) , special rules that govern proceedings on regular appropriations bills have generally also allowed any amendments to be offered that would otherwise be in order under house rules .

during the period covered by this report , particularly during the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) , regular appropriations bills have occasionally been considered under special rules that also placed further restrictions on the amending process .

special rules and ucas have also been used frequently to waive house rules that could prevent or delay the consideration of regular appropriations bills as reported by the committee .

these standing rules have included both those that would prevent consideration of the measure itself and those barring certain kinds of provisions it might contain , but the coverage of such waivers has changed over the period studied .

in earlier years , waivers of rules precluding consideration tended to specify those rules waived , but more recent special rules have often contained a blanket waiver .

one of the most frequently waived standing rules barring specific kinds of provisions has been of house rule xxi , clause 2 , which prohibits appropriations not authorized by law and the inclusion of "legislative" provisions .

such waivers may include exceptions for certain portions of the bill , leaving those portions vulnerable to a point of order .

since the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , however , the special rules or ucas initiating consideration have provided a blanket waiver of rule xxi , clause 2 , in almost all instances .

this report examines the terms under which the regular appropriations bills are typically brought up and initially considered on the house floor , as well as the practices of the house with regard to amendment opportunities and waivers , for fy1996 to fy2015 ( 104 th - 114 th congresses ) .

it focuses exclusively on initial consideration of regular appropriations bills and does not address the consideration of conference reports or amendments between the houses .

it also does not address the few instances where an appropriations bill was first considered on the house floor combined with one or more other appropriations bills ( so - called omnibus or minibus bills ) .

similarly , this report does not cover the initial consideration of supplemental appropriations bills or continuing appropriations measures , as such measures tend to be considered under different terms than is typical of regular appropriations bills .

it also does not discuss special rules prior to the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) , as the structure of those rules and the floor consideration of regular appropriations bills differed significantly from current practice .

for example , regular appropriations bills were often brought up using their privileged status in combination with a special rule that waived points of order .

examination of the practices of the house for considering regular appropriations bills shows that consideration was sometimes further structured once it had been initiated through an additional special rule or unanimous consent agreement .

for the purposes of consistency , the data presented in this report for each bill include only the terms under which consideration was initiated .

the practice of further structuring those terms after consideration has begun is discussed below in the report section " limiting debate and amendments . .

this report proceeds in three sections .

the first section provides a general overview of how the consideration of regular appropriations bills has been initiated between fy1996 and fy2015 .

the second section discusses the floor consideration of amendments to regular appropriations bills and the types of amending processes that have been established at the beginning of consideration .

the third section discusses waivers of points of order both against consideration and of rule xxi , clause 2 , and how the form of those waivers has evolved during this period .

for the fy1996 to fy2015 regular appropriations bills , the frequency of each method through which floor consideration was initiated is illustrated in table 1 .

during the earlier part of this period , all of the regular appropriations bills received individual floor consideration in all but one fiscal year .

since the fy2003 appropriations cycle , however , all regular appropriations bills received floor consideration in only four fiscal years , most recently for fy2010 .

over the entire period , special rules were used to initiate consideration of regular appropriations bills in almost all instances .

unanimous consent agreements and consideration as privileged measures were also used on some occasions , in 5 of the 20 fiscal years during this period .

when a regular appropriations bill is considered as a privileged measure , this procedure generally permits consideration of any amendments to the bill that comply with the rules of the house ( called an "open" amending process ) .

providing for consideration by a special rule or uca , however , allows this amending process to be altered .

such alterations can place preconditions on the offering of amendments , directly prescribe the specific amendments that will be in order , waive points of order against amendments , or place time limits on their consideration .

for fy1996 to fy2015 , the means used for consideration of most regular appropriations bills provided for some type of "open" amending process allowing an unrestricted number of amendments to be offered that comply with house rules .

such processes often waived points of order against certain amendments and , less frequently , required that amendments be preprinted in the congressional record in advance of consideration .

an exception to this has been the legislative branch appropriations bill .

on all but one occasion during this period , the means used for initiating consideration of legislative branch bills provided for a "structured" amendment process , which specified a list of amendments that could be offered and waived points of order against those amendments .

structured processes were used for other types of bills on 3 occasions through the 110 th congress , 13 occasions during the 111 th congress , and one occasion during each of the 113 th and 114 th congresses .

a closed process , which allowed no amendments , was used on only one occasion , for consideration of the fy2004 legislative branch appropriations bill .

other practices during this period have included the imposition of time caps on consideration of the bill , sections of the bill , or amendments .

in some cases , the house may choose to structure the amendment process subsequent to initiating consideration , either by unanimous consent or by adopting an additional special rule .

the standing rules of the house place certain restrictions on when a measure is eligible for consideration and what content may be considered .

specifically , house rules may require that a measure be brought to the floor only during certain time periods or after certain conditions have been satisfied .

rules may also restrict the content of measures , so that certain types of matters cannot be considered or must be considered in certain types of legislative vehicles .

these rules are enforced on the floor through points of order and are in effect when consideration of a measure is initiated through privilege , and also ( unless altered ) by a special rule or uca .

the house sometimes chooses to "waive" or set aside its standing rules or restrictions in the congressional budget act of 1974 ( titles i - ix of p.l .

93-344 , 2 u.s.c .

601-688 ) during the consideration of certain measures though a special rule or uca .

this is because these rules could potentially prevent the house from taking up legislation that it wishes to consider or require it to be considered in a less preferable form .

in setting aside these rules , the house can choose to waive only specific rules or broad categories of rules .

the house can also choose to waive rules only for specified provisions in the measure or for the entire measure .

alternatively , waivers of rules can also be framed as covering the entire measure excepting specified provisions , which would consequently remain vulnerable to a point of order .

house rule waivers provided through special rules and ucas prior to initial consideration of regular appropriations bills for fy1996 to fy2015 are illustrated in table 3 and table 4 .

during this period , the practice of providing broad waivers for "points of order against consideration" evolved — from providing no waivers or waivers only for specific rules to providing blanket waivers of all points of order against consideration or blanket waivers with exceptions .

this change in procedural practice , however , does not necessarily reflect changes in the content of the bills .

the practice of providing waivers for rule xxi , clause 2 , with exceptions for specified language in the bill increased during this period until the fy2008 regular appropriations bills .

for the fy2008 to fy2011 bills , only waivers that covered the entire measure were used .

most recently , waivers with specified exceptions were provided on five occasions in the 112 th and 113 th congresses for the consideration of fy2012 , fy2013 , and fy2014 measures .

when a bill is subject to a point of order against its consideration , house action on the bill requires that a waiver be granted , because if such a point of order is raised from the floor and sustained by the chair , the house will be unable to take the bill up for consideration .

as previously mentioned , special rules initiating consideration for regular appropriations bills have often included provisions that waive points of order against consideration stemming from restrictions in specific house rules or the congressional budget act .

for example , h.res .

213 ( 107 th congress ) , which provided for consideration of the fy2002 legislative branch appropriations bill , contained the following provision: "points of order against consideration of the bill for failure to comply with clause 4 ( c ) of rule xiii are waived. .

during this period , special rules providing for consideration of regular appropriations bills have also included provisions that provided a blanket waiver of points of order against consideration of the bill .

for example , h.res .

300 ( 112 th congress ) , which provided for consideration of the fy2012 agriculture appropriations bill , contained the following provision: "all points of order against consideration of the bill are waived. .

such provisions have the effect of waiving all points of order that would prevent the bill from being taken up by the house .

broad waivers of points of order provided by special rules are typically addressed in the accompanying committee report , as required under rule xiii clause 6 ( g ) .

in instances where a special rule contains a general waiver of points of order against consideration , the committee report accompanying the rule often identifies specific sections of house rules that would be violated by the bill's consideration .

in other instances , the committee report indicates that the waiver provided is "prophylactic," in that the consideration of the bill is not believed to violate house rules , but the waiver is included in the event that it does .

unanimous consent agreements that initiate consideration may similarly provide waivers of points of order against consideration in any of the forms discussed above .

table 3 contains a breakdown of the special rules and ucas initiating consideration of regular appropriations bills that provided a blanket waiver of all points of order against consideration , waived all such points of order with exceptions , waived specific points of order of this kind , or had no waiver .

during this period , special rules and ucas have trended in a similar direction with respect to the form of waiver provided .

prior to the fy2001 bills , waivers tended to be either for specific points of order against consideration or not provided at all .

waivers of all points of order were the least common when initiating consideration of regular appropriations bills .

since the fy2001 bills , however , waivers of all points of order against consideration have generally predominated , with the bills for fy2004 being the most recent for which a special rule or uca provided either a specific waiver or none at all .

during the 110 th and 111 th congresses , the waiver of points of order against consideration provided in special rules initiating consideration of regular appropriations bills contained an exception for rule xxi , clauses 9 and 10 .

such exceptions were typically included in all special rules that waived points of order against consideration during this period .

the two ucas initiating consideration of regular appropriations bills followed a similar pattern .

one included an exception to the waiver of all points of order against consideration for both of these clauses ; the other included an exception for rule xxi , clause 10 .

clauses 9 and 10 were added to rule xxi at the beginning of the 110 th congress .

clause 9 provides requirements related to earmark disclosure in the committee report accompanying a regular appropriations bill , and a point of order may be raised against any special rule that waives clause 9 .

in instances where such a point of order is raised , the house votes on that waiver through a question of consideration .

clause 10 contained the paygo point of order against direct spending and revenue legislation .

because regular appropriations bills primarily involve discretionary spending , it would be unusual for a point of order under clause 10 to be raised during consideration , even if allowed .

no points of order were raised pursuant to clause 9 or 10 when the regular appropriations bills were initially brought to the floor during the 110 th and 111 th congresses .

beginning in the 112 th congress , the practice returned to providing a blanket waiver of all points of order against consideration in the special rule ; no points of order under clause 9 have been raised against these special rules .

in addition to waiving points of order against consideration , special rules and ucas initiating consideration of regular appropriations bills have often waived house rule xxi , clause 2 , which prohibits general appropriations bills from including provisions "changing existing law. .

such provisions , for example , impose new duties upon the recipient of funds , change agency discretion , or mandate action contrary to existing law .

clause 2 also prohibits appropriations for programs , projects , or activities "not previously authorized by law. .

this rule stems from the principle that the process through which the activities of government are chosen should be distinct from the process through which those activities are funded .

points of order under rule xxi , clause 2 , may be raised against any portion of the bill during consideration .

if such a point of order is raised and sustained , the entire portion is stricken and consideration of the bill may continue .

since the fy1996 regular appropriations bills , almost all waivers of rule xxi , clause 2 , for provisions in the bill have taken one of two forms .

first , some of these waivers have covered the entire measure .

for example , h.res .

320 ( 112 th congress ) , which provided for consideration of the fy2012 defense appropriations bill , contained the following provision: "points of order against provisions in the bill for failure to comply with clause 2 of rule xxi are waived. .

second , waivers of rule xxi , clause 2 , have specified provisions that are excepted from the blanket waiver and thereby left unprotected .

for example , h.res .

836 , which provided for consideration of the fy2007 homeland security appropriations bill , included the following provision: points of order against provisions in the bill for failure to comply with clause 2 of rule xxi are waived except: beginning with the comma on page 38 , line 11 through 'funds' on line 14 ; section 512 ; beginning with 'or' on page 54 , line 12 through 'appropriation' on line 13 ; and section 536 .

alternately , a waiver of rule xxi , clause 2 , might apply only to specific provisions but still leave other provisions unprotected .

in many instances , the rules committee chooses to provide waivers with exceptions ( or waivers for only specific provisions ) because the authorizing committee of jurisdiction objects to the inclusion of a particular legislative provision or unauthorized appropriation .

this practice has generally been recognized as the "armey protocol" since the 104 th congress .

under this protocol , a provision that would potentially be out of order under rule xxi , clause 2 , is left unprotected and could be subject to a point of order on the floor .

if such a point of order against that provision were raised and sustained , the provision would be stricken and consideration of the bill would continue .

table 4 displays a breakdown of the number of special rules and ucas initiating consideration of regular appropriations bills that provided a blanket waiver of rule xxi , clause 2 , a blanket waiver with exceptions , a waiver for only specific provisions , or no waiver .

almost all bills were provided some type of clause 2 waiver at the time consideration was initiated ; in only one instance was no waiver of clause 2 provided when consideration was initiated through a special rule or uca .

in this instance ( h.res .

770 , 108 th congress ) , points of order were raised and sustained during subsequent consideration of the bill .

similarly , in the one instance where a waiver of clause 2 was provided for only a specified provision in the bill ( h.res .

498 , 105 th congress ) , points of order were raised and sustained against other provisions when the bill was considered .

for both blanket waivers of rule xxi , clause 2 , and waivers with exceptions , special rules and ucas have trended in a similar direction in the form of waiver provided .

for all but four of the fiscal years between fy1996 and fy2007 , at least half of the clause 2 waivers had specified exceptions , allowing those provisions to be stricken by a point of order during subsequent consideration .

for the bills between fy2008 and fy2011 , however , waivers included no exceptions , and so protection against such points of order was provided for the entire measure .

during the 112 th congress , the practice of providing waivers with exceptions was again applied in a few instances .

for consideration of bills during the 112 th congress , waivers with exceptions were provided for the fy2012 department of homeland security ( h.r .

2017 ) and agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( h.r .

2112 ) appropriations bills , and the fy2013 department of defense ( h.r .

5856 ) and transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies ( h.r .

5972 ) appropriations bills .

for consideration of bills in the 113 th congress , a waiver with exceptions was provided for the department of homeland security appropriations bill ( h.r .

2217 ) .

