the integration of drones into u.s. skies is expected by many to yield significant commercial and societal benefits .

drones could be employed to inspect pipelines , survey crops , and monitor the weather .

one newspaper has already used a drone to survey storm damage , and real estate agents have used them to survey property .

in short , the extent of their potential domestic application is bound only by human ingenuity .

in an effort to accelerate this introduction , in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 , congress tasked the federal aviation administration ( faa ) with safely integrating drones into the national airspace system by september 2015 .

likewise , sensing the opportunities that unmanned flight portend , lobbying groups and drone manufacturers have joined the chorus of those seeking a more rapid expansion of drones in the domestic market .

yet , the full - scale introduction of drones into u.s. skies will inevitably generate a host of legal issues .

this report will explore some of those issues .

to begin , this report will describe the regulatory framework for permitting the use of unmanned vehicles and the potential rulemaking that will occur over the next few years .

next , it will discuss theories of takings and property torts as they relate to drone flights over or near private property .

it will then discuss the privacy interests implicated by drone surveillance conducted by private actors and the potential countervailing first amendment rights to gather and receive news .

finally , this report will explore possible congressional responses to these privacy concerns , discuss how the faa has approached these concerns , and identify additional potential legal issues .

the predominant theory of airspace rights applied before the advent of aviation derived from the roman law maxim cujus est solum ejus est usque ad coelum , meaning whoever owns the land possesses all the space above the land extending upwards into the heavens .

this maxim was adopted into english common law and eventually made its way into american common law .

at the advent of commercial aviation , congress enacted the air commerce act of 1926 and later the 1938 civil aeronautics act .

these laws included provisions stating that "to the exclusion of all foreign nations , [the united states has] complete sovereignty of the airspace" over the country .

additionally , congress declared a "public right of freedom of transit in air commerce through the navigable airspace of the united states. .

this right to travel in navigable airspace came into conflict with the common law idea that each landowner owned the airspace above the surface in perpetuity .

if the common law idea was to be followed faithfully , there could be no right to travel in navigable airspace without constantly trespassing in private property owners' airspace .

this conflict was directly addressed by the supreme court in united states v. causby , discussed extensively below .

with the passage of the federal aviation act in 1958 , the administrator of the faa was given "full responsibility and authority for the advancement and promulgation of civil aeronautics generally.... " this centralization of responsibility and creation of a uniform set of rules recognized that "aviation is unique among transportation industries in its relation to the federal government — it is the only one whose operations are conducted almost wholly within federal jurisdiction.... " the faa continues to set uniform rules for the operation of aircraft in the national airspace .

in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( fmra ) , congress instructed the faa to "develop a comprehensive plan to safely accelerate the integration of civil unmanned aircraft systems into the national airspace system. .

these regulations must provide for this integration "as soon as practicable , but not later than september 30 , 2015. .

since the popularization of aviation , courts have had to balance the need for unobstructed air travel and commerce with the rights of private property owners .

the foundational case in explaining airspace ownership rights is united states v. causby .

perhaps the most contentious issue concerning the introduction of drones into u.s. airspace is the threat that this technology will be used to spy on american citizens .

with the ability to house high - powered cameras , infrared sensors , facial recognition technology , and license plate readers , some argue that drones present a substantial privacy risk .

undoubtedly , the government's use of drones for domestic surveillance operations implicates the fourth amendment and other applicable laws .

in like manner , privacy advocates have warned that private actors might use drones in a way that could infringe upon fundamental privacy rights .

this section will focus on the privacy issues associated with the use of drones by private , non - governmental actors .

it will provide a general history of privacy law in the united states and survey the various privacy torts , including intrusion upon seclusion , the privacy tort most applicable to drone surveillance .

it will then explore the first amendment right to gather news .

application of these theories to drone surveillance will be discussed in the section titled " congressional response . .

in addition to the legal issues described above , there are a host of other issues that may arise when introducing drones into the u.s. national airspace system .

preemption of state and local regulations .

the increased presence of drones in domestic airspace raises the question of potential federal preemption of state or local efforts to regulate different aspects of drone use .

the doctrine of preemption derives from the supremacy clause of the constitution , which states that federal law , treaties , and the constitution are the "supreme law of the land. .

a federal law may preempt state or local action in one of three ways: if the statute expressly states its intent to preempt state or local action ( express preemption ) ; if a court concludes that congress intended to occupy the regulatory field , implicitly preventing state or local action in that area ( field preemption ) ; or if the state or local action directly conflicts with or frustrates the purpose of the federal provisions ( conflict preemption ) .

with regard to traditional aviation laws , generally , state regulations of aviation safety , airspace management , and aviation noise are preempted by federal laws and regulations .

congress vested sole responsibility for the aviation industry and domestic airspace with the federal government in the federal aviation act of 1958 .

according to the legislative history , the faa was to have "full responsibility and authority for the advancement and promulgation of civil aeronautics generally , including promulgation and enforcement of safety regulations. .

in city of burbank v. lockheed air terminal , inc. , the supreme court struck down a local city ordinance that prohibited planes from taking off during certain hours of the day as preempted by the federal regulatory scheme .

expressing its fear regarding local control of airspace , the court stated , "if we were to uphold the burbank ordinance and a significant number of municipalities followed suit , it is obvious that fractionalized control of the timing of takeoffs and landings would severely limit the flexibility of the faa in controlling air traffic flow. .

the supreme court has , however , upheld state regulations imposing taxes on aircraft equipment located within the state .

state proposals seeking to regulate the use of drones are currently pending in many state legislatures throughout the country .

the virginia general assembly has passed a two - year moratorium on the use of drones by state and local law enforcement .

the bill prohibits the use of drones by agencies with jurisdiction over criminal law enforcement or regulatory violations , but includes exceptions for emergency situations .

following passage of the bill , the governor neither signed nor vetoed the bill , but rather sent it back to the general assembly with amendments , where it now awaits further action .

several other states have introduced bills similarly targeting the use of drones for surveillance .

other states , like texas , have introduced bills attempting to address privacy concerns related to widespread drone use .

the texas proposal would create a new state misdemeanor when a person uses a drone to capture an image without the consent of the landowner who owns the property captured in the image .

if these proposals were implemented , questions about federal preemption may be raised .

it appears that field preemption or conflict preemption would be the most likely grounds for finding preemption of such state regulations based on current federal law , if at all , since fmra does not contain an express preemption clause .

the extent to which the state can regulate drone use without being preempted by federal law may depend on the scope of the forthcoming federal regulations , the nature of the state regulations , and a reviewing court's analysis of whether congress intended to "occupy the field" of regulation on that issue .

the court has determined that field preemption can be inferred when "the pervasiveness of the federal regulation precludes supplementation by the states , where the federal interest in the field is sufficiently dominant , or where the object sought to be obtained by the federal law and the character of obligations imposed by it reveal the same purpose. .

righ t to protect property f rom trespassing drones .

there may be instances where a landowner is entitled to protect his property from intrusion by a drone .

under restatement ( second ) of torts section 260 , "one is privileged to commit an act which would otherwise be a trespass to a chattel or a conversion if the act is , or is reasonably believed to be , necessary to protect the actor's land or chattels or his possession of them , and the harm inflicted is not unreasonable as compared with the harm threatened. .

what this means is , in certain instances , a landowner would not be liable to the owner of a drone for damage necessarily or accidentally resulting from removing it from his property .

however , there appear to be no cases where a landowner was permitted to use force to prevent or remove an aircraft from his property .

additionally , as discussed above , determining whether a drone in flight is trespassing upon one's property may be unusually challenging .

stalking , harassment , and other crimes .

traditional crimes such as stalking , harassment , voyeurism , and wiretapping may all be committed through the operation of a drone .

as drones are further introduced into the national airspace , courts will have to work this new form of technology into their jurisprudence , and legislatures might amend these various statutes to expressly include crimes committed with a drone .

wiretap laws .

under the federal wiretap statute , it is unlawful to intentionally intercept an "oral communication" by a person "exhibiting an expectation that such communication is not subject to interception under circumstances justifying such expectation.... " currently , commercial microphones can record sounds upwards of 300 feet .

use of such a microphone on a drone to record private conversations could implicate the federal wiretap statute .

the legal issues discussed in this report will likely remain unresolved until the civilian use of drones becomes more widespread .

to that end , the faa has been tasked with developing "a comprehensive plan to safely accelerate the integration" of drones into the national airspace , which focuses on the safety of the drone technology and operator certification .

while the deadline for development of the plan has already elapsed , the faa has until the end of fy2015 to implement such a plan .

additionally , the faa must identify six test ranges where it will integrate drones into the national airspace .

this deadline , 180 days after enactment of the act , has also elapsed without faa compliance .

once these regulations are tested and promulgated , the unique legal challenges that could arise based on the operational differences between drones and already ubiquitous fixed - wing aircraft and helicopters may come into sharper focus .

