at the outset of the 113 th congress , there has been renewed congressional interest in gun control legislation .

senator dianne feinstein introduced s. 150 , the assault weapons ban of 2013 , which would prohibit , subject to certain exceptions , the sale , transfer , possession , manufacturing , and importation of specifically named firearms and other firearms that have certain features , as well as the transfer and possession of large capacity ammunition feeding devices .

representative carolyn mccarthy introduced a companion measure , h.r .

437 , in the house of representatives .

s. 150 is similar to the assault weapons ban of 1994 that was in effect through september 13 , 2004 .

as congress considers s. 150 and other gun control measures , it may be useful to review the 1994 law and its relation to federal firearms law , as well as the disposition of the legal challenges to the ban .

congress enacted the gun control act of 1968 ( gca or act ) to "keep firearms out of the hands of those not legally entitled to possess them because of age , criminal background , or incompetency , and to assist law enforcement authorities in the states and their subdivisions in combating the increasing prevalence of crime in the united states. .

the gca establishes a comprehensive statutory scheme that regulates the manufacture , sale , transfer , and possession of firearms and ammunition .

in particular , the gca establishes nine classes of individuals who are prohibited from shipping , transporting , possessing , or receiving firearms and ammunition .

the individuals targeted by this provision include ( 1 ) persons convicted of a crime punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ; ( 2 ) fugitives from justice ; ( 3 ) individuals who are unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance ; ( 4 ) persons legally determined to be mentally defective , or who have been committed to a mental institution ; ( 5 ) aliens illegally or unlawfully in the united states , as well as those who have been admitted pursuant to a nonimmigrant visa ; ( 6 ) individuals who have been discharged dishonorably from the armed forces ; ( 7 ) persons who have renounced united states citizenship ; ( 8 ) individuals subject to a pertinent court order ; and , finally , ( 9 ) persons who have been convicted of a misdemeanor domestic violence offense .

when the gca was enacted , the transfer and sale of ammunition appear to have been regulated in the same manner as firearms .

in 1986 , congress passed the firearm owners' protection act ( fopa ) , which repealed many of the regulations regarding ammunition .

consequently , the transfer and sale of ammunition is not as strictly regulated as the transfer and sale of firearms .

congress enacted , as part of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 , the public safety and recreational firearms act ( referred to as the "assault weapons ban" ) , which established a 10-year prohibition on the manufacture , transfer , or possession of "semiautomatic assault weapons," as defined by the act , as well as large capacity ammunition feeding devices .

the act contained several exceptions , including a "grandfather clause" allowing for the possession of such items that were otherwise lawfully possessed on the date of enactment .

the assault weapons ban expired on september 13 , 2004 .

generally speaking , an "assault weapon" is considered to be a military style weapon capable of providing by a selector switch either semiautomatic — that is , the firearm discharges one round , then loads a new round , each time the trigger is pulled until the magazine is exhausted — or a fully automatic firearm — that is , continuous discharge of rounds while the trigger is depressed until all rounds are discharged .

under federal law , a fully automatic firearm falls under the definition "machinegun," which is defined as "any weapon that shoots ... automatically more than one shot , without manual reloading , by a single function of the trigger. .

semiautomatic firearms , including semiautomatic assault weapons , are "produced with semiautomatic fire capability only. .

the assault weapons ban of 1994 was unsuccessfully challenged as violating several constitutional provisions .

while arguments that the act constituted an impermissible bill of attainder , is unconstitutionally vague , and is contrary to the ninth amendment were readily dismissed by the courts , challenges to the ban based on the commerce clause and the equal protection clause received more measured consideration .

if enacted , an assault weapons ban could also be challenged on second amendment grounds in light of the supreme court's decision in district of columbia v. heller .

in heller , the court recognized that the second amendment protects an individual right to bear arms for lawful purposes such as self - defense within the home .

the decision was not an exhaustive analysis of the full scope of the right guaranteed by the second amendment , but the court stated that "[l]ike most rights , the right secured by the second amendment is not unlimited. .

one limitation upon the second amendment the court addressed is that it "does not protect those weapons not typically possessed by law - abiding citizens for lawful purposes , such as short - barreled shotguns. .

the court found that its prior 1939 decision in united states v. miller supported this conclusion .

relying on miller , the court acknowledged that this limitation is supported by the "historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of 'dangerous and unusual weapons'" and that the "sorts of weapons protected were those 'in common use at the time'" because those capable of service in the militia at the time of ratification would have brought "the sorts of lawful weapons that they possessed at home to militia duty. .

since heller , cases that have evaluated the constitutionality of state assault weapons bans have generally found them to be valid under the second amendment .

in 2009 , the california court of appeals decided people v. james , which held that possession of an assault weapon in california remains unlawful and is not protected by the second amendment .

california's roberti - roos assault weapons control act of 1989 , like the 1994 federal assault weapons ban , defines "assault weapons" by providing a list of proscribed weapons and through characteristics "which render these weapons more dangerous than ordinary weapons typically possessed by law - abiding citizens for lawful purposes. .

relying on heller 's brief discussion that the second amendment does not protect a military weapon , such as an m16 rifle , the court in james declared that the prohibited weapons on the state's list "are not the types of weapons that are typically possessed by law - abiding citizens for lawful purposes such as sport hunting or self - defense ; rather these are weapons of war. .

it concluded that the relevant portion of the act did not prohibit conduct protected by the second amendment as defined in heller and therefore the state was within its ability to prohibit the types of dangerous and unusual weapons an individual can use .

the district of columbia amended its firearms regulations after the heller decision and enacted new firearms regulations including an assault weapons ban that is similar to california's .

in 2011 , the d.c .

circuit issued its decision in heller v. district of columbia ( heller ii ) which upheld the district's ban on certain semiautomatic rifles and lcafds .

under the "common use" factor delineated in heller , the d.c .

circuit acknowledged that "it was clear enough in the record that certain semi - automatic rifles and magazines holding more than 10 rounds are indeed in 'common use.' .

however , the court could not conclude definitely whether the weapons are "commonly used or are useful specifically for self - defense or hunting" such that they "meaningfully affect the right to keep and bear arms. .

therefore , the court went on to analyze the bans under a two - stepped approach to determine their validity under the second amendment .

under this approach , the court first asks whether a particular provision impinges upon a right protected by the second amendment as historically understood .

if it does , then it goes on to determine whether the provision passes muster under the appropriate level of constitutional scrutiny .

assuming that the ban impinged on the right protected under heller ( i.e. , to possess certain arms for lawful purposes such as individual self - defense or hunting ) , the court found that such regulations should be reviewed under intermediate scrutiny because the prohibition "does not effectively disarm individuals or substantially affect their ability to defend themselves. .

under intermediate scrutiny , the government has the burden of showing that there is a substantial relationship or reasonable "fit" between the regulation and the important governmental interest "in protecting police officers and controlling crime. .

the d.c .

circuit held that the district carried this burden and that the evidence demonstrated that a ban on both semiautomatic assault rifles and lcafds "is likely to promote the government's interest in crime control in the densely populated urban area that is the district of columbia. .

in 2012 , the supreme court of illinois decided wilson v. cook county , a case that evaluated the constitutionality of the blair holt assault weapons ban of cook county , a long - standing ordinance that was amended to similarly reflect provisions of the 1994 assault weapons ban .

the plaintiffs argued that the ordinance violates the due process and equal protection clauses of the u.s. constitution as well as the second amendment .

regarding the due process claim , the court concluded that the ordinance is not unconstitutionally vague such that it "fails to provide people of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to understand what conduct it prohibits. .

the court also dismissed the plaintiff's equal protection claim , finding that the "[o]rdinance does not arbitrarily differentiate between two owners with similar firearms because the banned firearms are either listed , a copy or duplicate , or fall under the characteristics - based test. .

with respect to the second amendment claim , the court indicated that it would follow the two - step approach similar to the heller ii court .

while the court acknowledged that the ordinance banned only a subset of weapons with particular characteristics similar to other jurisdictions , it found that it could not "conclusively say ... that assault weapons as defined in the [o]rdinance categorically fall outside the scope of the rights protected by the [s]econd [a]mendment. .

the court ultimately remanded the second amendment claim to the trial court for further proceedings , because unlike the james and heller ii decisions , the county did not have an opportunity to present evidence to justify the nexus between the ordinance and the governmental interest it seeks to protect .

these cases demonstrate that courts evaluating various assault weapons bans , and to a limited extent lcafd bans , have looked to the heller decision and the general framework that has developed in the lower courts for analyzing claims under the second amendment .

based on the heller decision where the supreme court indicated that certain weapons fall outside the protection of the second amendment , lower courts have examined whether the prohibited weapons are considered in "common use" or "commonly used" for lawful purposes or "dangerous and unusual. .

it is uncertain whether , to be protected under the second amendment , the weapon must be in "common use" by the people and if so , must it be in "common use" for self - defense or hunting , or what constitutes "dangerous and unusual. .

heller could arguably be taken to indicate that if the prohibited weapons do not meet these criteria then they are not protected by the second amendment , in which case no heighted judicial scrutiny would be applied .

courts also could evaluate such measures under the two - step approach laid out by the lower courts .

this asks whether a ban on certain weapons and firearm accessories imposes a burden on conduct falling within the scope of the second amendment .

if so , then a heightened level of judicial scrutiny will be applied to determine the ban's constitutionality .

how the "common use" and "dangerous and unusual" criteria should be read , if at all , in connection with the two - step approach remains unclear .

neither the james , heller ii , nor wilson courts appear to have fully explained the connection between the two approaches .

lastly , while it appeared that constitutional claims under the due process and equal protection clauses were largely dismissed when the 1994 assault weapons ban was in effect , the wilson case demonstrates that they are claims challengers may still consider raising .

