t his report provides an overview of set - asides for small businesses , key legal requirements governing agencies' use of set - asides , and recent litigation regarding agencies' use ( or non - use ) of set - asides when conducting particular procurements .

the term "set - aside" is commonly used to refer to a competition in which only small businesses may compete .

however , this usage can obscure the fact that some set - asides involve small purchases that may be made by means of simplified acquisition procedures that entail less than "full and open competition," as well as by the sealed bidding or contracting by negotiation that is more commonly associated with set - asides of larger contracts .

in order to better distinguish between these two categories of procurements , this report refers to the former as "purchases reserved for small businesses," and the latter as "competitive set - asides. .

in addition , some , but not all , of the statutory provisions pertaining to competitive set - asides also authorize agencies to award contracts without competition — by negotiating directly with a small business — when contracts cannot be set aside for small businesses ( eg , because offers cannot reasonably be expected from two or more small businesses ) , or when certain other conditions are met .

such awards are here referred to as "sole - source awards. .

small business set - asides are of perennial interest to congress because of their role in effectuating the long - standing declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

in support of this policy , congress has authorized agencies to conduct set - asides and make sole - source awards to small businesses , among other things .

specifically , with various provisions of the small business act of 1958 , as amended , congress has permitted federal agencies to conduct competitive set - asides for small businesses , as well as for specific types of small businesses ( i.e. , small disadvantaged businesses ( sdbs ) participating in the "8 ( a ) program," historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) small businesses , women - owned small businesses ( wosbs ) , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ( sdvosbs ) ) .

the small business act also authorizes federal agencies to make sole - source awards to 8 ( a ) participants , hubzone small businesses , sdvosbs , and wosbs in certain circumstances , as well as grant price evaluation adjustment preferences to hubzone small businesses in unrestricted competitions .

in addition , the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 , as amended , grants the department of veterans affairs ( va ) additional authority to conduct competitive set - asides for , and make sole - source awards to , sdvosbs and other veteran - owned small businesses ( vosbs ) .

congress has also sought to promote its "declared policy" of assistance to small businesses by requiring the establishment of governmentwide and agency - specific goals for the percentage of federal contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses each year .

the president is statutorily required to establish governmentwide goals , which must call for at least 23% of federal contract dollars to be awarded to small businesses ( including 5% of federal contract and subcontract dollars to wosbs ; 5% to sdbs ; 3% to hubzone small businesses ; and 3% to sdvosbs ) .

individual agencies , after "consultation" with the small business administration ( sba ) , are also statutorily required to set agency - specific goals .

these goals must represent , "for that agency , the maximum practicable opportunity" for small businesses to participate in the contracts awarded by the agency , and the "cumulative annual prime contract goals for all agencies [must] meet or exceed the annual governmentwide prime contract goal established by the president. .

set - asides for small businesses constitute one of the primary means by which agencies may meet their goals for contracting and subcontracting with small businesses .

however , these goals are not quotas , and the set - aside programs do not serve or seek to ensure that 23% of all federal contract dollars , for example , is awarded to small businesses .

the 112 th congress enacted legislation that expands agencies' authority to conduct competitive set - asides for wosbs , while the 113 th congress enacted legislation that permits sole - source awards to such firms .

interest in the set - aside programs seems likely to continue in the 114 th congress , in part , because a case currently pending before the supreme court involves small business set - asides .

specifically , on february 22 , 2016 , the court is scheduled to hear oral arguments in kingdomware technologies , inc. v. united states , a case in which a sdvosb challenges the department of veterans affairs' procurement of certain supplies and services through the federal supply schedules , rather than through a set - aside for sdvosbs or vosbs .

the report begins with an overview of the legal authorities governing set - asides and related contracting preferences for small businesses .

then , it turns to the legal issues , including ( 1 ) the implementation of the "rule of two," which permits or , in some cases , requires that agencies use set - asides when offers can reasonably be expected from at least two small businesses , and the award made at a fair price ; ( 2 ) when agencies may be required to use set - asides for small businesses ; ( 3 ) partial set - asides of contracts that cannot be totally set aside for small businesses ; ( 4 ) set - asides under certain indefinite - delivery / indefinite - quantity ( id / iq ) contracts ( i.e. , contracts that call for the contractor to supply quantities of goods or services that are unknown at the time of contracting to the government upon the government's order ) ; ( 5 ) priority of and among the set - aside programs ; and ( 6 ) limitations on the use of small business set - asides .

the small business act of 1958 , as amended , is the primary authority governing set - asides and related contracting preferences for small businesses .

by its terms , or as implemented by sba and the federal acquisition regulatory council ( far council ) , this act generally provides that "small purchases" are reserved for small businesses , and authorizes agencies to conduct competitive set - asides and , in some cases , grant other contracting preferences to small businesses .

however , it is important to note that one of the primary regulations implementing , in part , the small business act — the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) — applies only to the acquisition of goods and services by executive branch agencies with appropriated funds .

the far also excludes certain contracts ( eg , those performed overseas ) from its requirements pertaining to small business contracting , as discussed below .

the small business act does not expressly contemplate such exclusions .

however , agency regulations are generally entitled to deference so long as congress has not directly spoken to the precise question at issue , and the agency's reasonable interpretation of the statute is consistent with the purposes of the statute .

"[i]f the statute speaks clearly 'to the precise question at issue,'" the tribunal "must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress," regardless of what the agency regulation provides .

however , where "the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue," the tribunal "must sustain the [a]gency's interpretation if it is 'based on a permissible construction' of the act. .

in addition , congress has supplemented the provisions of the small business act by enacting additional legislation requiring the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to set aside contracts for sdvobs and other vosbs in certain circumstances .

legal questions about small business set - asides have arguably become more common in recent years , particularly since the government accountability office ( gao ) issued its 2008 decision in international program group , inc . , recommending that set - asides for hubzone small businesses be given "precedence" over set - asides for sdvosbs because the statute and regulations governing set - asides for hubzone small businesses , at that time , used "shall," and "shall" indicates mandatory action .

prior to international program group , gao had issued decisions indicating that agencies should have considered set - asides in certain circumstances , and gao and the federal courts had even found that hubzone set - asides were mandatory when the rule of two was satisfied .

nonetheless , notwithstanding such decisions , at least some agencies viewed themselves as retaining discretion to select which set - aside program to use ( eg , so as to maximize their performance vis - à - vis particular small business contracting goals ) .

in particular , prior to gao's 2008 decision , sba had taken the position that agencies could determine whether to use hubzone set - asides in specific procurements , and the far council had proposed amending the far expressly to provide that "[t]here is no order of precedence among the 8 ( a ) , hubzone , and sdvosb programs. .

by rejecting the view that agencies retained discretion to determine whether to use a hubzone set - aside when the rule of two was satisfied , gao's decision in international program group and related decisions in 2008-2010 appear to have prompted greater scrutiny of the statutory and regulatory language pertaining to small business set - asides and , specifically , provisions that could potentially be construed as requiring agencies to use — or not use — set - asides in particular procurements .

there has also been increased interest in implementation of the rule of two since any requirement that agencies set aside contracts for small businesses is generally contingent upon the contracting officer reasonably expecting offers from at least two small businesses , and the award being made at fair market price .

as the foregoing discussion suggests , determining whether and when particular requirements pertaining to small business set - asides apply can be complicated .

multiple statutes — some of which apply only to specific agencies — govern set - asides for small businesses , and authorize different actions as to different types of small businesses .

these statutes were enacted over time , between 1958 and 2006 , and arguably have not always been consistent in their treatment of particular things ( eg , the circumstances in which sole - source awards may be made to 8 ( a ) firms , as opposed to other types of small businesses ) .

further , these statutes have been implemented by sba regulations and the far over a number of years , and the bases for certain regulatory interpretations are not always clear , even if they are arguably within the agency's discretion ( eg , the exclusion of contracts awarded and / or performed outside the united states from the small business requirements of the far ) .

in addition , the statutes and regulations have been construed and applied by various judicial and administrative tribunals , which have , at times , had differing interpretations of the same provision ( eg , gao viewing the va as required to use set - asides for vosbs instead of the federal supply schedules , while the federal courts do not ) .

on top of all this , the stakes of these interpretations are arguably high , as small businesses and other vendors compete for a limited — and potentially dwindling — pool of federal contract dollars .

this can lead some to attempt to place significant weight on particular words ( eg , "shall," "competitive basis" ) in the hopes of narrowing — or broadening — the competition for particular procurements .

questions could , however , potentially be raised as to whether the existing statutory and regulatory provisions were drafted with such potential arguments in mind , or whether they are based , in part , on long - standing practices in the procurement field ( eg , the exclusion of orders placed through the federal supply schedules from small business set - asides under the veterans benefits act ) .

congress could potentially respond to any interpretations with which it disagrees by amending the relevant statutes ; directing sba or the far council to promulgate or amend regulations ; or requiring agencies to abide by particular interpretations of statutes or regulations .

