medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term care .

medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states .

participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered .

historically , eligibility was generally limited to low - income children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the elderly , and people with disabilities ; however , recent changes will soon add coverage for individuals under the age of 65 with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level .

the federal government pays a share of each state's medicaid costs ; states must contribute the remaining portion in order to qualify for federal funds .

this report describes the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) calculation used to reimburse states for most medicaid expenditures , and it lists the statutory exceptions to the regular fmap rate .

in addition , this report discusses other fmap - related issues , including fmap changes in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) , federal deficit reduction proposals that would amend the fmap rate , and the disaster - recovery fmap adjustment .

the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the fmap rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute .

the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures , but exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .

an enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate is provided for both services and administration under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , subject to the availability of funds from a state's federal allotment for chip .

when a state expands its medicaid program using chip funds ( rather than medicaid funds ) , the e - fmap rate applies and is paid out of the state's federal allotment .

the e - fmap rate is calculated by reducing the state share under the regular fmap rate by 30% .

the fmap rate is also used in determining the phased - down state contribution ( "clawback" ) for medicare part d , the federal share of certain child support enforcement collections , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) contingency funds , a portion of the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) , and foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act .

some recent issues related to the fmap rate include fmap changes in the aca , federal deficit reduction proposals impacting the fmap rate , and the disaster - related fmap adjustment .

the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures .

in fy2014 , 15 states will have the statutory minimum fmap rate of 50% , and mississippi will have the highest fmap rate of 73.05% .

from fy2013 to fy2014 , the regular fmap rates for 36 states will change , while the regular fmap rates for the remaining 15 states ( including the district of columbia ) will remain the same .

exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .

the aca added a number of exceptions to the fmap for "newly eligible" individuals , "expansion states," disaster - affected states , primary care payment rate increases , specified preventive services and immunizations , smoking cessation services for pregnant women , specified home and community - based services , health home services for certain people with chronic conditions , home and community - based attendant services and supports , and state balancing incentive payments .

since federal medicaid expenditures are a large and growing portion of the federal budget , controlling federal medicaid spending has been a focus of federal deficit reduction proposals .

amending the fmap structure has been identified as a way to reduce federal medicaid spending by reducing the statutory fmap floor .

 table a - 1 shows regular fy2006-fy2014 fmap rates calculated according to the formula described in the text of the report ( see " how fmap rates are calculated " ) .

in fy2014 , fmap rates range from 50% ( 15 states ) to 73% ( mississippi ) .

from fy2013 to fy2014 , regular fmap rates will decrease for 22 states , increase for 14 states , and remain the same for 14 states and the district of columbia .

all of the 14 states for which the fmap rates do not change have the statutory minimum fmap rate of 50% , and the fmap rate for the district of columbia is statutorily set at 70% .

