the enactment of various conservation and environmental protection statutes in the 1960s and 1970s created a new awareness of environmental harms .

at the same time , the civil rights initiatives also secured nondiscrimination in a number of legal rights , including education , employment , housing , voting , etc .

over the following decades , the development of these movements eventually converged , raising concerns that minority groups face disproportionate exposure to environmental risks and harms .

although congress has not enacted generally applicable legislation on the issue , concerns regarding disproportionate adverse environmental impacts that result from how an agency implements environmental regulations have been litigated under a number of legal theories and have been addressed administratively for several decades .

this report will examine the relevant legal authorities that may be asserted to address disproportionate environmental impacts that result from how an agency implements environmental regulations , including the equal protection clause of the u.s. constitution , title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 , and selected environmental and conservation statutes .

it also will analyze the use of these authorities to prevent such impacts and the likelihood of success for future challenges under each legal theory .

the report also will discuss administrative efforts to address "environmental justice," a term used by some advocates to refer to the distribution of environmental quality across various demographic groups , including the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) plan ej 2014 .

many commentators have used the term environmental justice to describe concerns that racial , ethnic , or low - income minority groups are affected disproportionately by environmental harm .

epa has defined environmental justice as "the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race , color , national origin , or income with respect to the development , implementation , and enforcement of environmental laws , regulations , and policies. .

in environmental protection debates , the question of siting potential environmental hazards often leads to disputes over whose proverbial backyard will be affected .

many communities often resist the placement of various industrial facilities and waste disposal sites within their boundaries .

several studies that first drew awareness to the potential correlation between environmental hazards and minority communities are cited regularly in debates about environmental justice .

a number of factors may explain why these communities might be affected more often than others .

aside from the possibility that the harms are directed purposely at certain communities , factors such as costs , community involvement , political clout , economic status , and education — which may or may not be related to racial or ethnic status — may contribute to any correlation .

for example , because property values may be lower in minority communities , siting authorities may choose inexpensive land near these communities .

these communities also may lack the educational background or civic involvement that other communities may use to counteract proposals that would result in disproportionate environmental harm .

if a siting decision that caused environmental hazards to the community depended solely on economic benefits and cost - efficiency , it may be difficult to justify an environmental justice claim .

on the other hand , if the decision factored in the unlikely opposition of a minority community , the decision might be alleged to be discriminatory against that community .

individuals and communities seeking legal protection against perceived or alleged disproportionate environmental harms have relied on a number of legal theories .

although basing such claims on equal protection provisions in the u.s. constitution appears reasonable , litigants have had little success with this approach , which requires proof that the government intended to discriminate .

for the same reason , title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 , which prohibits discrimination in federally funded programs , has proven troublesome for litigants to enforce in courts .

those who wish to challenge the effect of environmental harms also may seek relief under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) or the discretionary authority of agencies under their statutory mandates .

following the heightened study of the effects of environmental hazards on minority communities in the 1980s , epa assembled a working group to study the issue in 1990 , under the direction of president george h. w. bush .

the focus on environmental justice expanded under president bill clinton , who directed federal agencies to incorporate environmental justice into their mission and operations .

this directive has been reiterated by various federal agencies in recent years under president barack obama .

these actions have not provided an independent legal basis for enforcing nondiscrimination principles related to environmental harms .

however , they remain pertinent because they require agencies to apply relevant existing authorities that may achieve the same goal .

in 1994 , president clinton issued executive order 12898 ( e.o .

12898 ) to expand the goals of environmental justice beyond epa .

e.o .

12898 required each federal agency to "make achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying and addressing , as appropriate , disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs , policies , and activities on minority populations and low - income populations ..." individually , agencies were directed to develop an agency - wide strategy that would identify programs , policies , processes , and enforcement in need of revision to ensure equitable enforcement of health and environmental statutes ; to improve public participation ; and to improve access to information identifying environmental effects among minority and low - income populations .

e.o .

12898 also called for a coordinated approach to addressing the goal of environmental justice and established an interagency working group .

the group was directed to provide guidance to and coordinate consistency among the individual agencies and offices as they developed their respective environmental justice strategies .

under e.o .

12898 , federal agencies are responsible to undertake a number of measures to promote environmental justice .

for example , agencies must conduct [their] programs , policies , and activities that substantially affect human health or the environment , in a manner that ensures that such programs , policies , and activities do not have the effect of excluding persons ( including populations ) from participation in , denying persons ( including populations ) the benefits of , or subjecting persons ( including populations ) to discrimination under , such programs , policies , and activities , because of their race , color , or national origin .

it also directs agencies "whenever practicable and appropriate" to gather and analyze data on environmental and health impacts across a range of demographic groups in order to identify potential disparities among populations .

e.o .

12898 directs agencies to encourage public participation and awareness on issues considered by the agencies and the interagency working group .

however , it creates no specific obligations for disclosure or other action by the agency .

as such , e.o .

12898 may be thought of as an internal guidance document for the executive branch .

it is binding on executive agencies and offices , but does not create or implement generally applicable rules or obligations that could be enforced against the government , its officials , or other individuals .

in other words , e.o .

12898 may not be used as an enforcement mechanism for environmental justice claims .

in 2011 , the agencies originally included in the interagency working group established by e.o .

12898 agreed to a memorandum of understanding on environmental justice and executive order 12898 ( ej mou ) that reiterated the agencies' commitment to the goals of e.o .

12898 .

ej mou also expanded the opportunity for participation by other federal agencies , noting that e.o .

12898 "applies to covered agencies , [but] does not preclude other agencies from agreeing to undertake the commitments in the order. .

it also imposed requirements on public reporting by participating agencies of their environmental justice strategies and progress .

in 2011 , epa introduced a strategic plan known as plan ej 2014 to help integrate environmental justice into its programs , policies , and activities .

the plan marks 20 years since the issuance of e.o .

12898 and manifests epa's intent to set a standard for other agencies to address environmental justice .

plan ej 2014 outlines several methods through which epa can promote environmental justice , including rulemaking , permitting , compliance and enforcement , community - based action programs , and interagency support programs .

epa intends to report its progress toward achieving goals set in the plan in 2014 .

epa has issued guidance with specific instructions on recommended procedures to incorporate environmental justice into its rule - writing process , providing suggestions on when to consider environmental justice and questions to ask in order to successfully address the relevant issues that arise .

under the guidance , epa analysts are instructed to "[incorporate] environmental justice into the development of risk assessment , economic analysis , and other scientific input and policy choices during the development of a rule. .

with respect to its initiative to incorporate environmental justice into the permitting process , epa has endeavored "to develop and implement tools to better enable overburdened communities to have full and meaningful access to the permitting process. .

to advance environmental justice through its compliance and enforcement actions , ej plan 2014 provides for the enhanced use of enforcement and compliance tools "to address the needs of overburdened communities. .

in other words , as epa determines where to pursue enforcement actions , it will give priority to cases that affect communities which may be particularly vulnerable .

epa also intends to improve its communications with communities that may be at risk of environmental harms .

similarly , ej plan 2014 continues epa's community programs to "support community empowerment and provide community benefits at all levels. .

it provides for improvement of these programs , with particular emphasis on minority and low - income communities ( including tribal and indigenous communities ) that have been identified as lacking "capacity to affect environmental conditions. .

in particular , the agency's efforts focus on expanding partnerships with communities , building capacity within communities to organize community - based efforts , and coordinating with other agencies and entities that affect the community .

