on january 25 , 2013 , the senate approved two resolutions affecting the process for considering legislation and nominations .

s.res .

15 established two orders of the senate that will apply only in the 113 th congress .

the first aims to allow a majority to more quickly begin consideration of a bill while encouraging an increase in amending opportunities .

the second accelerates the consideration of some nominations supported by at least three - fifths of the senate .

the other resolution , s.res .

16 , made two changes to the standing rules of the senate , establishing a bipartisan method to bring a bill before the senate more quickly and altering the procedures that had effectively required the consent of all senators to send a measure to a conference committee with the house .

the changes , discussed in detail below , seek to expedite proceedings while also preserving the long - standing senate principle that a numerical majority should decide only after accounting for the intensity of individual and minority preferences .

most questions in the senate , such as whether to pass a bill or approve a nomination , are decided by majority vote .

but the senate does not have a rule that allows a majority of senators to end debate on a question when it is ready to vote on it .

as a result of this and other features of the senate , individual or minority groups of senators can influence decisions by filibustering — debating or taking other actions to prevent a question from coming to a vote — or even by threatening to do so .

the possibility of a filibuster allows a minority of senators to delay or prevent a vote that they fear they would lose .

if proponents of a matter want to end debate when faced with a determined coalition in opposition , they must use the cloture process , which typically requires three - fifths of the senate ( 60 votes , if no more than one vacancy ) as well as approximately a week , in practice , to implement .

for example , to end debate on a bill , a cloture motion can be presented as soon as the bill is taken up by the senate , but the vote on the question of ending debate on the bill would not occur until two days of session later .

furthermore , if a sufficient number of senators vote to invoke cloture , then consideration of the bill could still continue for a maximum of 30 additional hours .

only time in which the bill is actually being considered by the senate counts toward the 30 hours , and after cloture is invoked on a matter , it takes unanimous consent to consider any other matter .

in this way , three - fifths of the senate can reach a vote on passage of a bill , but it requires unanimity to do so swiftly .

the new rules and standing orders do not eliminate the ability of senators to filibuster and do not reduce the incentives of proponents of a matter to build a coalition larger than a simple majority .

instead , they reduce the time it might take to get to a final vote on certain matters , without eliminating the need for three - fifths of the senate to agree to do so .

they achieve this largely by altering the timing of the cloture process , or , in one instance , by reducing the number of successful cloture processes required to reach a vote on passage of a bill that would consequently be subject to an alternative amending process .

the time required for a cloture process has generally been understood to give individual senators influence over the senate agenda , as the sheer number of items of business before the senate likely makes processing each under the terms of the cloture rule impossible , and unanimous consent effectively required .

this report explains the provisions of each new standing order and rule .

the impact of the changes , however , might be felt largely in negotiations about how or when to set aside the rules and standing orders with the consent of all senators .

the senate usually does not find it efficient to conduct business by following its rules as they are written .

instead , the senate typically operates under unanimous consent agreements that reflect the rights senators have under the rules , but that fix the terms of consideration to the benefit of all senators .

for example , after cloture is invoked on a question , the senate often agrees by unanimous consent to allow overnight hours to count against the 30 hours of post - cloture time .

senators who wish to delay a vote benefit from this arrangement , because the vote is delayed without requiring them to take floor actions to consume as much of the 30 hours as they can .

senators who would like to vote as soon as possible also benefit because they do not need to dedicate floor time to post - cloture consideration or remain near the floor to make a quorum if required .

in this way , the unanimous consent agreement reflects the rights of senators under the rules , even as provisions of the rule are being waived .

senators decide whether or not to enter into unanimous consent agreements , or essentially to waive their right to delay proceedings , based in part on what they think they could achieve using the regular rules and procedures .

to the extent the january 2013 changes have altered procedural opportunities or constraints , they can be expected to affect unanimous consent negotiations .

the recent procedural changes might also affect unanimous consent negotiations by altering expectations about the manner in which legislation and nominations are to be processed .

when unanimous consent practices recur so commonly as to become standard , they foster expectations of their continued routine use , which may in turn affect senators' decisions about whether to object to proposed unanimous consent agreements .

to continue the previous example , the senate often agrees to hold a vote on a question one day after cloture was invoked on it because that is expected and widely accepted , not because each senator has explicitly weighed whether or not to attempt to cause the vote to be held sooner ( or later ) , operating under the rules .

senators decide whether or not to accept a consent agreement based in part on the potential costs their objection might bring to their colleagues and to their own future efforts to build coalitions .

the cost of objecting is generally considered to be higher when doing so would be extraordinary , or contrary to the normal method of conducting business .

senate agreement to these resolutions in january , and the statements made regarding their intended operation , could both indicate and initiate changes in what most senators believe the proper processes should be .

to assist senators and staff in understanding the changes and their potential impact on senate operations , this report describes each of the four changes below , in turn .

each section opens with a brief description of the change , identifying its key features and its general purpose .

the overview is followed by a more detailed discussion of senate practices related to the changes as well as the precise procedural mechanisms established by the new rules and orders .

the procedural mechanisms are examined in detail not because there is an expectation that they will operate in the exact manner described , but to clarify the range of procedural options these mechanisms may open up in the senate .

while this report attempts to explain the new procedures , and in some cases it indicates where their precise operation is unclear , consultation with the senate parliamentarian is strongly advised as specific procedural circumstances arise .

no written rule or order could account for all courses of procedural action that could arise in the future .

the senate interprets its rules by establishing precedent through rulings of the chair , usually with the guidance of the senate parliamentarian , and occasionally through votes on appeals of such rulings .

the senate also interprets its rules to some degree through repeated practice , but again , even informal decisions regarding the specific implementation of procedures are usually made in consultation with the parliamentarian .

this report focuses on the procedural changes themselves and their potential consequences .

for background information on the changes and other related proposals , including possible motivations for changing senate procedures , see crs report r41342 , proposals to change the operation of cloture in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

for an explanation of the process for changing senate procedures , see crs report r42929 , procedures for considering changes in senate rules , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r42928 , "first day" proceedings and procedural change in the senate , by [author name scrubbed] , for a discussion of the specific processes and proposals in this congress and the last .

through the approval of s.res .

15 , the senate made two procedural changes that , under the terms of the resolution , will expire at the end of the congress .

these two changes are considered "standing orders" of the senate because they did not amend the standing rules of the senate themselves .

for the 113 th congress , however , these changes will have the same force and effect as rules .

the form of a standing order might have been chosen because it was considered to be more appropriate for a temporary procedural change .

in addition , agreeing to a procedural change in the form of a standing order can require a smaller coalition for approval than a change in the standing rules .

to invoke cloture on a proposal to directly amend the standing rules requires a two - thirds vote of senators voting , a quorum being present ( which can be as many as 67 senators ) .

to invoke cloture on a resolution affecting procedures but not directly amending the standing rules , such as s.res .

15 , would require only three - fifths of the senate , typically 60 .

the second resolution the senate approved on january 24 , 2013 , s.res .

16 , made two changes to the standing rules .

these changes will remain part of the standing rules and will be in effect in future congresses , unless the senate agrees to amend its rules .

s.res .

16 created an expedited method by which three - fifths of the senate can end debate on the question of taking up a bill ( or other matter ) at the initiative of a bipartisan group of 16 senators , including both party leaders .

under rule xxii , all cloture motions require 16 signatures to receive a vote .

the new paragraph in the rule provides that a cloture motion on a motion to proceed , signed by the majority and the minority leader as well as at least seven senators affiliated with each party , will mature in one session day , instead of the two session days required for all other such cloture motions .

furthermore , if such a cloture motion is successful , then the motion to proceed will not be subject to debate , in contrast to being subject to a maximum of 30 hours of consideration post - cloture .

this procedure introduces a process in the senate through which measures enjoying wide , but not universal , support can be brought up in the senate more expeditiously .

in modern practice , the senate begins consideration of a matter either by unanimous consent , or through a motion to proceed to consider it .

the motion to proceed can be adopted by a simple majority , but it is debatable in most circumstances and therefore is subject to filibuster .

to reach a vote on a motion to proceed , therefore , a cloture process might be necessary , which takes a supermajority of three - fifths of the senate ( typically 60 ) .

prior to this rules change , in the absence of unanimous consent , taking up most measures on the floor required not just a coalition of 60 senators but also , in practice , four to five days of session .

the rules change will allow bipartisan , leadership - supported supermajority coalitions to take up a measure in two days of session .

the full effect of this change on senate practice might not be clearly observable .

some bipartisan cloture motions might be presented under the new rule , and legislation might be brought before the senate using this particular process .

it is also likely , however , that the option of using this procedure will influence behind - the - scenes negotiations over the senate agenda .

the ability of a bipartisan group of senators to more quickly take up a bill might facilitate the policy and procedural negotiations among those who wish to take action on that topic .

in the face of a small but determined group in opposition , proponents of a measure will no longer have to weigh as heavily whether it is worth dedicating considerable floor time — and the time of senators who would have to remain at or near the floor to make a quorum — to the consideration of the question of taking up a bill ( which would necessarily prevent the consideration of other matters ) .

the interests and concerns of those who do not yet wish to take up the bill could still likely be addressed , perhaps within internal party negotiations , because the consent of seven fellow party members as well as the leader is needed to use the new expedited process .

in many cases , however , negotiations of this kind might lead not to the use of this bipartisan cloture motion , but rather to instances in which a bill is brought up by unanimous consent that otherwise would have been taken up after invoking cloture on a motion to proceed , or would not have been taken up at all due to time constraints .

it is also possible that the rules change will increase the incentive of proponents of a measure to engage in policy negotiations and to modify proposals , because a bipartisan three - fifths coalition could be viewed as possibly achievable while unanimity might be viewed as unreachable .

s.res .

16 creates a motion to take the three steps necessary to authorize a conference committee with the house and expedites the cloture process on that motion .

prior to this rules change , it effectively required unanimous consent to arrange for a conference committee , principally because of the time that might be required to take each step separately in the face of opposition .

under the new rule , a coalition of three - fifths of the senate can quickly agree to send a bill to conference .

if cloture is filed on the new motion to authorize a conference committee , the consolidated motion would be subject to two hours of debate , after which the senate would vote on cloture .

if cloture is invoked by three - fifths of the senate , a simple majority could approve the motion to authorize a conference , and no further debate of the motion would be in order .

for the two houses to reach the point at which a conference committee can be formed , it is first necessary for one house to pass a measure of the other , with amendments reflecting its own position .

 ( in current practice , the changes proposed usually take the form of a complete substitute amendment. ) .

after this point has been reached , each chamber must take three parliamentary actions to formally establish a conference committee .

first , each chamber has to adopt a motion to establish its disagreement with the other chamber's version of the measure , which in parliamentary language is called reaching the "stage of disagreement. .

the chamber that passed the bill with amendment ( s ) adopts a motion to insist on its amendment ( s ) ; the chamber that first passed the bill adopts a motion to disagree to the amendment ( s ) proposed by the other .

second , both chambers have to agree to send a measure to conference , and the exact form of the parliamentary action depends simply on the order in which the chambers act: the senate is either the first to propose a conference ( in which case , the parliamentary action taken is a request for a conference ) or it is not ( in which case , the parliamentary action taken is to agree to the house request for a conference ) .

the third and final parliamentary action is that the conferees are appointed .

s.res .

16 added a paragraph to senate rule xxviii to create a single motion to accomplish all three parliamentary steps .

specifically , through this new motion the senate can 1 .

reach the stage of disagreement by either insisting on its own amendment ( s ) , or disagreeing to ( a ) house amendment ( s ) .

2 .

agree to create a conference committee , by either requesting a conference or agreeing to the house request for a conference .

3 .

authorize the presiding officer to appoint conferees .

the motion is not subject to division , meaning that no senator can demand that each parliamentary step be considered separately ; the proposal to authorize a conference will be considered and dispensed with as a single proposition .

motions to instruct conferees could still be offered after the senate had approved the motion , but before the presiding officer appointed conferees .

the motion to authorize a conference is in order ( 1 ) after the house has sent an amendment to the senate or ( 2 ) after the house has disagreed to a senate amendment and returned it to the senate .

if the senate has taken up a house - passed bill for consideration ( such as "h.r .

100" ) , then under current practice conference is frequently arranged after the senate has passed the house bill with an amendment .

the new motion to go to conference , however , could not be made as soon as the senate has passed the house bill with an amendment ( s ) .

in the absence of unanimous consent to arrange for a conference , the senate could send the house bill with an amendment back to the house .

the house could then disagree to the senate amendment ( perhaps requesting a conference ) , and return the bill and amendment to the senate .

at that point , the message from the house disagreeing to the senate amendment could be laid before the senate , and the compound motion to authorize a conference would be in order .

if the senate considers its own bill ( such as "s. 100" ) , after passage the senate would send the bill to the house , and the house could amend the bill .

at that point , the senate , once it has received the bill back from the house , could use the new motion to agree to a conference .

this would also be the earliest point the senate could arrange for a conference by unanimous consent .

alternatively , after the senate considers its own bill , it may , by unanimous consent , lay aside its own bill , take up a house - passed measure , and agree to an amendment consisting of the text of the senate bill .

then the senate could send the bill back to the house , and once it was returned conference could be arranged on the house - passed bill as described in the previous paragraph .

the new rule does not allow the consolidated motion to include a provision accomplishing the "hookup" process of a senate - approved text with a house - passed bill ; it could be done quickly only by unanimous consent .

in addition , under the new paragraph , if cloture is filed on the motion to authorize a conference , the motion will thereafter be subject to only two hours of debate , equally divided between the majority and minority leaders , or their designees .

a senator wishing to speak during this time would be yielded a portion of an hour from his or her floor manager .

after all time for debate has been used ( or yielded back ) , the senate will vote on the cloture motion .

if three - fifths of the senate ( usually 60 senators ) agrees to invoke cloture , the question on the motion to authorize a conference would not be subject to further debate under the new rule .

if cloture is never moved on the motion , presumably it would be subject to extended debate under the regular rules of the senate .

if cloture is not invoked , presumably the motion would remain pending before the senate and remain subject to extended debate .

prior to this rules change , unanimous consent was effectively required to send a measure to conference , because the parliamentary actions needed for this purpose could take considerable time to complete if senators attempted to delay further action on the measure .

even in instances when three - fifths or more of the senate was prepared to go to conference , substantial time could be required ( 1 ) for invoking cloture separately on each parliamentary action ( and perhaps on additional motions of higher precedence ) ; ( 2 ) potentially , for the election of conferees by motion and the complications that could arise in the process ; and ( 3 ) for disposing of a theoretically unlimited number of motions to instruct conferees .

if a single senator objected , or threatened to object , to a unanimous consent request to take the actions to send a bill to conference , it could become necessary to take each parliamentary action separately and , potentially , to obtain cloture to limit debate on each in sequence .

the senate rarely found it practical to pursue this route to conference , although , on some occasions , continued negotiations about matters such as the composition of the conference committee or the policy issues in disagreement would lead eventually to the formation of a conference committee .

sometimes , however , it appears the senate did not send a measure to conference due to the time that would be necessary to do so in the face of opposition .

in recent congresses , perhaps in part because of the procedural challenge of arranging for a conference in the senate , the chambers have more often relied instead on amendments between the houses to resolve their differences on a bill .

the informal , bicameral discussions that congress uses to arrive at a resolution of the substantive differences between house and senate versions of a measure are similar whether the final compromise is embodied in a conference report or in an amendment between the houses .

furthermore , the agreement reached through informal negotiations can be presented to each body and considered under terms that , in important respects , resemble the terms for considering a conference report .

in contrast to conference committee procedures , however , the amendments between the houses procedures do not require identification of the negotiators , do not mandate even one public meeting , and do not restrict the authority of the negotiators to the matter submitted to them .

senators from both parties have recently expressed a desire to increase the use of conference committees , and this sentiment may have contributed to the decision to change the rules .

the rules change is clearly intended to address what had been viewed as a significant roadblock in senate procedure .

it is likely to ease the path for conference , because even though three - fifths support is still required for cloture , the previous procedures effectively required unanimous consent .

the rules change , perhaps combined with the acknowledgement that the alternative is amendments between the houses , might increase the number of conference committees formed .

the decision of how to resolve differences between the chambers , however , is affected by many other factors as well .

the rules change could alter senate practices when authorizing a conference in another respect .

the senate might be more likely to debate the question of authorizing a conference on the senate floor .

generally , the question has not been discussed in the past , but instead simply propounded as a unanimous consent request and agreed to without objection .

even if the senate continues to authorize a conference committee pursuant to a unanimous consent request , the terms of the rule could lead senators in some of these cases to request time for debate on the question .

relatedly , another consequence could be an increase in the offering of motions to instruct conferees , again perhaps under the terms of a unanimous consent agreement .

motions to instruct , even if approved , are not binding on conferees , such that if the conference report does not comply with the instructions , no point of order will lie against the conference report on that ground .

such motions are infrequently offered in the senate , although in recent congresses motions to instruct conferees have been offered on legislation on which debate and amendment opportunities had been limited .

for example , motions to instruct have been offered after consideration of budget reconciliation bills the senate considers under expedited procedures outlined in the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-344 , as amended , 2 u.s.c .

621 et .

seq. ) .

furthermore , if the senate finds it necessary to rely on the motion to authorize a conference committee , then conference committees might be arranged at a later parliamentary stage than under current practice .

this could affect which chamber acts first on any resulting conference report .

it is most common , in current practice , for the senate to amend a house bill , insist on its amendment , and request a conference .

the chamber that asks for the conference traditionally acts last on the resulting conference report ; this is not a rule of either chamber , but simply the general practice of both .

as described above , however , the new compound motion would not be in order immediately after the senate passed a house bill with an amendment .

therefore , the conference would be authorized only after house action .

if the house , upon receiving a senate amendment to a house bill , disagrees to the senate amendment and requests the conference , then under the usual congressional practice it would be the house that acted last on the conference report .

in addition to affecting negotiations as to whether to form a conference committee and the floor consideration of the question of authorizing a conference , the change might affect negotiations regarding the ratio of majority to minority conferees .

generally , conferees are appointed from the committee of jurisdiction through a selection process led by committee and party leaders .

when unanimous consent was effectively required to arrange for a conference before , individual senators potentially had leverage over conference committee composition ( although a senator not on the committee of jurisdiction rarely chose to withhold his or her consent unless appointed to the conference committee ) .

leverage regarding the conferee ratio will continue to exist for the minority party , assuming it holds at least 41 seats , but the leverage of an individual senator seeking inclusion on the conference committee will be reduced , in the absence of party support .

a final potential consequence concerns the long - term implications of the rules change .

the new provision of senate rule xxviii creates a method to end debate that is unprecedented in its speed .

the rule effectively creates a two - hour "layover" period for a cloture motion and eliminates post - cloture debate .

it preserves the requirement that three - fifths of the senate agree to end consideration of the question , but to end debate essentially at once with three - fifths is arguably quite different from doing so only after guaranteeing time for each opponent to express his or her views .

the rules change reflects recent unanimous consent practices of shortening or eliminating a cloture process while preserving the requirement for a three - fifths vote .

in this way , the rules change is grounded in senate practice .

yet changing the rules eliminates the need for unanimous consent , and it shifts , at least in theory , some of the negotiating leverage from an individual senator to minority coalitions of senators .

