the national park service ( nps ) administers the national park system for both recreational use and preservation of park resources , a mission that can be contradictory .

increased recreation on nps lands has fueled disagreements over this dual mission and over the optimum extent of motorized versus nonmotorized recreational activities .

the national park system , with 401 units covering approximately 85 million acres of land , received more than 268 million recreational visits in 2013 .

use of off - highway vehicles ( ohvs ) in the parks — including all - terrain vehicles ( atvs ) , snowmobiles , personal watercraft , and others — along with recreational activities such as mountain biking , snow biking , heli - skiing , and aircraft tours , have evolved and gained in popularity .

these newer forms intersect with more traditional , nonmotorized forms of recreation , including land - based activities such as hiking , camping , hunting , birdwatching , horseback riding , and rock climbing , and water - based pursuits such as fishing , canoeing , kayaking , and rafting .

ohv use in the parks has been particularly contentious , although nps has fewer lands open to ohvs than do other federal land management agencies such as the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) .

ohv supporters contend that the vehicles allow visitors access to hard - to - reach natural areas ; bring economic benefits to communities serving riders ; provide outdoor recreation opportunities for the disabled , senior citizens , and others with mobility limitations ; and , in the case of snowmobiles , allow increased access to sites during winter .

they assert that technological advances will continue to limit noise and pollution .

by contrast , opponents of ohvs in the national park system assert that these vehicles damage the environment and cultural artifacts , pose safety concerns , and conflict with other forms of recreation .

nps staffing levels , they contend , are inadequate to effectively monitor motorized use and its impact on park resources .

opponents also cite the availability of other federal lands , such as blm and fs lands , where ohv use may be permitted .

among environmental concerns raised by ohv critics are potential damage to wildlife habitat and land and water ecosystems ; the impact of dust on winter snow melts and water supply ; noise , air , and water pollution ; and a diminished experience for recreationists seeking quiet and solitude and / or hunting and fishing opportunities .

critics also point to the beneficial economic impact of nonmotorized recreation on local communities .

the 113 th congress has addressed motorized recreation in the national park system through legislation and oversight .

bills concerning motorized recreation at nps units include h.r .

819 , h.r .

2954 , and s. 486 , all of which would change regulations for ohvs at cape hatteras national seashore ; and h.r .

3590 , as amended ( h.amdt .

538 ) , which would prohibit nps from altering regulations that allow the use of motorized vessels for fishing at ozark national scenic riverways .

in its oversight role , the house natural resources committee has held hearings on outdoor recreation , including motorized and nonmotorized uses , on federal lands .

a may 2013 hearing addressed outdoor recreation issues such as insurance and permitting problems for outfitters and guides .

a june 2013 hearing discussed federal , state , and local interactions regarding outdoor recreation and addressed problems of coordination , trail and travel planning , conflicts between motorized and nonmotorized uses , and local input into agency planning .

excluding alaska , 13 nps units allow off - road use of atvs , four - wheel drive vehicles , and / or dune , sand , and swamp buggies by the general public .

environmental groups have alleged that these vehicles damage wildlife habitat and disturb nonmotorized activities , both in the units that permit their use and in other areas where , they claim , unauthorized use occurs .

users of the vehicles , by contrast , have sought more routes and areas for off - road recreation and increased motorized access to hunting and fishing sites .

they assert that nps restrictions harm communities surrounding parks , which depend on business generated by ohv users .

nps is in the process of issuing special regulations to designate routes and areas for off - road use in those units that permit atvs and oversand vehicles .

eleven of the 13 park units have special regulations in place: big cypress national preserve ; apostle islands national lakeshore ; curecanti , gateway , and lake meredith national recreation areas ( nras ) ; and assateague , cape cod , cape hatteras , fire island , gulf islands , and padre island national seashores .

two additional units are open to public use while nps completes ohv management planning: glen canyon nra and cape lookout national seashore .

also , lake meredith and curecanti nras and big cypress national preserve are developing regulations to change the current boundaries for ohv riders .

other areas that once allowed public off - road use of atvs and oversand vehicles are now closed to such use , including little river canyon national preserve and big south fork national river and recreation area .

some of nps's regulatory actions respond to a 2005 lawsuit by environmental organizations .

the groups alleged that atvs and other off - highway vehicles constituted a "serious threat" to nps resources that the agency failed to address .

the parties settled in 2008 .

nps is still addressing some requirements of the settlement , such as the requirement that the agency develop environmental impact statements and special rules governing ohv use at glen canyon nra and cape lookout national seashore .

 ( cape lookout has completed public scoping and is developing a draft alternative ohv management plan and environmental assessment ; glen canyon released a draft plan in january 2014. ) .

also in response to the settlement agreement , nps is encouraging education via the websites of units permitting ohv use .

proposals to regulate recreational snowmobile use in nps units have been controversial , with debate often mirroring the preservation / use conflict within the nps mission .

user groups contend that snowmobile use is necessary to access park sites in winter and helps support local communities and industry .

opponents are concerned about emissions , noise pollution , and wildlife damage from snowmobiles on parklands .

in 2000 , nps announced the enforcement of long - standing regulations that would have banned snowmobile use throughout almost all of the national park system ; later it modified its enforcement stance to allow snowmobile use to continue in the 43 park units that had permitted it prior to the announcement .

to date , nps has taken no further action on a general policy for snowmobiles .

however , nps's management policies state that , outside alaska , special regulations are required to designate snowmobile and oversnow vehicle routes after park planning determines such use to be appropriate .

designated routes are limited to those used by motorboats and motorized vehicles in other seasons .

nps is to provide for the public enjoyment of parklands while protecting resources , including natural quiet , while the federal aviation administration ( faa ) controls airspace and aircraft overflights .

this has created a conflict between resource management and aviation access authorities and their constituencies .

grand canyon national park has been the focal point of a conflict between groups seeking to limit overflights of national parks due to concerns about noise and safety , and air tour operators whose economic stability may depend on providing overflights , with ripple effects on local businesses .

the national parks overflights act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-91 ) prohibited flights below the canyon's rim and directed nps to recommend a flight control plan for grand canyon that would provide a "substantial restoration of the natural quiet. .

it required an nps study of the effects of all aircraft overflights , which was submitted to congress in 1994 .

aircraft overflights are also a concern for other park units .

the national parks air tour management act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-181 , title viii , hereinafter "air tour act" ) regulates commercial air tours at other park units .

it requires the faa and nps to create management plans for air tours at individual park units and within a half - mile of their boundaries .

each plan could prohibit or limit air tours , such as by route and altitude restrictions .

the air tour act also requires faa to establish "reasonably achievable" requirements for quiet aircraft technology for grand canyon within one year of enactment and to designate , by rule , grand canyon routes or corridors for aircraft and helicopters using quiet technology .

quiet aircraft would not be subject to existing caps on canyon overflights .

personal watercraft ( pwc ) are high - speed , very shallow - draft , and highly maneuverable watercraft "operated by a person or persons sitting , standing , or kneeling on the vessel rather than within the confines of the hull" ( 36 c.f.r .

§1.4 ) .

often used to perform stunt - like maneuvers , pwc include watercraft known by brand and generic names such as jet ski ® , sea - doo ® , surf - jet ® , water sled , wet jet , wavejammer , wetbike , and waverunner ® .

pwc represent a small segment of the recreational boat market — the national marine manufacturers association ( nmma ) estimated that 1.3 million pwc were in use in 2012 , about 8% of 16.67 million recreational boats .

however , the number of pwc accidents has raised concerns .

there were 721 pwc injuries and 58 deaths reported for 2012 , constituting 19% of reported accidents among all recreational boats .

in addition to safety issues , critics of pwc use cite environmental concerns , including noise , air , and water pollution , as well as damage to land , plants , and wildlife .

supporters of access for pwc contend that technological advances enable manufacturers to produce cleaner , more efficient machines , and they point to economic benefits generated by the industry .

recent controversies have focused on regulatory actions that would restrict recreational use of or access for these vehicles , often in specific park units .

mountain biking advocates , such as the international mountain biking association ( imba ) , actively support opening additional trails in the national park system to mountain bikers .

other groups have expressed concern that increasing the number of trails for mountain bikes could cause resource damage , such as erosion , and diminish the enjoyment of visitors on foot or horseback .

motorized recreation on nps lands sometimes brings into conflict the two parts of the nps mission: to conserve public land while at the same time providing for its enjoyment by the public .

in nps units that permit atvs ; dune , sand , or swamp buggies ; snowmobiles ; aircraft overflights ; personal watercraft ; and / or mountain bikes , the desire for access to these recreational opportunities has clashed with concerns about resource damage and disturbance of non - motorized pursuits .

adding to the conflict are economic considerations , with some asserting that restrictions on motorized recreation harm local industries that serve vehicle users , while others contend that growth in motorized recreation damages valuable natural resources that also draw visitors to the parks and support gateway communities .

nps's laws , regulations , and policies generally emphasize the conservation of park resources in conservation / use conflicts , and nps has fewer lands open to off - highway vehicles than do other federal land management agencies such as the bureau of land management and the forest service .

the 113 th congress has addressed motorized recreation in the national park system through legislation and oversight .

while oversight hearings have concerned broad topics , such as impediments to motorized recreation on federal lands generally , introduced legislation has focused on ohv use at specific units .

congress could consider other specific conflicts or broader topics , such as nps management of motorized recreation , calls to increase motorized access , or impacts of motorized use on natural resources , in the remainder of the 113 th congress .

