the increasing costs of health care have focused congressional attention upon both the development and public availability of prescription drugs .

congress has long recognized that the patent system has an important role to play in the pharmaceutical industry in each respect .

the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , commonly known as the hatch - waxman act , in part reformed both the patent and food and drug laws in order to balance incentives for innovation and competition within the pharmaceutical industry .

recently , congressional attention has been directed towards one aspect of the patent system , the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation .

although brand - name pharmaceutical companies commonly procure patents on their innovative products and processes , such rights are not self - enforcing .

if a brand - name drug company wishes to enforce its patents against generic competitors , it must pursue litigation in the federal courts .

such litigation ordinarily terminates in either a judgment of infringement , which typically blocks generic competition until such time as the patent expires , or a judgment that the patent is invalid or not infringed , which typically opens the market to generic entry .

as with other sorts of commercial litigation , however , the parties to pharmaceutical patent litigation may choose to settle their case .

certain of these settlements call for the generic firm to neither challenge the brand - name company's patents nor sell a generic version of the patented drug .

in exchange , the brand - name drug company agrees to make cash payments to the generic firm .

this compensation has been termed an "exclusion" or "exit" payment or , because the payment flows counterintuitively , from the patent proprietor to the accused infringer , a "reverse" payment. .

some observers have also termed these settlements as "pay - for - delay" agreements .

commentators differ markedly in their views of reverse payment settlements .

some observers believe that they result from the specialized patent litigation procedures established by the hatch - waxman act .

others conclude that when one competitor pays another not to market its product , such a settlement is anti - competitive and presumptively a violation of the antitrust laws .

since 2003 , congress has required that litigants notify federal antitrust authorities of their pharmaceutical patent settlements .

to date , congress has not stipulated substantive standards for assessing the validity of these agreements under the antitrust law , however .

that determination was left to judicial application of general antitrust principles .

uniformity of results was not a hallmark of this line of cases .

facing different factual patterns , some lower courts have concluded that a particular reverse payment settlement constituted an antitrust violation , while others had upheld the agreement .

the june 17 , 2013 , decision of the u.s. supreme court in federal trade commission v. actavis , inc. resolved this disagreement by holding that the legality of reverse payment settlements should be evaluated under the "rule of reason" approach .

however , the court declined to hold that such settlements should be presumptively illegal under a "quick look" analysis .

the lower courts now face the potentially complex task of applying the rule of reason to reverse payment settlements going forward .

legislation before the 113 th congress also relates to reverse payment settlements .

the preserve access to affordable generics act ( s. 214 ) would create a rebuttable presumption that certain reverse payment settlements were illegal .

in addition , the fair generics act ( s. 504 ) would introduce reforms to the hatch - waxman act that would reduce incentives for generic firms to settle with brand - name companies .

this legislation has not yet been enacted .

this report introduces and analyzes innovation and competition policy issues associated with pharmaceutical patent litigation settlements .

it begins with a review of pharmaceutical patent litigation procedures under the hatch - waxman act .

the report then introduces the concept of reverse payment settlements .

next , the report analyzes the status of reverse payment settlements under the antitrust laws .

the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and possible alternatives .

as discussed previously , a generic firm's filing of a paragraph iv anda may result in a patent infringement suit brought by a brand - name drug company .

in such litigation , if the nda holder demonstrates that the independent generic firm's proposed product would violate its patents , then the court will ordinarily issue an injunction that prevents the generic drug company from marketing that product .

that injunction will expire on the same date as the nda holder's patents .

independent generic drug companies commonly amend their andas in this event , replacing their paragraph iv certifications with paragraph iii certifications .

on the other hand , the courts may decide in favor of the independent generic firm .

the court may conclude that the generic firm's proposed product does not infringe the asserted patents , or that the asserted patents are invalid or unenforceable .

in this circumstance , the independent generic firm may launch its product once the fda has finally approved its anda .

in addition to the issuance of final judgment in favor of either the brand - name drug company or generic firm , another resolution of pharmaceutical patent litigation is possible .

this legal situation led to a number of cases with varying details , but a common core fact pattern .

upon filing a paragraph iv anda , a generic firm would be sued for patent infringement as provided by the hatch - waxman act .

the nda holder and generic applicant would then settle their dispute .

the settlement would call for the generic firm to neither challenge the patent nor produce a generic version of the patented drug , for a period of time up to the remaining term of the patent .

in exchange , the nda holder would agree to compensate the anda applicant , often with substantial monetary payments over a number of years .

opinions about the effects of reverse payment settlements upon social welfare have varied .

some commentators believe that such settlements are anticompetitive .

they believe that many of these agreements may amount to no more than two firms colluding in order to restrict output and share patent - based profits .

such settlements are also said to eliminate the possibility of a judicial holding of patent invalidity , which may open the market to generic competition and benefit consumers .

on the other hand , some commentators have found nothing inherently troublesome about reverse payment settlements .

among their observations is that there is a general judicial policy in favor of promoting settlement .

settlements can allow the parties to avoid the expenses of litigation , achieve a resolution to the dispute in a timely manner , and avoid the risk of an uncertain result in the courtroom .

the settlement of litigation further serves the goal of resolving disputes in a peaceful manner , and also preserves scarce judicial resources .

second , any settlement of litigation between rational actors necessarily involves an exchange of benefits and obligations .

as judge richard posner has explained: [a]ny settlement agreement can be characterized as involving "compensation" to the defendant , who would not settle unless he had something to show for the settlement .

if any settlement agreement is thus to be classified as involving a forbidden "reverse payment," we shall have no more patent settlements .

third , certain reverse payment settlements have allowed for the introduction of generic competition prior to the date the relevant patent expires .

it is possible , for example , for the brand - name and generic firms to divide the remaining patent term between them , with the generic firm being allowed to market a competing product prior to the running of the full patent term .

such agreements may potentially benefit consumers , certainly in comparison to a judgment that the patent is not invalid and infringed .

finally , the dispute settlement procedures established by the hatch - waxman act may themselves promote the use of reverse payment settlements in pharmaceutical patent litigation .

in patent litigation outside the hatch - waxman act context , the accused infringer is ordinarily using or marketing the patented technology .

a judicial finding of infringement would expose the accused infringer to an injunction , along with damages awarded for past uses and sales .

as a result , the accused infringer may well be willing to compensate the patent proprietor in order to avoid the risk of such a holding .

some observers believe that the structure of the hatch - waxman act alters the traditional balance of risks between the plaintiff - patentee and accused infringer .

as explained by one federal district court: [i]n creating an artificial act of infringement ( the anda iv filing ) , the hatch - waxman amendments grant generic manufacturers standing to mount a validity challenge without incurring the cost of entry or risking enormous damages flowing from infringing commercial sales.... because of the hatch - waxman scheme , [the generic firm's] exposure in the patent litigation was limited to litigation costs , but its upside – exclusive generic sales – was immense .

the patent holder , however , has no corresponding upside , as there are no infringement damages to collect , but has an enormous downside – losing the patent .

as a result , some commentators believe that it is entirely predictable that the unique procedures of the hatch - waxman act have resulted in the new phenomenon of reverse payment settlements .

at the present time , congressional action on pharmaceutical patent litigation settlements has been limited .

in the 2003 medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma ) , congress mandated that the department of justice ( doj ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) receive copies of certain patent settlements agreements in the pharmaceutical field .

the filing requirement applies to agreements executed on or after january 7 , 2004 , between an anda applicant , on one hand , and either the nda holder or an owner of an orange book - listed patent , on the other .

such agreements trigger the statutory notification requirement if they relate to one of three topics: ( 1 ) the manufacture , marketing , or sale of the brand - name drug that is the listed drug in the anda ; ( 2 ) the manufacture , marketing , or sale of the generic drug for which the anda was submitted ; or ( 3 ) the 180-day generic exclusivity period as it applies to that anda , or to another anda filed with respect to the same brand - name drug .

the mma stipulates that certain agreements are not subject to this filing requirement .

in particular , agreements that solely consist of purchase orders for raw materials , equipment and facility contracts , employment or consulting contracts , or packaging and labeling contracts do not need to be submitted to the doj or ftc .

the ftc reported that during fy2012 ( october 1 , 2011 , to september 30 , 2012 ) , the agency received "140 final resolutions of patent disputes between a brand and a generic , of which 40 settlements may involve pay - for - delay payments. .

although the mma imposed a filing obligation upon certain patent settlements between pharmaceutical firms , that legislation did not set substantive standards as to the validity of these agreements .

both prior and subsequent to congressional enactment of the mma , however , various government and private actors asserted that certain reverse payment settlements violated the antitrust laws .

in order to resolve these claims , different courts applied general principles of antitrust law .

facing different factual patterns , the courts ultimately reached varying results .

after introducing the basic concepts of antitrust law , this report next reviews several judicial opinions that address reverse payment settlements .

in view of this landscape , several options are available for congress .

one possibility is to await further judicial developments .

the supreme court's actavis decision arguably resolved the split among the courts of appeal with respect to reverse payment settlements , but it remains to be seen how the lower courts will continue to refine this case law .

another option is to regulate the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation in some manner .

two bills in the 113 th congress pertain to reverse payment settlements .

the preserve access to affordable generics act , s. 27 , would declare that certain reverse payment settlements constitute acts of unfair competition .

in particular , that bill would amend the federal trade commission act to provide that an agreement "shall be presumed to have anticompetitive effects and be unlawful if — ( i ) an anda filer receives anything of value ; and ( ii ) the anda filer agrees to limit or forego research , development , manufacturing , marketing , or sales of the anda product for any period of time. .

that presumption would not apply if the parties to the agreement demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the procompetitive benefits of the agreement outweighed the anticompetitive effects of the agreement .

s. 27 includes a list of factors to be weighed by the courts in such circumstances .

in addition , the fair and immediate release of generics act , s. 504 , would make a number of changes to the hatch - waxman act in order to discourage reverse payments settlements .

in particular , s. 504 would grant any generic firm the right to share the 180-day regulatory exclusivity if it wins a patent challenge in the district court or is not sued for patent infringement by the brand company .

the legislation would also obligate generic firms to abide by any deferred entry date agreed to in their settlements with brand - name firms , even if relevant patents were struck down previously .

finally , brand - name firms would be required to make a decision to enforce their patents within 45 days of being notified of a patent challenge by a generic firm under the hatch - waxman act .

the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation forms an important issue because such litigation is itself important to our public health system .

our patient population relies upon brand - name drug companies to develop new medicines , but it also relies upon generic firms to increase access to such medications once they have been developed .

the hatch - waxman act provides for patent litigation between these two traditional rivals as a primary vehicle through which these competing demands are mediated .

when concluded in a manner that comports with antitrust principles , such settlements may further the public policy goals of encouraging the labors that lead to medical innovation , but also distributing the fruits of those labors to consumers .

