for many years , the unauthorized alien population has been seen as a public policy challenge .

addressing this population , estimated to number more than 11 million today , may take on added urgency in 2013 if the 113 th congress tackles comprehensive immigration reform .

despite longstanding concern about the unauthorized population , however , there has not been much discussion about its composition .

while the individuals included in this population at any point in time are officially categorized as unauthorized , they may differ significantly in their particular status - related circumstances under immigration law .

for example , some unauthorized aliens in the united states have u.s. citizen or lpr family members or employers who are petitioning for them to become legal permanent residents ( lprs ) of the united states under current law ; others have no such sponsors .

the variety of status - related circumstances among unauthorized aliens warrants attention because some immigration reform policy options under discussion would make distinctions based on individual circumstances .

while there continue to be proposals seeking to establish statutory legalization programs to enable large numbers of unauthorized aliens to become lprs or , conversely , proposals aimed at promoting the departure of large numbers of unauthorized aliens from the country over time , there also has been discussion of developing policies to provide targeted immigration relief to the unauthorized alien population .

immigration relief is a broad term that encompasses relief from removal from the united states without the granting of a legal immigration status as well as relief in the form of a legal immigration status , which could be a temporary immigration status or a permanent immigration status .

a main focus of these various discussions about targeted relief has been limiting eligibility for legal status to certain segments of the unauthorized population .

to help inform policy discussions about addressing the unauthorized alien population in these targeted ways , this report will analyze components of the unauthorized population and discuss policy options to provide relief to selected subgroups of particular congressional and public interest .

according to recent estimates by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the unauthorized resident alien population totaled 11.5 million in january 2011 .

using different sources , the pew hispanic center estimated the unauthorized resident population at 11.1 million for march 2011 .

both sets of estimates include individuals who are sometimes described as being "quasi - legal" because they have temporary authorization to remain in the united states but do not have a legal immigration status .

these individuals include applicants for asylum ( see asylum under other avenues to legal immigration status ) and persons with temporary protected status ( tps ) ( see other forms of immigration relief ) .

dhs and pew have analyzed the demographic characteristics of the unauthorized alien population .

these characteristics help determine an individual's status - related prospects .

among the dhs and pew findings , dhs estimated that about 85% of the unauthorized population in january 2011 had entered the country before 2005 .

with respect to labor force participation , pew estimated that there were 8.0 million unauthorized aliens in the labor force in 2010 , representing almost four of every five unauthorized adults in the united states that year .

pew also considered the u.s. families of unauthorized aliens , estimating that about half of all unauthorized adults ( about 5 million individuals ) were in families with minor children in 2010 .

about 1 million of these children were unauthorized aliens ; another estimated 4.5 million children in families with at least one unauthorized parent were u.s. - born citizens .

according to the pew analysis , at least 9 million adults and children were in mixed - status families ( i.e. , families with at least one unauthorized parent and at least one u.s. - born child ) in 2010 .

under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , the basis of current immigration law , unauthorized aliens are typically unable to be legally employed and are subject to being removed from the country .

they also have limited opportunities to obtain legal status while remaining in the united states .

the ina prescribes pathways through which a foreign national can obtain legal temporary status and legal permanent status while in the united states .

nonimmigrants comprise the main category of legal temporary admissions .

they include tourists , foreign students , and temporary workers , among others .

immigrants , synonymous with legal permanent residents , comprise the main category of legal permanent admissions .

they consist primarily of family - based admissions ( foreign nationals admitted on the basis of family ties ) and employment - based admissions ( foreign nationals admitted on the basis of employment ties or abilities ) .

also included among permanent admissions are humanitarian cases , such as individuals granted asylum on the basis of persecution claims .

foreign nationals in the united states — whether legally present or illegally present — who want to become lprs and who are not eligible for humanitarian relief may lack the requisite family or employment relationships to obtain lpr status under the permanent family - based or employment - based immigration systems .

in addition , the ina includes mechanisms , such as the grounds of inadmissibility , that may bar an unauthorized alien with the requisite ties from obtaining legal immigration status .

in order to be eligible for a nonimmigrant or immigrant visa and for admission to the united states , a foreign national must be found to be admissible to the country .

the ina enumerates grounds of inadmissibility — grounds upon which aliens are ineligible for visas and admission .

they include health - related grounds and security - and terrorism - related grounds as well as grounds concerning illegal entrants , public charge ( the likelihood that an alien will require public support ) , and other issues .

some grounds of inadmissibility may be waived , as specified in the ina .

selected grounds of inadmissibility , including those related to illegal entrants and illegal presence in the united states , are discussed separately below ( see " admissibility " ) .

the following are key provisions in current law relevant to gaining legal nonimmigrant or immigrant admission to the united states while in the country .

the provisions are introduced generally here to provide the background information necessary to discuss their application to unauthorized aliens .

as explored briefly here and more fully in subsequent sections of this report , current law provides potential pathways for some components of the unauthorized resident population to obtain legal status , but not for others .

those without existing pathways would require new legislative enactments to become eligible for legal immigration status .

through the mechanisms described above , an eligible unauthorized alien may obtain legal permanent status or , in the case of nonimmigrant admissions , legal nonimmigrant status .

other forms of relief enable unauthorized aliens to remain in the united states temporarily but do not grant them a legal status .

for this reason , beneficiaries of these types of relief are sometimes referred to as "quasi - legal. .

these types of relief , some of which are applied as blanket relief to members of a designated class and some of which are applied on a case - by - case basis , have historically been provided for humanitarian purposes .

there are several forms of blanket relief that have been provided for humanitarian purposes over the years .

in most cases , this relief has been provided on a discretionary basis administratively , by the attorney general or , more recently , by the secretary of homeland security .

individuals granted blanket relief typically can apply for employment authorization .

the most common discretionary procedures to provide blanket relief have been extended voluntary departure ( evd ) , and deferred departure or deferred enforced departure ( ded ) .

over the years , evd and ded have been provided to otherwise deportable aliens of various nationalities , including ethiopians , iranians , afghans , poles and salvadorans .

currently , certain liberians in the united states have ded .

while evd and ded do not confer legal status , in the past legislation has been enacted to grant lpr status to members of specified groups with these forms of relief .

for example , legislation enacted by the 100 th congress in 1987 provided for the adjustment of status of aliens who were provided with , or allowed to maintain , evd on the basis of a nationality group determination during the previous five years .

nationality groups covered by this language included ethiopians , afghans , and poles .

one form of blanket relief — temporary protected status ( tps ) — is authorized by the ina .

the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , may designate a foreign state or part of a foreign state for tps in certain situations , including in cases of ongoing armed conflict or environmental disaster , as specified in the ina .

a foreign state can be designated for tps for a period of between 6 and 18 months , subject to extension .

to obtain tps , eligible aliens report to uscis , pay a processing fee , and receive registration documents and a work authorization .

as of january 2013 , the following countries are designated for tps: el salvador , haiti , honduras , nicaragua , somalia , sudan , south sudan , and syria .

the ina provision authorizing tps , however , places restrictions on congressional consideration of legislation to grant those with tps a legal immigration status ( see " aliens with temporary protected status or other temporary relief from removal ," below ) .

rather than being applied as blanket relief to members of a designated class , relief from removal can also be applied on a case - by - case basis .

the discretionary procedure of deferred action provides relief , on an individual basis , to a particular individual for a specific period of time .

individuals granted deferred action may apply for employment authorization .

the uscis adjudicator's field manual describes deferred action , as follows: a dhs field office director may , in his or her discretion , recommend deferral of ( removal ) action , an act of administrative choice in determining , as a matter of prosecutorial discretion , to give some cases lower enforcement priority.… accrual of unlawful presence stops on the date an alien is granted deferred action and resumes the day after deferred action is terminated .

dhs and its predecessor , the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , have utilized deferred action to provide relief to members of defined groups .

for example , in 1997 , ins issued a guidance memorandum concerning deferred action in cases of battered aliens who were self - petitioning for immigrant status in accordance with the 1994 violence against women act ( vawa ) .

more recently , as described below under " unauthorized aliens who arrived as children ," dhs established a deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) program .

another form of case - by - case relief for unauthorized aliens falls under dhs's parole authority , as set forth in the ina .

parole is discretionary authority that may be exercised by dhs to allow an alien to enter the united states temporarily ( without being formally admitted ) for urgent humanitarian reasons or when the entry is determined to be for significant public benefit .

granting parole to unauthorized aliens already in the united states is known as parole - in - place .

in recent years , parole - in - place has been used to enable the spouses and children of military service members to adjust status in the united states .

as discussed , aliens who have been paroled into the united states are eligible to adjust status under the main ina §245 ( a ) adjustment of status provision .

while a stereotypical view of an unauthorized alien may be of a young man with no connections to the united states who crosses the southwest border illegally in search of work , in reality the unauthorized alien population includes individuals who entered the country in different ways , for different reasons , and who have different types of connections to the united states .

the circumstances of individuals who compose the unauthorized alien population affect their treatment under current immigration law as well as their future status - related prospects .

the following factors are relevant to a consideration of the treatment and status prospects of unauthorized aliens in the united states .

based on the factors discussed in the preceding section and other considerations , individuals in the unauthorized alien population can be grouped into various status - related categories .

the subgroups listed here , which overlap and are fluid , reflect aliens' current status and available avenues for immigration relief .

while these subgroups cover the large majority of those considered to be unauthorized , they do not necessarily cover the entire population .

there has been increasing discussion in recent years of developing policies to provide targeted relief to unauthorized aliens .

these policies could take a variety of forms .

they could be legislative or administrative , and could provide different types of relief to different subgroups of the unauthorized population .

a main focus of these policy discussions has been unauthorized aliens with approved immigrant visa petitions , especially those with u.s. citizen or lpr family members .

selected segments of the unauthorized alien population without an affirmative pathway to legal status , such as students who entered the united states as children and aliens with long - term tps , also have been the subject of policy proposals .

considering targeted immigration relief for unauthorized aliens may offer policymakers new options for tackling the vexing issue of unauthorized immigration .

pursuing a targeted approach , however , would require policymakers to make distinctions among members of the unauthorized population to determine what type of relief to make available to what subgroup .

among the many related questions that could arise may be whether to limit the prospect of legal status to those who qualify under current law , whether to provide pathways to permanent legal status as well as temporary legal status , and whether to place any numerical limits on any new forms of relief .

also important would be questions about which subgroups of unauthorized aliens in the united states would not be covered by targeted immigration relief options under discussion and what policies would be pursued toward them .

