rising tensions over overlapping maritime territorial claims in east asia have become a pressing challenge for u.s. policy makers , raising important questions about u.s. diplomacy and security commitments in the region .

these issues raise a series of challenges for congress , including broad oversight of the obama administration's policies in asia , decisions about military priorities and resources in and around disputed areas , how deeply to support the development of military capabilities of disputant nations , and how to manage relations with parties involved in the disputes , particularly china , japan , the philippines , and vietnam , which have been involved in increasingly frequent maritime incidents in the east china sea and south china sea .

the territorial disputes at the heart of these tensions are decades old , and incidents among the parties have been ongoing for many years .

observers have noted a sharp uptick in maritime incidents and diplomatic tensions over recent years , posing one of the first major challenges for the u.s. strategic "rebalancing" towards the asia - pacific .

although the people's republic of china ( prc ) is not the only nation that has sought to press its maritime territorial claims , actions taken by prc actors , including china's maritime law enforcement authorities and the people's liberation army ( pla ) , have been a particular concern .

the most serious sets of disputes are in the east china sea and south china sea .

the former include the competing claims by china , japan , and taiwan over a set of japanese - controlled islets called the senkakus by japan , the diaoyu islands by china , and the diaoyutai islands by taiwan .

the south china sea disputes involve competing claims by brunei , malaysia , china , the philippines , taiwan , and vietnam .

other disputes involve japan and south korea in the sea of japan , and china and south korea in the yellow sea .

the south china sea , the east china sea , and the sea of japan are among the world's busiest waterways , and incidents at sea can create risks for vessels operating in both seas .

incidents arise for many reasons , including the desire of nations around a sea's periphery to demonstrate sovereignty and to protect their ability to exploit economic resources including oil and gas , or fish .

in addition , incidents can be propelled by populist pressures in many of the nations involved .

the united states is not a claimant in any of these waters , and it has consistently taken no position on the specific sovereignty questions .

however , u.s. government officials regularly voice u.s. opposition to the use of force , threat , or coercion by nations seeking to strengthen sovereignty claims over landmasses , and support for the use of customary international law and available arbitration mechanisms to resolve disputes peacefully .

u.s. officials also have voiced the position that maritime claims should be based on relevant international law , as indicated in the 1982 u.n. convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) .

to many observers , chinese actions in the disputed waters will be a key factor for regional security , and a test of china's development as a regional power and a responsible global actor .

many analysts argue that because china has more military might than many of the claimants , as well as economic leverage and geopolitical clout , its behavior in these disputes sets the tone for maritime security in the region .

prc officials , by contrast , regularly have argued that they are responding to the actions of other nations rather than acting aggressively .

they have reacted particularly strongly to u.s. actions and statements which they perceive as supportive of other claimants , arguing that the united states is contributing to regional instability by emboldening other nations .

in this context , u.s. policy makers face numerous simultaneous challenges: discouraging what many see as aggressive or coercive chinese behavior while retaining a productive relationship with beijing , supporting u.s. allies while discouraging them from taking actions that could further escalate tensions , and helping the region's nations forge multilateral "rules of the road" for managing tensions — all at a time when the frequency of maritime incidents continues to grow .

administration officials say the disputes and tensions will likely continue in the region for years .

this report will discuss the territorial claims in east asia that underlie the growing tensions , u.s. interests that are at stake , factors that may be driving the growing tensions , and possible options for congress to consider .

a companion crs report r42784 , maritime territorial and exclusive economic zone ( eez ) disputes involving china: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , focuses on the security implications for the united states of disagreements over the definition of and the permissible activities in the disputed eezs in the east china sea and the south china sea , with a focus on issues involving china .

other crs reports discuss these issues as well , including crs report r42761 , senkaku ( diaoyu / diaoyutai ) islands dispute: u.s. treaty obligations , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r41108 , u.s. - china relations: an overview of policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl32496 , u.s. - china military contacts: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33436 , japan - u.s. relations: issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r40208 , u.s. - vietnam relations in 2013: current issues and implications for u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43498 , the republic of the philippines and u.s. interests — 2014 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r41952 , u.s. - taiwan relationship: overview of policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

maritime territorial disputes are a significant factor in u.s. diplomacy in east asia , particularly relations with china , japan , south korea , and southeast asian nations including the philippines and vietnam .

they have become one of the most challenging aspects of u.s. policy in asia , touching on the management of treaty alliances , particularly those with japan and the philippines , where treaty obligations could be invoked if either country becomes involved in an active conflict with another of the claimants ( for more , see the " treaty obligations " section below ) , and on the obama administration's efforts to help asian nations build regional "rules and norms" that foster stability .

long - standing u.s. policy holds that the united states has no territorial claims in the region and does not take a position on any of the specific sovereignty disputes , but that it supports freedom of navigation in these waters and opposes the use of coercion , intimidation , threats , or force by claimants trying to assert their territorial claims .

the obama administration has taken several steps to raise the level of u.s. involvement in the disputes .

in what many analysts regard as a touchstone moment in the u.s. approach , secretary of state hillary clinton stated at the july 2010 meeting of the asean regional forum ( arf ) in hanoi , vietnam , that the united states has a "national interest in freedom of navigation , open access to asia's maritime commons , and respect for international law in the south china sea. .

chinese officials reacted angrily to the statement , and to the fact that 11 other nations at the meeting also voiced similar concerns .

at nearly every regional security dialogue since that meeting , u.s. and other regional officials have voiced concern about the issues , while china has sought to have them removed from the multilateral agenda , arguing that the maritime territorial disputes and incidents are bilateral issues to be resolved by the nations involved .

in the east china sea , where the frequency of sino - japan maritime incidents has grown to levels that many observers find alarming , the obama administration has raised the profile of the long - standing u.s. position that the u.s. - japan security treaty , under which united states is bound to protect "the territories under the administration of japan," covers the senkaku islets because they are administered by japan .

on an april 2014 state visit to japan , president obama became the first president to state this publicly , prompting an angry chinese response .

administration officials have coupled statements to this effect to statements that the united states takes no position on the question of sovereignty and that it opposes unilateral attempts to undermine japanese administration .

to some japanese observers , the growing sino - japan maritime confrontation is a concrete manifestation of the threat japan has faced for years from china's rising regional power .

it brings into relief japan's dependence on the u.s. security guarantee and its anxiety that washington will not defend japanese territory if doing so risks war with china .

in this context , the rebalancing strategy has been reassuring to many japanese leaders .

however , obama administration officials also have communicated concerns to their japanese counterparts that tokyo should not be seen as unnecessarily provocative on disputes with its neighbors .

many chinese observers see the confrontation in the opposite way: a concrete manifestation of the threat china faces from a re - militarizing japan , backed by u.s. support .

china considers japan to have set off the current round of tensions in 2012 by purchasing the islets from private japanese owners .

china also believes the u.s. rebalancing has contributed to the rising tensions , emboldening japan and changing what it says had been a stable situation .

the diametrically opposed views underscore how hard it will be to reduce tensions .

in the south china sea , the united states has voiced support for multilateral dialogues to help manage tensions , acknowledging that the territorial disputes are long - standing , involve numerous parties , and will be very difficult to resolve in the near term .

it has voiced particular support for discussions between china and asean over a code of conduct for disputants in the region .

to many analysts , such a set of mutual understandings — ideally with some form of enforcement mechanism — could contribute to preventing potential conflict .

although asean - china negotiations on a code were restarted in 2013 , disagreement among parties about what should be included , and whether a code should have binding dispute resolution mechanisms , has stymied progress .

in recent months , many observers note that obama administrations officials also have become more specific in their calls for all parties to adhere to customary international law , as embodied in the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) , and to clarify the precise nature of their claims .

in february 6 , 2014 , testimony to the house foreign affairs committee's asia subcommittee , assistant secretary of state daniel russel said: "... we do take a strong position that maritime claims must accord with customary international law .

this means that all maritime claims must be derived from land features and otherwise comport with the international law of the sea. .

during an april trip to the philippines , president obama praised manila's decision to file for international arbitration in its maritime disputes with china .

at the same time , the tensions raise the issue of whether the united states should seek to improve the capabilities of southeast asian nations to monitor and police their maritime territory in the south china sea , where several nations have disputes with china .

the united states has transferred to the philippines two 3,350-ton hamilton - class high - endurance cutters that originally entered service with the u.s. coast guard in 1967 .

in december 2013 , the administration announced two security assistance packages — a $40 million , three - year package for the philippines under the global security contingency fund ( gscf ) , to aid the philippine coast guard and national police improve maritime domain awareness , logistics , engineering , communication , and vessel maintenance ; and a $32.5 million regional assistance package — including $18 million for vietnam — to enhance the capacity of coastal patrol units .

the latter package included new maritime law enforcement training courses at the international law enforcement academy in bangkok , thailand .

maritime disputes in east asia raise numerous issues for congress , including broad oversight of the obama administration's policies and relations with each of the claimant nations .

congress faces questions of how much to support the development of military capabilities of southeast asian disputants , each of which is at a military disadvantage with china , and how to manage relations with china and japan , which have been involved in increasingly frequent maritime incidents in the east china sea .

congress may choose to examine the rebalancing towards asia and its implications for relations between china and other claimant nations .

it may choose to assess whether the obama administration's approach is fostering stability , and whether the administration has a clearly articulated strategy for dealing with the disputes .

one key congressional concern has been the possibility that the united states could be drawn into a conflict in the region .

some analysts point to the risk of a conflict that could bring in the united states , arising from scenarios that include: chinese action to block u.s. surveillance activity within china's 200-nautical - mile exclusive economic zone ( eez ) ( the area from 12 nautical miles from china's coast to 200 nautical miles from its coast ) , where china takes the position that foreign militaries must seek its approval to conduct any activity ; armed conflict between china and another claimant , perhaps as an escalation of an inadvertent incident such as a collision .

this would be of particular concern in the cases of japan or the philippines , both of which have treaty alliances with the united states .

as noted above , the u.s. position is that the u.s. - japan security treaty of 1960 applies to the senkaku islands , which are claimed by china , japan , and taiwan , and administered by japan .

the 1951 mutual defense treaty with the philippines is less definitive about the united states' responsibilities in the event of an attack on philippine - claimed territory in the south china sea .

east asian maritime territorial disputes may play a role in consideration of various legislation during the 113 th congress , especially defense authorization and appropriation bills .

defense authorization legislation may consider the implications of the reallocation of military resources within the asia - pacific region on the political dynamics among the various claimants in the east and south china seas .

similarly , congress may examine defense appropriation legislation which may provide for the provision of military resources to southeast asian nations .

h.r .

4495 , introduced in the house on april 28 , 2014 , called on the department of defense to conduct an assessment of the maritime balance of forces in the asia - pacific region over the next 10-year period , and ensure the united states maintains its defense commitment to the region .

overall , congress has the ability to lend its voice in support of processes to lower tensions and seek resolution of the disputes , or to speak forcefully about what it sees as aggressive or coercive actions by parties in the disputes .

it can urge that u.s. relations with china , japan , taiwan , southeast asian claimants , and multilateral bodies such as asean be conducted in ways that serve u.s. interests in the region .

for example , congress inserted in the fy2013 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

4310 / p.l .

112-239 ) a resolution stating among other items that "the unilateral action of a third party will not affect the united states' acknowledgment of the administration of japan over the senkaku islands. .

the senate has considered resolutions regarding maritime security in east asia .

on july 29 , 2013 , it unanimously agreed to s.res .

167 ( "reaffirming the strong support of the united states for the peaceful resolution of territorial , sovereignty , and jurisdictional disputes in the asia - pacific maritime domains .

" ) , which condemns the use of coercion and urges all parties to the disputes to exercise self - restraint ; supports a south china sea code of conduct , collaborative diplomatic processes , and adherence to international law , including the use of international arbitration ; and encourages the strengthening of u.s. partnerships and military engagement in the region .

on april 7 , 2014 , senator robert menendez introduced s.res .

412 ( "reaffirming the strong support of the united states government for freedom of navigation and other internationally lawful uses of sea and airspace in the asia - pacific region , and for the peaceful diplomatic resolution of outstanding territorial and maritime claims and disputes .

" ) , which has been referred to the senate foreign relations committee .

h.r .

4495 , mentioned above , makes many similar statements of support for peaceful resolution of the disputes .

it has been referred to both the house armed services committee and house foreign affairs committee .

the senate also could offer its advice and consent to u.s. adherence to the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) , which went into force in 1994 and is widely considered the governing regime for oceans and the primary ( though not the only ) venue for making maritime territorial claims and adjudicating maritime territorial disputes .

the united states signed unclos in 1994 but has not ratified it .

in the 112 th congress , the senate foreign relations committee held four hearings on unclos , considering the opinions of the obama administration , military leadership , the private sector , and opponents of accession .

the committee held no vote on the convention in the 112 th congress , and no hearings have been held in the 113 th congress .

the persistence of complex and overlapping territorial claims in the south china sea , the east china sea , the sea of japan , and the yellow sea is at the base of tensions that have existed for decades , and that have flared up substantially in recent years .

the disputes stem from myriad factors , including different interpretations of history , different interpretations of unclos , the unwillingness of some parties to submit to dispute settlement procedures , and — with rare exceptions — the inability of the disputants to negotiate settlements among themselves .

one of the most complex issues surrounding maritime territorial disputes is that there is no single agreed - upon venue or protocol for resolving them .

unclos — to which each of the claimant states is a part — presents one possible venue for making formal claims to maritime territory .

unclos hosts dispute - resolution mechanisms including the international tribunal of the law of the sea ( itlos ) and can also refer disputes to the international court of justice ( icg ) .

however , when china became a party to the convention , it formally did not accept its dispute - resolution chapters .

furthermore , unclos's provisions do not govern decisions on who owns which land or landmasses — they apply only to the maritime rights countries can claim around their sovereign land territory .

the prc's expansive and vaguely defined claims in the south china sea are not based on unclos's provisions , relying instead on historical documents predating unclos , which beijing argues show it enjoyed centuries of administrative control of the areas .

countries have relied on numerous tools to demonstrate sovereignty claims , including evidence of historical administrative control or de facto administrative control through occupation or construction on islands and other landmasses .

nations have declared islets , some of them no more than rocks at high tide , as sovereign territories .

this dynamic has led to numerous instances of aggressive behavior by claimants trying to demonstrate administrative control over an area .

many observers argue that the rising frequency of sino - japan incidents in the senkakus relates to a chinese effort to demonstrate that japan does not exercise undisputed administration over the uninhabited islets , and a japanese effort to demonstrate that it does .

other incidents in the south china sea — including a 2012 china - philippines dispute over a set of outcroppings known as scarborough shoal and a may 2014 china - vietnam standoff after the china national offshore oil corporation ( cnooc ) moved an exploration rig into waters claimed by both nations — can be seen as attempts to show which claimant has effective control over an area .

such behavior is not new: beginning in the 1940s , claimants including china , malaysia , the philippines , taiwan , and vietnam have each occupied islands and rocks in the south china sea in order to demonstrate administrative control .

if sovereignty over an island or rock can be established , unclos allows its members to claim various types of adjoining maritime territory , with varying associated rights and privileges ( see table 1 ) .

in essence , a landmass is entitled to an exclusive economic zone of up to 200 nautical miles if it is habitable , although the convention does not give a precise definition of the term .

if the landmass is not habitable but extends above the sea level at high tide , it is deemed under unclos to be a rock , and entitled to only a 12 nautical mile territorial sea .

the distinction is one reason why claimants in the south china sea have built extensive structures and even based people above land features that are little more than rocks at high tide .

under unclos , rocks that do not extend above sea level at high tide are not landmasses and do not allow a claimant to claim any maritime territory .

there essentially are two disagreements over territory and boundaries in the east china sea ( known in china as dong hai , or east sea ) .

the first , and most acrimonious , is the territorial dispute over the senkaku islets ( called the diaoyu islets by the prc and the diaoyutai islets by taiwan ) , which are administered by japan , but also claimed by china and taiwan .

the second major east china sea disagreement is a maritime sovereignty dispute between china and japan .

while china claims the whole continental shelf to the okinawa trough , japan claims the same shelf to a median line between its undisputed territory and that of china .

east asia's territorial disputes are decades old , and incidents at sea have taken place for many years .

to some , the fact that the disputants have not resorted to large - scale combat since china's 1974 seizure of the paracel islands from the faltering republic of vietnam ( south vietnam ) is a testimony to the region's stability .

however , the notable uptick in tensions since 2005-2006 has raised deep concerns in the region and among those who rely on trade routes through the south china sea and east china sea to support economic growth and trade .

the explanations for the uptick in tensions in recent years are numerous , and include: competition for energy and fishery resources .

such competition long has been a factor in the south china sea , but it has been heightened by the greater energy needs of rapidly growing economies , higher energy prices , and more sophisticated offshore exploration and extraction technology that makes offshore development a more realistic prospect .

overfishing in coastal waters has also pushed more fishing vessels to operate in disputed territory .

growing energy demand in the region's expanding economies compels maritime nations , particularly china , the philippines , and vietnam , to seek the greatest possible rights to exploit resources .

china's emergence as a regional power , and deep uncertainty about its strategic intentions .

questions about china include whether its foreign policy has shifted to a fundamentally more assertive stance , whether it is actively seeking a strategic maritime buffer zone in the region , and whether it sees southeast asian nations as strategic and economic partners or rivals .

over the past two years , there also have been questions about how china perceives and will respond to the united states' strategic rebalancing to the region , and whether this will lead to greater or lesser tensions .

rising importance of national image in the domestic politics of several of the disputing countries .

many analysts allege that the political importance of national pride appears to be increasing in the politics of china , japan , the philippines , south korea , and vietnam , and that this has made it difficult for their governments to compromise or negotiate , particularly given the increasing frequency of aggressive or assertive actions by other claimants .

myriad other factors , including unclos's emergence as a formal diplomatic mechanism that allows claimants to make direct assertions of claims .

some analysts , including many chinese observers , argue that moves by claimants to stake formal claims almost inevitably bring a counter - response by other claimants .

combined with the other drivers of competition , they argue that this dynamic raises tensions and makes compromise more difficult .

since its creation in 1967 , asean , southeast asia's primary multilateral organization , has been a key player in diplomacy over the south china sea .

four of its 10 members are involved in the territorial disputes in the south china sea , while a fifth , indonesia , has substantial maritime territory and is increasingly seen as a regional leader on the issue .

a sixth , singapore , is a heavily trade - dependent nation that regularly asserts its national interest in protecting freedom of navigation in the south china sea .

asean and china have been discussing a code of conduct for parties in the region since the 1990s , without success .

in 2002 , asean's members and china agreed on a declaration on the conduct of parties in the south china sea , which outlined principles for avoiding conflicts but did not create mechanisms to solve them .

the declaration stated: "the parties concerned undertake to resolve their territorial and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means , without resorting to the threat or use of force , through friendly consultations and negotiations by sovereign states directly concerned , in accordance with universally recognized principles of international law , including the 1982 un convention on the law of the sea. .

the declaration formally called on signatories to work towards a formal code of conduct , but subsequent discussions between asean and china have not led to such a code .

to many analysts , such a set of mutual understandings — ideally with some form of enforcement mechanism — could be a major tool for preventing conflict .

to others , however , the prospect of a formal , binding code that would deal with an actual crisis is likely years away , making it an insufficient means for addressing a security crisis occurring now .

although regular asean - china meetings on a code were restarted in 2011 and formal negotiations restarted in 2013 , disagreement among parties about what should be included , and whether a code should have binding dispute resolution mechanisms , has stymied progress .

some observers believe china is dragging out negotiations on the code of conduct while it continues to consolidate greater effective control over the south china sea .

some analysts argue that asean's lack of unity and emphasis on consensus has made it an unwieldy place to discuss these issues .

in july 2012 , an asean foreign ministers' meeting in phnom penh , cambodia , failed to produce a communiqué , stalled by disagreements over whether specific mention should be made of south china sea incidents .

reports indicated that cambodia , the meeting's chair and widely seen as china's closest ally in the region , blocked any such mention .

this was followed by a cambodia - hosted asean - china leaders meeting in november 2012 in which cambodia and others , particularly the philippines , publicly argued about whether the group had agreed on a common stance on how to proceed with negotiating a code .

two other asean nations , indonesia and singapore , have played increasingly active roles in diplomacy over the south china sea .

indonesia: indonesia's position is unique in that it has negotiated each of its maritime borders in the south china sea with its neighbors , and in the small area where indonesian waters overlap with the nine - dash line , there are no landmasses to dispute with china .

indonesia is also southeast asia's largest and most populous nation , and it carries disproportionate diplomatic weight within the group .

in the wake of the unsuccessful july 2012 asean ministerial meeting in phnom penh , indonesia's foreign minister shuttled to other capitals to gain an agreement on six points related to the south china sea .

these included agreement on the need for early conclusion of a regional code of conduct ; the continued exercise of self - restraint and non - use of force by all parties ; and the peaceful resolution of disputes , in accordance with universally recognized principles of international law , including unclos .

singapore: singapore has become more vocal in urging actions to lower tensions in the region .

in a high - profile september 2012 speech in beijing , singapore's prime minister lee hsien loong said: "the many overlapping claims by multiple claimants in the south china sea are unlikely to be resolved any time soon .

hence ... the involved parties must manage the disputes responsibly .

all sides should avoid escalating tensions or precipitating confrontations that will affect the international standing of the region. .

because the speech was made at the chinese communist party's central party school , observers believe it was meant as a pointed message to china's leadership .

prime minister lee also stressed that singapore has an interest in seeing the disputes in the south china sea over territorial sovereignty and maritime resource rights resolved peacefully and in accordance with international law , including unclos .

although the united states does not take a position on the specific maritime territorial claims in east asia , it does have treaty obligations with two of the claimants — japan and the philippines — that could be invoked if they become involved in an active conflict with another of the claimants .

the 1960 u.s. - japan security treaty and the mutual defense treaty between the philippines and the united states contain provisions describing conditions under which the united states would provide military assistance if either nation were attacked .

u.s. administrations going back at least to the nixon administration have stated that the united states takes no position on the territorial disputes over the senkaku islands .

however , it also has been u.s. policy since 1971 that because article 5 of the 1960 u.s. - japan security treaty stipulates that the united states is bound to protect "the territories under the administration of japan," and japan administers the senkakus , the islands are covered by the security treaty .

china's increase in patrols around the senkakus since the fall of 2012 appears to many to be an attempt to demonstrate that china has a degree of administrative control over the islets , thereby exploiting the u.s. distinction between sovereignty and administrative control .

in its own attempt to address this perceived gap , congress inserted in the fy2013 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

4310 ) a resolution stating among other items , that "the unilateral action of a third party will not affect the united states' acknowledgment of the administration of japan over the senkaku islands. .

as noted , president obama made a similar statement during his april 2014 visit to tokyo .

the philippines has been an outspoken proponent of an extensive u.s. role in resolving maritime disputes .

some philippine officials have on occasion suggested the mutual defense treaty with the united states should apply in the case of disputes in philippine - claimed waters of the south china sea .

on this question , the language of the treaty is not definitive .

article iv of the treaty states: "each party ... declares that it would act to meet the common dangers in accordance with its constitutional processes. .

article v refers to an armed attack on the "metropolitan territory of either of the parties," the "island territories under its jurisdiction in the pacific ocean," or its "armed forces , public vessels , or aircraft in the pacific. .

although some american analysts have expressed support for a stronger understanding of the treaty , most u.s. interpretations have not explicitly included the disputed areas as part of u.s. obligations .

this ambiguity presents a dilemma , in that the united states seeks to avoid being drawn into a potential conflict but also seeks to support its treaty ally and deter a use of force against it .

on an april 2014 visit to the philippines , president obama sought to outline the u.s. position regarding the treaty's obligations .

let me be absolutely clear .

for more than 60 years , the united states and the philippines have been bound by a mutual defense treaty .

and this treaty means our two nations pledge — and i'm quoting — our "common determination to defend themselves against external armed attacks , so that no potential aggressor could be under the illusion that either of them stands alone. .

in other words , our commitment to defend the philippines is ironclad and the united states will keep that commitment , because allies never stand alone .

one emerging dynamic is that the united states and the philippines are involved in plans to increase u.s. access to philippine naval facilities , and the united states is offering assistance and making sales to the philippine military to help it with maritime domain awareness in its coastal waters , including the south china sea .

on april 28 , 2014 , the united states and the philippines completed the enhanced defense cooperation agreement ( edca ) after eight months of negotiations .

under the 10-year , renewable arrangement , u.s. military personnel are to be deployed to the philippines on a rotational basis .

the accord allows the united states to use philippine bases , including u.s. - built facilities and improvements , and facilitates the increased presence of u.s. forces , ships , aircraft , and equipment in the philippines .

in addition , the edca "improves opportunities for bilateral training ; supports the long - term modernization of the armed forces of the philippines ( afp ) as it works to establish a minimum credible defense. .

the united states has pursued bilateral approaches with china including confidence - building measures and other dialogues or agreements .

the u.s. military and china's people's liberation army have held meetings under the military maritime consultative agreement ( mmca ) , talks which could be reinvigorated and expanded to include the prc's civilian maritime enforcement ships .

the 1998 mmca only covers meetings to discuss maritime and air safety .

the u.s. military has continued to face challenges to operational safety and freedom of navigation , and has discussed maritime security with the pla , including at the strategic security dialogue , a joint civilian - military dialogue that takes place under the broader bilateral u.s. - china strategic and economic dialogue ( s&ed ) .

as part of the u.s. strategic "rebalance" to the asia - pacific , the obama administration has expanded military - to - military engagement with the pla .

such expanded engagement involves military exercises , including an invitation for the pla navy to participate for the first time in the 2014 u.s. - led rimpac maritime exercise , which will take place between june 24 and august 1 .

china has accepted the invitation .

some analysts see security interests being served by the pla's exposure to a demonstration of u.s. allied capabilities and international norms for forces operating in close proximity with one another .

others worry that such engagement could strengthen the pla's warfighting capability .

over the years , disputants have discussed and pursued numerous multilateral options , including joint exploration and development of resources , and efforts for disputants to work together and consult in other areas seen as non - sensitive .

joint management of hydrocarbon and fisheries resources has been proposed as a way to defuse tensions over the two resources that drive many of the disputes .

another option for multilateral management of disputes is expanding cooperation in current anti - piracy operations from the gulf of aden to waters such as the indian ocean and malacca straits .

in february 2012 , the navies of china , india , and japan agreed to increase coordination of escort operations in the gulf of aden .

among other confidence - building proposals that some analysts have offered are: creating a regional coast guard forum , which could be modeled after the north pacific coast guard forum that cooperates on maritime and legal issues ; utilizing the western pacific naval symposium , a 20-member naval gathering created in 1987 , which will hold its next meeting september 24-28 in kuala lumpur , malaysia ; strengthening the international maritime organization's ( imo's ) convention on the international regulations for preventing collisions at sea and / or establishing information - sharing centers ; building on the code for unplanned encounters at sea ( cues ) , approved at the 14 th western pacific naval symposium in april 2014 , and adopted by the u.s. and chinese navies , among others .

promoting naval cooperation in areas such as environmental protection , scientific research , search and rescue operations , and others ; deepening the activities of functional asean - centered bodies including the asean maritime forum and maritime security dialogues under the arf or the asean defense ministers' meeting plus ( admm+ ) .

the asean treaty of amity and cooperation might offer conflict - mediation mechanisms acceptable to the broad range of disputants .

china ratified the treaty in 2003 .

in 2009 , secretary of state clinton signed the agreement , which says that signatories should "refrain from the threat or use of force and shall at all times settle such disputes among themselves through friendly negotiations. .

it offers a non - mandatory dispute settlement mechanism , but also offers that if disputants do not wish to utilize it , "this shall not preclude the other high contracting parties not party to the dispute from offering all possible assistance to settle the said dispute. .

some have suggested that indonesia or a nation outside the region could fill this role .

the 1982 united nations convention on the law of the sea , which entered into force in november 1994 , establishes a comprehensive legal regime governing activities within the oceans , and provides the primary ( though not the only ) venue for making maritime territorial claims and adjudicating maritime territorial disputes .

each of the disputants in the south china sea is a party to the treaty , although some still take exception to the dispute settlement mechanisms that unclos provides .

within east asia , the only non - party states are cambodia and north korea .

the united states signed the convention in 1984 but has not ratified it .

as noted above , the senate foreign relations committee held four hearings in 2012 to consider whether to recommend action on the convention .

at the first hearing , on may 23 , 2012 , secretary of state hillary clinton , secretary of defense leon panetta , and chairman of the joint chiefs of staff general martin dempsey testified together .

secretary clinton stated that u.s. navigational rights and the ability to challenge other countries' behavior should stand on the firmest and most persuasive legal footing , "including in critical areas such as the south china sea. .

she said that in the promotion of u.s. vital interests such as freedom of navigation in face of claims that countries are making in the south china sea , the united states would have greater credibility in invoking the convention's rules and a greater ability to enforce them if it were a party to unclos .

secretary panetta stated that not acceding to unclos potentially undercuts u.s. credibility in a number of multilateral meetings in a strategically vital arc extending from the western pacific and east asia to the indian ocean and the middle east .

he said that the united states is pushing for a rules - based order and peaceful resolutions of maritime and territorial disputes in the south china sea , strait of hormuz , and elsewhere .

general dempsey stated that joining unclos would provide legal certainty to support navigational freedom and maritime operations that include the right of transit through international straits , the right to exercise high seas freedoms in foreign exclusive economic zones , and the right of innocent passage through territorial seas .

he cited concerns about countries expanding their maritime claims and restricting movement in the oceans .

many of the region's nations have publicly urged the united states to join unclos , which they argue would give greater international legitimacy to u.s. diplomacy , as well as give the united states a seat at the table in unclos discussions of key issues relating to maritime law .

indonesian ambassador to the united states dino djalal , for instance , said at a 2011 conference in washington , dc , that given the priority the united states has placed on maritime security in east asia , becoming a party to unclos "has become a matter of strategic necessity — i repeat , strategic necessity , for the united states…" on the broadest level , becoming a party to the convention would give the united states a seat at the table at unclos bodies , and give it the opportunity to influence experts from other nations in consideration of issues before the convention .

some of the key maritime issues related to unclos that could have an impact on disputes in east asia include: the rights of military craft to operate in other nations' exclusive economic zones ( eezs ) .

china has taken a position that military craft need permission to operate in another nation's eez .

this has become a deep point of contention between the united states and china , but if china's interpretation of the unclos provisions on eezs were to become widely accepted , it could affect u.s. surveillance and other military activity worldwide .

according to the navy , 26 other nations subscribe to views similar to that of the prc , including south china sea disputants malaysia and vietnam , although vietnam's 2012 law of the sea relaxed vietnam's position , requiring notification of such activity rather than approval .

extended continental shelf claims .

as discussed above , unclos has a formal body , the commission on the limits of the continental shelf , that may consider formal claims that extend beyond 200 nautical miles from a coastal state .

unclos gave parties the right to make such claims , based on the depth of the seabed beyond their eezs .

malaysia and vietnam submitted such a claim in 2009 , to which china objected .

in december 2012 , china made such a claim in the east china sea , which may also be considered by the commission .

definitions of inhabitable islands .

unclos allows nations to claim 12 nautical mile territorial waters around uninhabitable rocks and shoals , but a 200 nautical mile eez around islands that can support permanent inhabitation .

this difference has influenced moves by each of the disputants to base people and build structures and other infrastructure on or over small islands and shoals which would not otherwise support life .

china's designation of a settlement on woody shoal in the paracels as an administrative capital , and its moves to build a sewage system on the small island , are seen as moves to both demonstrate administrative control over the area and to demonstrate its inhabitability .

opponents of accession argue that unclos does not , in and of itself , solve the territorial disputes and because many of china's claims do not rely on unclos's provisions , u.s. accession would do little to make the prc any more willing to submit to dispute resolution procedures .

opponents also argue that u.s. accession would do little to change the underlying cause of insecurity in the region — the overlapping claims which parties are unlikely to withdraw , and chinese claims that do not fundamentally rely on unclos .

whether to consider unclos accession is just one of the questions arising from the maritime territorial disputes in east asia that the 113 th congress faces .

most analysts believe that because the sovereignty disputes themselves are so difficult and raise such wide - ranging issues for u.s. policy , managing them will touch on many of congress's roles in foreign policy , including its oversight of the administration's diplomatic actions in asia , its consideration of military posture and budgets , and its search for ways to limit the potential for conflict and create a more stable environment in the region .

in the 113 th congress , on july 27 , 2013 , the senate passed one resolution ( s.res .

167 ) introduced by senator robert menendez , reaffirming the strong support of the united states for the peaceful resolution of territorial , sovereignty , and jurisdictional disputes in the asia - pacific maritime domains .

senator menendez introduced another resolution ( s.res .

412 ) on april 7 , 2014 , "reaffirming the strong support of the united states government for freedom of navigation and other internationally lawful uses of sea and airspace in the asia - pacific region , and for the peaceful diplomatic resolution of outstanding territorial and maritime claims and disputes. .

in the house , representative faleomavoega introduced h.r .

772 in february 2013 , seeking peaceful and collaborative resolution of the south china sea disputes .

on april 28 , 2014 , representatives randy forbes and colleen hanabusa introduced the asia pacific region priority act ( h.r .

4495 ) , "to strengthen the united states commitment to security and stability in the asia - pacific region," which among other things calls on the department of defense to conduct an assessment of the maritime balance of forces in the asia - pacific region , with a focus on the chinese people's liberation army and state oceanic administration .

the 112 th congress also undertook several legislative actions regarding maritime disputes in asia .

the senate passed two resolutions on east asian maritime disputes , and took other legislative action related to the tensions .

in june 2011 , the senate passed a resolution ( s.res .

217 ) introduced by senator jim webb calling for a peaceful and multilateral resolution to maritime territorial disputes in southeast asia .

in august 2012 , the senate also passed s.res .

524 , introduced by senator john kerry , reaffirming u.s. support for the 2002 asean - china declaration of conduct of parties in the south china sea and a collaborative diplomatic process by all claimants to resolve disputes .

in november 2012 , the senate unanimously accepted an amendment introduced by senator webb to the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( s. 1253 ) that expressed the sense of the senate regarding the east china sea disputes , calling for parties to refrain from coercion and stating that the u.s. - japan treaty of mutual cooperation and security covers areas under japanese administration , such as the senkakus .

it was ultimately incorporated into the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 signed by the president ( h.r .

4310 / p.l .

112-239 ) .

