the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) is the primary federal program that supports workforce development .

wia includes four main titles: title i — workforce investment systems — provides job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals .

title i programs , which are primarily administered through the employment and training administration ( eta ) of the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , include three state formula grant programs , multiple national programs , job corps , and demonstration programs .

in addition , title i authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated ; title ii — adult education and literacy — provides education services to assist adults in improving their literacy and completing secondary education ; title iii — workforce investment - related activities — amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 to integrate the u.s. employment service ( es ) , which provides job search and job matching assistance to unemployed individuals , into the one - stop system established by wia ; and title iv — rehabilitation act amendments of 1998 — amends the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which provides employment - related services to individuals with disabilities .

the authorizations for appropriations for most programs under the workforce investment act ( wia ) of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) expired at the end of fy2003 .

since that time , wia programs have been funded through the annual appropriations process .

in the 108 th and 109 th congresses , bills to reauthorize wia were passed in both the house and the senate ; however , no further action was taken .

in the 112 th congress , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) released discussion drafts in june 2011 of legislation to amend and reauthorize wia .

while markup of this legislation was scheduled , it was ultimately postponed indefinitely .

no legislation has been introduced .

the house committee on education and the workforce , however , ordered reported h.r .

4297 — the workforce investment improvement act of 2012 .

this bill was introduced on march 29 , 2012 , by representative virginia foxx of north carolina , the chair of the subcommittee on higher education and workforce training ( for herself , representative howard p. "buck" mckeon of california , and representative joseph heck of nevada ) .

a legislative hearing on h.r .

4297 was held before the full committee on education and the workforce on april 17 , 2012 .

on june 7 , 2012 , the committee , after considering 23 amendments to h.r .

4297 , ordered the bill reported by a vote of 23 to 15 .

no further action was taken on h.r .

4297 in the 112 th congress .

in the 113 th congress , the house committee on education and the workforce has ordered reported h.r .

803 — the supporting knowledge and investing in lifelong skills act ( skills act ) .

this bill was introduced on february 25 , 2013 , by representative virginia foxx of north carolina , the chair of the subcommittee on higher education and workforce training .

a legislative hearing on h.r .

803 was held before the full committee on education and the workforce on february 26 , 2013 .

on march 6 , 2013 , the committee , after considering four amendments to h.r .

803 , ordered the bill reported by a vote of 23 to 0 .

no democrats on the committee cast a vote on the measure , maintaining that they were not provided adequate input in the process .

h.r .

803 was debated in the house of representatives on march 15 , 2013 , and passed by a vote of 215-202 .

this report summarizes each of the wia titles and highlights the major features of h.r .

803 pertaining to each title .

the report also compares the proposed provisions of h.r .

803 to current law in the following tables: table 1 .

major provisions of title i .

this table covers provisions governing the "workforce investment systems" that provide for , among other things , state formula grants , state and local planning procedures , and the establishment of the one - stop delivery system .

wia established the one - stop delivery system as a way to co - locate and coordinate the activities of multiple employment programs for adults , youth , and various targeted subpopulations .

the delivery of these services occurs primarily through more than 3,000 career centers nationwide .

table 2 .

major provisions of title ii .

this table covers provisions for adult education and literacy activities .

table 3 .

major provisions of title iii .

this table covers changes to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which was also amended in title iii of wia .

wagner - peyser provides authorization for the employment service , which provides job matching and job search assistance for unemployed individuals .

table 4 .

major provisions of title iv of wia and title v of h.r .

803 .

this table addresses amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 , in particular to the vocational rehabilitation and other employment - related provisions of that act , which authorizes various employment services for individuals with disabilities .

title i of the workforce investment act — workforce investment systems — authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated .

title i also authorizes funding for the three major state formula grant programs ( adult , youth , and dislocated worker ) , job corps ( a dol - administered program for low - income youth ) , and several other national programs that are directed toward subpopulations with barriers to employment ( eg , native americans ) .

h.r .

803 takes a fundamentally different approach from current law to the federal role in the delivery of workforce development services by consolidating multiple programs into a single block grant that is allocated to states by formula .

at the same time , h.r .

803 maintains the existing one - stop delivery system as the delivery mechanism for employment and training services .

below is a brief summary of the major provisions of h.r .

803 .

this list is followed by a thematic comparison in table 1 of current law and h.r .

803 .

h.r .

803 repeals 24 programs , activities , and provisions in wia title i , the wagner - peyser act , and related workforce development legislation .

major title i programs that are repealed include youth activities , native american programs , migrant and seasonal farmworker programs , reintegration of ex - offender programs , and youthbuild .

in addition , h.r .

803 modifies several other programs to increase coordination with the wia system .

for example , h.r .

803 specifies that certain refugee assistance programs in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) coordinate training services with wia programs .

as part of the elimination and consolidation of multiple programs , h.r .

803 combines funding from 19 programs to create a new , single workforce investment fund ( wif ) .

from the $6.25 billion in the wif , the secretary of labor would set aside $31.2 million for technical assistance and evaluations , $62.5 million for native american employment and training programs , $1.56 billion for job corps , and $218.6 million for national emergency / dislocated worker activities .

from the remaining $4.37 billion , $11 million would be set aside for outlying areas and $4.26 billion would be allocated to states through a new four - factor formula consisting of measures of unemployment , civilian labor force , long - term unemployment , and youth poverty .

for the first three years of authorization ( fy2014-fy2016 ) , h.r .

803 provides that states would receive 100% of the relative share of funding they received under the 19 programs whose funding is consolidated into the wif .

for the remaining years of authorization ( through fy2020 ) , states would receive no less than 90% of their previous year's relative share of funding .

at the state level ( i.e. , after funds are allocated from dol to the states ) , h.r .

803 requires that each state set aside up to 15% of the state allotment for various statewide activities , including rapid response , statewide grants for individuals with barriers to employment , and administrative costs .

h.r .

803 changes the composition and majority requirements of both state and local workforce investment boards ( wibs ) .

under current law , wibs are required to have representatives from business , labor , government , and other organizations with workforce development experience , the majority of which must represent businesses .

h.r .

803 would make business representatives the only required members of wibs , and require that two - thirds of the wib membership be comprised of business representatives .

in addition , h.r .

803 requires that local wibs reserve a percentage of funds to carry out training activities .

under current law , there is no required percentage to be spent on training .

h.r .

803 expands the requirements for state and local plans to require that wibs indicate how they will serve the employment and training needs of various subpopulations , including at - risk and out - of - school youth , disabled workers , ex - offenders , native americans , migrant and seasonal farmworkers , refugees and entrants , and veterans ( including disabled and homeless veterans ) .

in addition , h.r .

803 requires that state and local plans indicate strategies to develop or strengthen industry or sector partnerships .

in addition to enhanced provisions for state and local plans , h.r .

803 expands the scope of existing options for state unified plans .

h.r .

803 allows governors to propose additional consolidation of funds into the wif .

specifically , governors may propose to consolidate some or all of the funds from programs dedicated to employment and training activities into the wif , subject to the approval of the secretary with jurisdiction over the program under consideration for consolidation .

for example , governors may propose to consolidate some or all of the funding dedicated to employment and training in the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) grant into the wif , subject to approval by the secretary of hhs .

h.r .

803 combines "core" and "intensive" services into a new single category of "work ready services. .

under current law , an individual typically needs to move through core and intensive services before being considered for training ( this is known as the "sequence of services" provision in wia ) .

under h.r .

803 , however , an individual may be determined eligible for training after an interview , evaluation , assessment , or case management by a one - stop operator or partner , but the individual need not have necessarily received work ready services .

under current law , there is a priority of service for low - income individuals when resources are limited at one - stop centers .

h.r .

803 eliminates this priority .

h.r .

803 adds incumbent worker training as an allowable training activity at the local level .

currently , incumbent worker training is an allowable statewide activity but not an allowable local activity .

finally , h.r .

803 requires that each local area hire at least one "veteran employment specialist" to carry out employment and training activities for veterans in the local area .

the bill specifies that the hiring preference for this specialist should be for a disabled or other veteran .

the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) is the primary federal legislation that supports basic education for out - of - school adults .

commonly called "adult education," the programs funded by aefla typically support educational services at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training .

almost all aefla funding is allotted to the states via formula grants .

states are required to subgrant the large majority of their funds to local providers that deliver educational services .

the skills act reauthorizes aefla from fy2014 through fy2020 and makes largely administrative changes to the existing program .

it also changes the program's accountability measures to align with the standardized measures of the skills act .

the skills act authorizes $606,294,933 per year for fy2014 through fy2020 .

this authorization level equals the fy2012 funding level .

under current law , approximately 5% of the aefla appropriation is set aside for national programs and incentive grants .

the skills act reduces the set - aside to 2% for modified and streamlined national activities .

the skills act does not substantially modify the formula that distributes state grants or matching requirements .

it also maintains the current requirements for the portions of each state grant that must be allotted to specified activities .

to receive federal funds , each state must have an approved state plan .

the skills act reduces the duration of each state's plan from five years to three years and permits a state's adult education plan to be part of a state unified plan ( described in title i ) .

the skills act also increases the scope of each state's required plan in several ways , such as increasing the range of stakeholders ( eg , representatives from other social service programs and postsecondary education ) that must be consulted in the formulation of the state plan .

the skills act also updates language and makes minor changes to state and local activities .

most notably , it replaces considerations that states must make when awarding local grants with a group of "measurable goals" that local grantees must demonstrate .

title iii of the workforce investment act — workforce investment - related activities — makes amendments to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 ( 29 u.s.c .

49 et seq .

 ) , which authorizes the employment service ( es ) .

the es is the central component of most states' one - stop delivery systems , as es services are universally accessible to job seekers and employers and es offices may not exist outside of the one - stop delivery system .

es is one of the required partners in the one - stop delivery system .

its central mission is to facilitate the match between individuals seeking work and employers seeking workers .

it has been a central component of the workforce development system through wia .

title iii adds section 15 ( "employment statistics" ) to wagner - peyser , which requires the secretary of labor to develop , provide , and improve various types of labor market information .

h.r .

803 repeals sections 1-14 , which authorize the employment service .

funding from the es is consolidated into the new workforce investment fund .

the rehabilitation act , as amended , authorizes grants to support programs related to employment and independent living for individuals with disabilities .

the programs it funds are generally administered by the department of education .

in fy2012 , nearly 90% of the funds appropriated under the rehabilitation act were for vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) state grants .

the skills act authorizes the vr state grants program as well as other programs under the rehabilitation act from fy2014 through fy2020 .

the programs' performance indicators are also modified to align with the standardized metrics described in title i .

the vr grants to states program is mandatory spending .

the skills act authorizes $3,121,712,000 per year for the vr state grants program for fy2014 through fy2020 .

this authorization is equal to the fy2012 appropriation level .

funding for the vr state grants program , however , is determined by a formula in the rehabilitation act that provides an inflationary increase each year .

the skills act does not amend or repeal this formula .

as such , the program's funding would be determined by this formula and not its authorization level .

the skills act increases emphasis on transitional services to students with disabilities .

transitional services vary by student but can generally be understood as a coordinated set of services for an eligible individual between the ages of 16 and 21 to assist that individual in moving from school activities to post - school activities and employment .

the skills act requires each state to set aside at least 10% of its vr state grant funds for transition services .

the act also requires each state's vr plan to include strategies for serving the transition population as well as a description of how the vr services will coordinate with transition services provided under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) .

in addition to the vr state grants program , the skills act authorizes approximately $317 million per year for other grant programs that are administered by the department of education .

these programs are authorized at their fy2012 funding levels for each year from fy2014 to fy2020 ; the authorization level is the same each year .

the largest authorization among these programs is national institute on disability and rehabilitation research ( nidrr ) grants , which is authorized at $109 million per year .

the skills act also extends authorization through fy2020 for the national council on disability ( $3.3 million per year ) and the access board ( $7.4 million per year ) .

the skills act repeals four authorizations .

the supported employment state grants program ( $29 million appropriation in fy2012 ) is repealed and its functions are absorbed by the vr state agencies .

three competitive grant programs ( two of which were unfunded in fy2012 ) are also repealed .

