the new starts program provides federal funds to public transportation agencies on a largely competitive basis for the construction of new fixed guideway transit systems and the expansion of existing systems ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ) .

in federal law , "fixed guideway" is defined as "a public transportation facility: using and occupying a separate right - of - way for the exclusive use of public transportation ; using rail ; using a fixed catenary system ; for a passenger ferry system ; or for a bus rapid transit system" ( 49 u.s.c .

§5302 ( 7 ) ) .

bus rapid transit ( brt ) is distinguished from regular bus transit by high - frequency service at widely spaced stops and a combination of various elements that might include transit stations , level - platform boarding , separate right - of - way , traffic signal priority , and special branding .

it should be noted that public transportation , as defined in federal law , does not include transportation by school bus , intercity bus , or intercity passenger rail ( amtrak ) .

most new starts funding has been provided to transit rail systems for subway / elevated rail ( heavy rail ) , light rail , or commuter rail projects .

with federal support , a number of cities , such as charlotte , denver , minneapolis , and salt lake city , have opened entirely new rail systems , and many other cities have added to existing systems .

two current extension projects supported by new starts funding are the second avenue subway in new york city and the dulles airport corridor metrorail extension in northern virginia .

rail transit route - mileage almost doubled between 1985 and 2009 , with light rail mileage almost quadrupling , commuter rail mileage doubling , and subway mileage growing by 25% .

transit rail systems now provide about 44% of public transit trips ( up from 31% in 1985 ) , with most of the rest , about 51% , provided by bus .

brt systems have proliferated over the past few years , partly with the help of new starts funding .

brt has particularly benefited from a category of less costly new starts projects known as small starts .

the new starts program is one element of the federal public transportation program that is administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) within the department of transportation .

in july 2012 , the new starts program was reauthorized through fy2014 as part of the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) .

the program underwent several significant changes in map - 21 .

this background report explains how the new starts program is structured under map - 21 .

it begins by discussing program funding and concludes with a legislative history .

the new starts program is one of six major funding programs administered by fta , accounting for about 18% of fta's budget ( figure 1 ) .

unlike fta's other major programs , funding for new starts comes from the general fund of the u.s. treasury , not the mass transit account of the highway trust fund .

moreover , the new starts program provides discretionary funding whereas the other major programs provide funding by formula .

new starts funding averaged about $1.5 billion per year in the period from fy2004 to fy2008 .

since fy2009 new starts funding has tended to be greater than this , but more variable ( figure 2 ) .

the regular appropriation in fy2009 was supplemented with $750 million from the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

rescission of new starts budget authority affected fy2009 and fy2010 funding ; the fy2010 rescission of $280 million approximately matches funding for the access to the region's core ( arc ) tunnel project , which was cancelled by new jersey in october 2010 .

the cancellation of arc likely contributed to the reduction of funding in fy2011 .

for fy2012 , congress decided to fund bus rapid transit projects recommended by fta for new starts funding from the discretionary bus and bus facilities program instead .

the senate appropriations committee report noted: "these projects are eligible for funding from bus and bus facilities , and this shift will make it possible for the committee to better support the rail transit projects in the capital investment grants [new starts] program. .

prior to the passage of map - 21 , bus program funding was discretionary , but heavily earmarked .

in map - 21 , the bus and bus facilities program is about half its previous size and funding is distributed by formula .

the majority of federal funding for new starts and small starts projects has come through the new starts program , but such projects may also be supported by other federal programs , such as the fta's urbanized area formula program and the federal highway administration's ( fhwa's ) congestion mitigation and air quality improvement ( cmaq ) program .

funding amounts from these other programs tend to be relatively small .

in an analysis of new starts and small starts projects from october 2004 through june 2012 , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that almost 92% of federal funding for new starts projects came from the new starts program , 5% from fhwa flex funding ( such as cmaq ) , 1% from other fta programs , and 2% from other federal sources .

in small start projects , 80% came from the new starts program , 14% from fhwa flex funds , and 7% from other fta programs .

whatever the funding source , the maximum federal share of a new starts project is 80% .

every year since fy2002 , however , the senate appropriations committee has included in its report a directive to fta not to sign any grant agreements for new starts projects ( though not small starts projects ) with more than a 60% federal share .

projects approved for new starts funding typically have had less than a 60% federal share , often much less .

map - 21 , however , establishes an exception to these limitations for up to three brt projects per fiscal year ; these are required to have a federal share of at least 80% ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ( l ) ( 8 ) ) .

consistent with the law , gao found that the federal government paid 45% of the cost of new starts projects , on average , with local sources paying 48% and state sources 7% .

the average federal share in small starts projects , by contrast , was 67% , with 24% from local sources and 9% from state sources .

the vast majority of state and local contributions come from public funds raised by taxes , bonds , and tolls .

only about 4% of the local funding of new starts projects came from private investment or public - private partnerships , according to gao .

the new starts program evolved from section 3 of the urban mass transportation act of 1964 ( p.l .

88-365 ) .

in 1994 , section 3 became section 5309 in a revision without substantive change of title 49 of the united states code .

beginning in the 1970s , as the commitment of , and demand for , federal funding began to grow , the department of transportation issued a series of policy statements on the principles by which it would distribute discretionary money to so - called "new starts. .

these statements issued in 1976 , 1978 , 1980 , and 1984 introduced a series of principles that were written into federal law , including long - range planning , alternatives analysis incorporating a baseline alternative , cost effectiveness , local financial commitment , multi - year contracts specifying the limits of federal participation , supportive local land use planning , and a ratings system .

congress inserted many of these principles into law in the surface transportation and uniform relocation assistance act of 1987 ( sturaa ; p.l .

100-17 ) .

sturaa established the criteria by which new starts projects would be judged in order to be eligible for federal funding , and also required dot's recommendations for funding in the subsequent fiscal year to be detailed in an annual report to congress .

the criteria enacted in sturaa required a new starts project to be based on an alternatives analysis and preliminary engineering , to be cost - effective , and to be supported by an acceptable amount of local financial commitment that is stable and dependable .

in the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea , p.l .

102-240 ) , congress added to the cost - effectiveness criterion the justifications of mobility improvements , environmental benefits , and operating efficiencies .

istea also added a list of lesser considerations such as congestion relief , energy consumption , transit supportive land use policies and future patterns , and economic development .

a new starts project would still need to be based on alternatives analysis and preliminary engineering and to have an acceptable amount of local financial commitment .

the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l .

105-178 ) left the existing law mostly unchanged , but added a few additional considerations such as the costs of sprawl and the technical capacity of a grantee ( usually a transit agency ) to undertake a project .

tea - 21 also required fta to rate projects overall as "highly recommended," "recommended," or "not recommended. .

tea - 21 also made it a requirement that fta formally approve a project to move from preliminary engineering into final design .

fta published its final rule in response to tea - 21 in 2000 , and subsequently published several program guidance documents .

safetea changed the three - point scale , introduced in tea - 21 , to a five - point scale of high , medium - high , medium , medium - low , and low .

it also elevated two factors — economic development effects and public transportation supportive land use policies and future patterns — from considerations to project justifications .

safetea also created the small starts program .

prior to the enactment of safetea , fta issued a "dear colleague" letter announcing that it would target funding to those projects which received a medium or better rating for cost effectiveness .

according to fta this was in response to concerns expressed by congress , gao , and the dot's inspector general about recommending for funding projects that received a medium - low on cost effectiveness .

following the passage of safetea , in a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) on august 3 , 2007 , fta proposed that a medium rating be required for fta to recommend a project for funding , and for cost effectiveness to be weighted as 50% of the project justification measure .

the other 50% would consist of land use and economic development combined into one criterion at a weight of 20% , mobility benefits ( 20% ) , environmental benefits ( 5% ) , and benefits to transit - dependent riders ( 5% ) .

this proposal was not well received by the house transportation and infrastructure committee , or by those responding to the notice .

some of the concerns were that , contravening the intent of safetea , the rule would place too much emphasis on cost effectiveness and would not sufficiently evaluate or weight the economic development effects of transit projects .

this , critics contended , would favor projects designed for suburban commuters , such as commuter rail and bus rapid transit projects , over more centrally located transit projects such as streetcars .

because of these concerns , congress included language in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) , preventing fta from implementing a final rule .

in the safetea - lu technical corrections act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-244 ) , congress amended 49 u.s.c .

section 5309 to require that fta "give comparable , but not necessarily equal , numerical weight to each project justification criteria in calculating the overall project rating. .

this was carried forward in map - 21 ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ( g ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( ii ) and 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ( h ) ( 6 ) ) .

fta withdrew the 2007 nprm in february 2009 , and then in july 2009 issued final guidance establishing cost effectiveness as 20% of the project justification rating .

the other factors were economic development ( 20% ) , mobility improvements ( 20% ) , land use ( 20% ) , environmental benefits ( 10% ) , and operating efficiencies ( 10% ) .

this was followed in january 2010 with an announcement that fta was withdrawing the policy of only recommending for funding projects that received a medium cost - effectiveness rating or better in favor of recommending projects with an overall rating of medium or better ( although projects must score a medium or better on both project justification and local financial commitment ) .

at the same time fta announced that it intended to issue a new nprm for changes to the evaluation for new starts and small starts projects .

in this regard , fta issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on june 3 , 2010 , requesting comments on how to improve measurement of cost effectiveness , environmental benefits , and economic development .

an nprm was issued january 25 , 2012 , along with proposed new starts / small starts policy guidance .

a final rule was published january 9 , 2013 , along with revised proposed policy guidance .

before the changes in the proposed rulemaking were finalized congress enacted map - 21 , making substantial changes to the new starts program .

some of the changes proposed by fta in its january 2012 nprm were incorporated into the law .

for example , map authorizes the use of warrants for projects in which the federal funding is $100 million or less or the federal funding share is 50% or less ( 49 u.s.c .

§5309 ( g ) ( 3 ) ) .

some other elements of the program subject to proposed new rules were changed by the law and some changes in the law were not considered in the proposed new rules .

for example , operating efficiencies has been dropped from the list of project justifications and congestion relief added .

fta will deal with these sorts of issues in future rulemaking and policy guidance .

the rulemaking and revised proposed policy guidance establish some significant changes in the evaluation of new starts / small starts projects .

according to the rulemaking , fta has two broad goals: to measure a broader range of benefits and to simplify the evaluation process .

to accomplish the first goal fta will , for example , evaluate environmental benefits by measuring anticipated changes in air quality criteria pollutants , energy use , greenhouse gas emissions , and safety .

environmental benefits in the previous evaluation scheme were based solely on an area's air quality designation .

to accomplish the second goal , fta will take a number of steps including simplifying measures , eliminating the baseline alternative requirement , and improving the ways in which data are submitted to fta and evaluated .

one of the simplified measures is to evaluate mobility improvements as the estimated total number of trips generated by the project with an extra weight for trips by transit - dependent people .

prior to the rulemaking five measures were used to estimate mobility improvements including incremental travel time saved per passenger mile over the baseline alternative .

this change , along with changes to the cost effectiveness measure required by law , will likely improve the rating of projects that generally provide shorter trips , such as streetcars .

