the national forests are managed by the usda forest service ( fs ) for a variety of uses , including many types of recreation — sightseeing , ohv use , backpacking , and more — while preserving the productivity of the lands .

recreation use continues to grow , with ohv use among the fastest growing uses .

however , ohv use is still substantially less than other , non - motorized forms of recreation in the national forests .

the various uses and values of the national forests sometimes conflict with one another .

for example , timber harvesting and ohv use can affect birdwatching and sightseeing , and can degrade water quality in certain settings .

decisions about what uses are allowed , and when and where , are made in comprehensive land and resource management plans prepared for each unit of the national forest system , and for each project .

because of multiple efforts to modify the planning regulations , many plan revisions have been delayed .

much of the attention has been focused on motorized recreation , because of the potentially significant impacts of motorized recreation on other values .

the fs manages about 193 million acres of land .

federal guidance on ohv use in e.o .

11644 and e.o .

11989 , as described in the introduction to this report , was incorporated into fs regulations .

despite this guidance , not all forest plans had identified areas as open or closed to ohvs , and local practices as to ohv use vary .

in 2004 , the fs chief identified unmanaged recreation — "increasing use of the national forests for outdoor activities ... , including the use of off - highway vehicles" — as a threat to the nation's forests and grasslands .

according to the fs , ohv use has created many unauthorized roads and trails , which can be unsafe and harmful to other resources .

in 2005 , the fs finalized regulations to require forest plans to identify a system of roads , trails , and areas available for motorized vehicle use and prohibit the use of ohvs and other motorized vehicles outside the designated system .

subpart a of the regulations requires the agency to identify the minimum road system needed for safe and efficient travel and for the protection , management , and use of national forest system lands .

subpart b of the regulations requires the fs to designate those roads , trails , and areas where motor vehicle use is allowed and to identify them on a motor vehicle use map ( mvum ) .

subpart c of the regulations makes management of over - snow vehicles ( eg , snowmobiles ) optional .

as of december 2012 , mvums based on the new regulations were completed for 93 of the 114 administrative units in the national forest system , representing 82% of fs lands .

as of july 2008 , 100 million acres of national forest lands ( 52% ) were generally open to ohv use , including 64 million acres open to cross - country use .

more recent data are not available .

opinions continue to be divided over the importance and impact of the travel management regulations .

some assert that the regulations do not go far enough , preferring that all ohv uses be prohibited in the national forests , because ohvs can damage national forest lands and resources .

in august 2010 , several groups requested the fs to end the snowmobile exemption from the travel management regulations , but the agency denied the request in march 2011 .

legal action continues , with a lawsuit filed against the forest service in federal court in november , 2012 .

others counter that the regulations penalize the majority of ohv users that obey the rules and restrict off - highway uses at a time when other landowners and other federal and state agencies are reducing similar recreational access to their lands .

the conflicts between interests continue to persist and may be escalating , in part because of the lack of past efforts to regulate ohv use .

in april 2012 , the fs finalized new regulations for land and resource management planning for the national forest system .

although access affects land and resource use and management , the new planning regulations did not specifically address transportation planning .

the fs noted that the 2012 rule generally did not address management of particular activities or uses , such as forest transportation systems , because separate regulations govern specific uses .

tensions over road and trail closures continue to persist .

many of the completed travel management plans have been challenged for either being too restrictive or not restrictive enough .

the forest service has prevailed on some challenges but lost on others .

in addition , some groups have cited an 1866 statute known as "r.s .

2477" as providing county primacy in determining road access to federal lands .

the fs generally agreed with the findings in the gao's 2009 report on ohv use on federal lands , according to the fs comments on the draft report .

one of the gao recommendations was for the establishment of a nationwide strategy for ohv use and performance measures and timeframes for carrying out ohv goals .

in response , the fs developed the route and area designation implementation guide in 2010 .

as of december 2012 , the fs was in the process of developing performance measures for ohv goals , and planned to complete and implement the measures by 2014 .

in response to the gao recommendation to improve communication with the public about ohv use , the fs established an interactive travel map on their website with improved information about which roads and trails are available for ohv use on national forest lands .

in response to the gao recommendation to enhance law enforcement of ohv use , the fs examined fines for ohv related violations and is considering the feasibility of a system - wide standard for fine amounts .

a 113 th congress bill , h.r .

145 , contains provisions on motorized recreation on trails in idaho .

similar legislation was introduced in the 112 th congress .

while no general legislation on ohv activities in the national forests was introduced in the 112 th congress , some measures addressed motorized recreation in areas with existing special designations .

other bills would have restricted ohv activities , explicitly or implicitly , by designating areas as wilderness .

still other 112 th congress measures sought to designate other types of areas , including special management areas , and govern the use of motorized vehicles in those areas .

for instance , s. 1635 proposed the establishment of the sheep mountain special management area , comprised of lands from four national forests , and generally prohibited use of motor vehicles in the area .

the subcommittee on public lands and forests of the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 1635 on march 22 , 2012 .

s. 3400 sought to establish the hermosa creek special management area in the san juan national forest , and generally would have limited motorized vehicles in the area to roads and trails designated by the secretary .

as another example , s. 268 would have established several special management areas and recreation management areas in montana .

motorized vehicles were generally limited to roads and trails in the new areas .

however , the provisions varied , with one area generally prohibiting motorized vehicles .

the bill also would have required the secretary to report on topics including the opportunities for expanded all - terrain vehicle routes and trails across the three rivers district and adjacent areas on the kootenai national forest .

the subcommittee on public lands and forests of the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 268 on may 25 , 2011 .

h.r .

4109 contained a variety of provisions relating to motorized recreation in the los padres national forest .

among other provisions , the bill sought to establish ohv areas in the forest , with motorized vehicles generally permitted only on designated roads and trails .

it also sought to establish the condor ridge scenic area , with motorized vehicles generally permitted only on roads and trails designated as of the date of enactment of the legislation .

the bill also would have designated uses on certain roads and trails and added them to the forest's mvum , and called for the secretary of agriculture to report on the feasibility of and interest on constructing new trails , which would be open to certain vehicles .

the subcommittee on national parks , forests , and public lands of the house committee on natural resources held a hearing on h.r .

4109 on june 28 , 2012 .

in addition , section 433 of h.r .

6091 , the fy2013 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill , sought to prohibit the implementation or enforcement of portions of the travel management regulations in california until certain planning actions were taken .

similar provisions — including a nationwide prohibition on implementing or enforcing the regulations in fy2011 — were considered in previous appropriations bills but were not enacted .

the bill was reported by the house committee on appropriations and placed on the house calendar on july 10 , 2012 .

a house subcommittee held oversight hearings that in part addressed the forest service's implementation of the travel management regulations .

a hearing on september 19 , 2011 , focused on access to the national forests and the impacts of closing roads and trails to ohv use .

testimony was received from local government officials , ohv user groups , and environmental conservation groups .

another hearing on november 15 , 2011 focused on the travel management planning and designation process implemented by the fs .

blm and the fs manage motorized recreation on their lands under certain common authorities , such as executive orders , and each agency has its own regulations , policies , and other guidance .

further , while there is no single law pertaining exclusively to motorized use on all blm or all fs lands , both agencies manage motorized recreation under broad laws providing for multiple use of agency lands as well as specific laws pertaining to individual land areas .

currently , the agencies are determining the extent to which ohvs are allowed in particular areas through their planning processes , through the development of new management plans or , more commonly , updates to existing plans .

the fs also continues to develop accompanying motor vehicle use maps depicting where motor vehicle use is allowed .

blm also continues to address motorized recreation through broad travel and transportation plans that cover all modes of travel and public access .

agency determinations have been controversial in some areas .

for instance , while some have expressed concern that motorized use on federal lands is too restricted to accommodate the recreating public , others have asserted that additional limits are needed to protect federal lands from resource damage .

recent congresses have generally addressed motorized use on blm and fs lands in legislation focused on particular areas rather than on blm or fs lands more generally .

for instance , the 112 th congress considered blm land bills that sought to create ohv recreation areas , and to establish more general recreation areas with specifications as to where motorized vehicles could be used .

other bills sought to convey ( eg , to a county ) particular blm lands for motorized recreation , among other uses .

for the fs , bills in the 112 th congress addressed motorized recreation in areas with special designations , such as wilderness .

other fs bills sought to designate new types of areas , such as special management areas , and specify the extent to which motorized vehicles could be used in these areas .

the 112 th congress also held broad oversight hearings on motorized recreation on blm and fs lands , encompassing issues including the extent to which lands are open , agency planning processes , balance among land uses , economic effects , and sources of funding .

the 113 th congress might consider a variety of issues related to motorized recreation on federal lands .

one issue is whether legislation is desirable to address motorized recreation on particular blm and fs lands , or whether any bills providing for additional special designations would set parameters on ohv use .

a related issue could be whether there is a need for broader , programmatic legislation focused on motorized recreation on federal lands generally or on most or all blm or fs lands .

provisions of any such legislation could cover an array of issues , such as access and impacts .

congress also may continue to assess agency management of motorized recreation through oversight hearings .

the appropriate level of funding for motorized recreation on agency lands is likely to be addressed as part of the annual appropriations process , and congress also could evaluate how funds for ohv management are used and whether there is a need for other sources of funding .

