on july 20 , 1923 , the national woman's party ( nwp ) met in seneca falls , new york , to commemorate the 75 th anniversary of the historic seneca falls convention and celebrate the 1920 ratification of the nineteenth amendment , by which women won the right to vote .

at the meeting , nwp leader alice paul announced her next project would be to develop and promote a new constitutional amendment , guaranteeing equal rights and equality under the law in the united states to women and men .

paul , a prominent suffragist , noted the recent ratification of the nineteenth amendment , which established the right of women to vote .

she characterized an "equal rights" amendment as the next logical step for the women's movement .

the proposed amendment was first introduced six months later , in december 1923 , in the 68 th congress .

originally named "the lucretia mott amendment," in honor of the prominent 19 th century abolitionist , women's rights activist , and social reformer , the draft amendment stated that , "men and women shall have equal rights throughout the united states and every place subject to its jurisdiction. .

nearly half a century passed before the mott amendment , as amended and ultimately renamed the alice paul amendment , was approved by congress and proposed to the states for ratification in 1972 .

in common with the eighteenth and twentieth through twenty - sixth amendments , the proposed era included a seven - year deadline for ratification ; in this case the deadline was included in the proposing clause , or preamble , that preceded the text of the amendment .

after considerable early progress in the states , ratifications slowed , and the process ultimately stalled at 35 states in 1977 , 3 short of the 38 approvals ( three - fourths of the states ) required by the constitution .

as the 1979 deadline approached , however , era supporters capitalized on the fact that the seven - year time limit was incorporated in the amendment's proposing clause , rather than in the body of the amendment .

concluding that the amendment itself was , therefore , not time - limited , congress extended the ratification period by 38 months , through 1982 .

no further states added their approval during the extension , however , and the proposed era appeared to expire in 1982 .

since the proposed era's extended ratification period expired in 1982 , senators and representatives have continued to introduce new versions of the amendment , beginning in the 97 th congress .

more recently , new analyses emerged that led era supporters to assert that the amendment remains viable , and that the period for its ratification could be extended indefinitely by congressional action .

resolutions embracing this thesis have been introduced beginning in the 112 th congress .

their stated purpose is that of "[r]emoving the deadline for ratification of the equal rights amendment. .

if enacted , these measures would eliminate the 1979 and 1982 deadlines ; reopen the proposed era for state ratification at the present count of 37 states ; and extend the period for state ratification indefinitely .

this report examines the legislative history of the various proposals that ultimately emerged as the proposed equal rights amendment .

it identifies and provides an analysis of current legislative proposals and reviews contemporary factors that may bear on its present and future viability .

despite the efforts of women's rights advocates in every congress , nearly 50 years passed between the time when the mott amendment was first introduced in 1923 and the equal rights amendment was approved by congress and proposed to the states in 1972 .

interest in the proposed equal rights amendment did not end when its extended ratification deadline expired on june 30 , 1982 .

since that time , there have been regular efforts to introduce the concept as a "fresh start" in congress , while additional approaches have emerged that would revive h.j .

res .

208 , the amendment as originally proposed by the 92 nd congress .

supporters of the era , and particularly the three - state strategy — now , arguably , the one - state strategy , assuming the validity of ratifications by nevada and illinois — identify a number of sources that they claim support their contention that the proposed equal rights amendment remains constitutionally viable .

other scholars and observers , however , have raised concerns about , or objections to , these assertions .

the arguments and constitutional principles relied on by era supporters to justify the revival of the proposed equal rights amendment include , but may not be limited to , the following: article v , they assert , grants exceptionally broad discretion and authority over the constitutional amendment process to congress .

in their interpretation , the example of the twenty - seventh amendment suggests that there is no requirement of contemporaneity in the ratification process for proposed constitutional changes .

era proponents claim that the supreme court's decision in coleman v. miller gives congress wide discretion in setting conditions for the ratification process .

far from being sacrosanct and an element in the founders' "original intent," the seven - year deadline for amendments has its origins in a political maneuver by opponents of the eighteenth amendment authorizing prohibition .

the decision of one congress in setting a deadline for ratification of an amendment does not constrain a later congress from rescinding the deadline and reviving or acceding to the ratification of a proposed amendment .

against these statements of support may be weighed the cautions of other observers who may argue as follows: the twenty - seventh amendment is a questionable model for efforts to revive the proposed equal rights amendment ; unlike the proposed amendment , it was not encumbered by two expired ratification deadlines .

moreover , it is argued that congress has generally ignored its provisions since ratification .

even though the proposed equal rights amendment received an extension , supporters were unable to gain approval by three - fourths of the states .

opponents suggest that a "third bite of the apple" is arguably unfair and , if not unconstitutional , at least contrary to the founders' intentions .

revivification opponents caution era supporters against an overly broad interpretation of coleman v. miller , which , they argue , may have been be a politically influenced decision .

congress implicitly recognized its misjudgment on the ratification deadline for the proposed equal rights amendment when it incorporated such a requirement in the text of the proposed district of columbia voting rights ( congressional representation ) amendment .

the rescission issue was not conclusively decided in the 1980s and remains potentially open to congressional or judicial action if the proposed equal rights amendment is reopened for further ratifications .

congress could revisit the contending points raised by different analysts if it gives active consideration to legislation that would seek specifically to revive the proposed equal rights amendment , or to accept the additional state ratifications .

in recent years , some supporters of the proposed era have embraced the three - state strategy , which maintains that congress has the authority to effectively repeal the ratification deadlines provided in h.j .

res .

208 , 92 nd congress and h.j.res .

638 , 95 th congress .

in the 115 th congress , s.j.res .

5 and h.j.res .

53 incorporate this approach , which could be more accurately described as a "one - state strategy" following ratification by nevada in 2017 and illinois in 2018 .

alternatively , congress could propose a "fresh start" equal rights amendment ; such proposals have been introduced regularly since the original era time limit expired in 1982 .

this approach might avoid the controversies that have been associated with repeal of the deadlines for the 1972 era , but starting over would present a fresh constitutional amendment with the stringent requirements provided in article v: approval by two - thirds majorities in both houses of congress , and ratification by three - fourths of the states .

it would , however , be possible to draft the proposal without a time limit , as is the case with s.j.res .

6 and h.j.res .

33 in the 115 th congress .

if approved by congress in this form , the proposed amendment would , as was the case with the madison amendment , remain current , viable , and thus eligible for ratification , for an indefinite period .

