the oregon & california railroad ( o&c ) lands consist of 2.6 million acres of timberland in western oregon ( see figure 1 ) .

the majority of these lands ( 2.5 million acres ) were originally granted to the oregon & california railroad company in 1866 for constructing approximately 300 miles of the oregon portion of a railroad from portland , or , to sacramento , ca .

the railroad received alternating sections of land for an average of 20 miles on each side of the proposed railroad , resulting in a checkerboard ownership pattern with private , state , local , and federal ownership .

as part of the grant , congress directed the oregon & california railroad company to encourage settlement and development by selling parcels no larger than 160 acres at a maximum price of $2.50 per acre .

however , the railroad violated the grant in part by selling larger tracts above the designated price , and also by temporarily halting sales to increase timber prices .

in 1908 , the united states sued the railroad company , and in 1915 the u.s. supreme court ruled that the railroad violated the terms of the grant .

the disposition of these lands was eventually resolved when the chamberlain - ferris act of 1916 revested all unsold tracts of land back to the federal government .

management concerns — such as how to compensate the counties for the loss of property tax revenue — persisted , and were addressed with the oregon & california railroad lands act of 1937 ( o&c act ) .

this act directed that the department of the interior ( doi ) would administer the lands "for permanent forest production" with the purpose of providing timber , protecting watersheds , providing recreational opportunities , and contributing to the economic stability of the local communities .

the o&c act also established a revenue sharing system for the counties .

initially the lands were managed by the doi general land office , but in 1946 , the general land office was merged with the u.s. grazing service to create the bureau of land management ( blm ) , which continues to administer the o&c lands .

in fy2014 , blm received $115 million in appropriations to manage the o&c lands .

the o&c lands are also commonly considered to refer to approximately 472,000 acres of controverted lands managed by the forest service and 75,000 acres of the reconveyed coos bay wagon road ( cbwr ) lands .

the controverted lands consisted of unselected and unpatented odd - numbered sections within the indemnity limits of the railroad , but also fell within the boundaries of a national forest established in the 1890s .

the forest service claimed jurisdiction , despite opposition from the doi .

the issue was resolved in 1954 when congress approved a bill affirming the administrative jurisdiction of the forest service but directing that the disposition of revenue follow the formula established by the o&c act .

the cbwr lands — also in western oregon — were reconveyed to federal ownership in 1919 after the failure of the southern oregon company to fulfill the terms of a grant to construct a military road .

the cbwr lands are managed by blm and have been included with the o&c lands for various legislative and management purposes .

unless otherwise noted , the term o&c lands will be used in this report to include the revested o&c lands and the reconveyed cbwr lands managed by blm , and the controverted forest service o&c lands .

this report provides background information about the o&c lands and discusses federal payments made to the 18 counties in oregon to compensate for the tax - exempt status of these federal lands .

this report then analyzes some of the major issues before congress related to the management of the o&c lands .

the o&c lands consist mostly of douglas fir forests , which contain marketable softwood lumber commonly used for construction purposes .

as part of the o&c act of 1937 , the lands were classified as timberlands to be managed for "permanent forest production. .

timber was to be sold , cut , and removed in conformity with the principle of sustained yield to provide a permanent timber supply .

the statute established a 500 million board feet annual allowable sale quantity ( asq ) , which could be adjusted periodically .

by 1972 , the asq peaked at approximately 1.2 billion board feet , aided in part by a 1960s modification which included the intermixed public domain forestry lands in the calculation formula .

from the 1960s to the 1980s , the average harvest level regularly exceeded 1 billion board feet per year .

harvest levels began to decline in the 1990s , reaching a low of 13 million board feet in 1994 .

since 2000 , blm has offered an annual average of approximately 180 million board feet for harvest , including 239 million board feet in fy2014 .

see figure 2 for timber harvest volume going back to fy1976 and figure 3 for timber sale data back to fy1942 ( reliable and accurate blm harvest data prior to fy1976 are unavailable ) .

the o&c act also provided for protecting watersheds , regulating stream flow , contributing to the economic stability of local communities and industries , and providing recreational opportunities .

while some see the inclusion of these other management goals as requiring the o&c lands to be managed for multiple - use , others — including some judicial opinions — interpret the o&c act as a dominant - use statute that elevates timber production over other listed values .

in 1998 , congress established a "no net loss" policy for lands administered by blm in western oregon .

the act requires blm to ensure — on a 10-year basis — that the total acres of o&c and cbwr land remain consistent .

the act further requires blm to ensure the total acres of o&c , cbwr , and public domain land available for timber harvest remain stable .

the counties containing the o&c lands had a financial stake in the o&c lands because they received tax payments from the railroad until 1911 , when the railroad stopped paying in anticipation of the land being returned to federal ownership .

when the lands were returned to federal ownership in 1916 , the counties lost some of their tax base .

congress debated the federal government's responsibility for compensating the counties for the loss of potential tax revenue until the 1937 o&c act created a revenue - sharing system dependent on timber sales .

the debate was reignited in the late 1990s , when timber revenues declined , and continued through the 113 th congress .

legislative issues surrounding o&c management include who should manage the lands , the applicability of the nwfp and various federal environmental laws , how to calculate and define sustained yield and allowable sale quantity , and how to address county compensation .

with the last of the srs payments made in early 2014 , the fy2014 payments ( to be made in early 2015 ) are likely to be significantly lower than the fy2013 payments unless congress changes current law to prevent a reversion to 50% of o&c receipts .

options for reauthorizing or modifying srs for fy2015 , authorizing a makeup payment for fy2014 , or other legislative proposals to address o&c payments and land management remain as issues for the 114 th congress to consider .

legislative issues surrounding extending srs and similar county payment programs include the basis for compensation , the source of funds , interaction with other compensation programs , and the duration of the program .

in addition , any new mandatory spending in excess of the baseline that would increase the deficit may require budgetary offsets .

another related issue is the extent to which the federal government should retain ownership and management authority of the o&c lands .

if congress considers reverting to a receipt - sharing payment system , several concerns have been raised .

the primary concern for the o&c counties has been the decline in receipts due to the decline in timber sales since the late 1980s .

for example , o&c receipts declined from a peak of $220 million in fy1989 to a low of $12 million in 2003 .

although receipts have been gradually increasing — in fy2012 receipts were $20 million — they remain well below the fy1989 levels .

however , returning to 1989 harvest levels is not feasible under the management of the nwfp , and given the economic realities of the current timber market .

another concern has been the annual fluctuations in the payments , which some argue harms the o&c counties by creating uncertainty and interfering with their fiscal planning .

congress has considered a variety of other legislative proposals to address the o&c lands .

in the 1990s , congress considered proposals to transfer ownership of the o&c lands to private ownership or to transfer management to a nonfederal entity .

while legislation directly aimed at the o&c lands was not introduced in the 112 th congress , members of congress from the oregon delegation in both the house and senate released draft proposals and frameworks .

other legislation to alter management of all federal lands would have affected o&c management .

the 113 th congress considered two o&c legislative proposals , discussed below .

the 114 th congress may continue to debate these issues ; for example , one bill was introduced on january 8 , 2015 .

the 113 th congress considered legislation to address the management of the o&c lands and federal payments programs to the o&c counties .

title iii of the house - passed h.r .

1526 — the restoring healthy forests for healthy communities act — would have transferred management authority of much of the o&c lands to a panel appointed by the governor of oregon and established a trust with fiduciary responsibility to the counties , among other provisions related to the management and applicability of federal environmental laws .

s. 1784 , as reported out of the senate committee on energy and natural resources , would have retained management authority within the blm , but would have designated three different management prescriptions for the o&c lands based on either a conservation or forestry emphasis , and then based on the ecology of the forest type .

on september 20 , 2013 , the house passed h.r .

1526 , the restoring healthy forests for healthy communities act .

title iii of h.r .

1526 would have created and transferred management authority of the o&c lands to an o&c trust under the guidance of a seven - member advisory board appointed by the governor of oregon .

the proposed o&c trust would have had "fiduciary responsibilities to act for the benefit of the o&c counties" and would have managed the lands based on a revised definition of sustained - yield , with half of the land managed on a long - term rotation ( 100-120 years ) .

the remaining forest in the proposed trust would have been managed on any rotation age as determined by the board .

although management authority would have been transferred to the board , the federal government would have retained all "right , title , and interest" in the o&c lands , enabling pilt payments to continue .

even so , section 312 ( a ) ( 2 ) would have deemed that actions on the proposed o&c trust lands would not involve federal action or discretion .

this provision would have exempted actions by the proposed o&c trust from reviews under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , the endangered species act , and the national historic preservation act .

state laws governing management of private timberlands in oregon would have applied .

title iii would have also transferred forest stands older than 125 years to the forest service , and they would have been managed under the nwfp with a harvest prohibition on old growth .

after those lands were transferred , section 314 ( k ) would have deemed management of the proposed o&c trust to be compliant with esa for the northern spotted owl .

however , there are multiple esa species in oregon that may still have required mitigation measures ( eg , the marbled murrelet and multiple populations of salmon ) .

the bill also would have limited judicial review of the proposed o&c trust management to the o&c counties ( section 312 ( g ) ( 2 ) ) .

additionally , the bill would have designated one new wilderness area , expanded an existing wilderness area , and designated several new wild and scenic river sections within the o&c land areas .

revenue from the trust would have been distributed to the counties to pay for operating and management expenses ( including salaries for the board members ) .

within 10 years , revenue would have also been used to establish a conservation fund and a reserve fund .

in addition , the bill specified that a total of $72.8 million would have been paid to the federal government over seven years .

a remaining question was whether the forests could have produced timber to support a level of revenue to accomplish those distributions , or how timber markets would have reacted to an influx of additional supply .

the bill did not address what would have happened if revenues were insufficient , nor did the bill establish a clear prioritization for allocating the revenue distribution between expenses , payments to the counties , payments to the treasury , and deposits into the funds .

title v of h.r .

1526 also would have provided a one - time srs payment in february 2015 , essentially a fy2014 payment .

for the o&c counties , the payment would have been $27 million less than the fy2010 payment ( which would have resulted in a payment of approximately $58 million ) .

the oregon and california land grant act of 2013 ( s. 1784 ) , reported out of the committee on energy and natural resources on december 11 , 2014 , would have amended the o&c act of 1937 and would have allocated portions of the o&c lands as "forestry emphasis areas" and other portions as "conservation emphasis areas," each with different management prescriptions .

regardless of allocation , all of the areas would have been managed under the principles of ecological forestry as defined in the bill , albeit with different emphases .

the bill would have added an additional 700,000 acres to the o&c lands — bringing the total to 2.8 million acres — through transfers from the forest service , u.s. army corps of engineers , and the inclusion of some blm public domain forestry acres .

the forestry emphasis areas would have been further allocated into moist and dry forests , with different specific management prescriptions .

between 4% and 6% of the moist forestry emphasis areas would have been harvested every five years using a variable retention regeneration regime , which would have required about one - third of the trees to remain standing in clusters to mimic natural disturbance patterns .

management of dry forestry emphasis areas would have focused on improving fire resiliency primarily by reducing stand density , using harvests and prescribed fire as necessary to achieve the stated restoration goals .

hazardous fuel reduction projects close to developed areas would have been given priority .

private citizens would have been authorized to conduct forest management projects on federal land within 100 feet of their property .

s. 1784 did not address the applicability of federal environmental laws or the extent of federal liability for these actions .

blm would have been required to produce two separate planning documents every five years: landscape prioritization plans detailing the planned vegetation management projects for all three emphasis areas , and a comprehensive environmental review under nepa for the dry forestry emphasis areas ( plus specified conservation emphasis areas ) and for the moist forestry emphasis areas ( plus specified conservation emphasis areas ) .

the environmental reviews would be large - scale and long - term , analyzing the potential effects of five years of forest management activities , including timber sales .

the survey and management requirements under the nwfp would not apply to forestry emphasis areas .

from the date of enactment , blm would have had nine months to develop both of the draft environmental impact statements and 27 months to publish the final environmental impact statement for each project .

it is unclear if blm would have been able to comply with these deadlines , and what would have happened if the agency were unable to do so .

in a departure from existing practice , blm would not have been required to conduct any project - level nepa reviews except in unusual circumstances .

title ii of s. 1784 would have altered the distribution of revenue from current law .

it would have allocated $4 million annually to the u.s. treasury and 25% of the revenue ( up to $20 million ) annually to blm for administrative costs .

remaining revenue then would have been distributed to the o&c counties to fulfill a minimum payment equivalent to 50% of the revenues generated in fy2013 .

if there had not been enough revenue to make that minimum payment , the shortfall would have been deducted from the treasury payment .

both h.r .

1526 and s. 1784 sought to address questions about the management of the o&c lands , the applicability of the nwfp and various federal environmental laws , and how to address county compensation .

however , the bills took fundamentally and philosophically different approaches , though with respect to some commonalities .

for example , both bills would have provided some restrictions on old growth harvests and would have protected portions of the o&c lands through new wilderness designations .

however , while h.r .

1526 proposed divesting the management authority of the federal o&c lands to state control , in contrast , s. 1784 would have retained federal authority but with very specific management prescriptions .

both bills attempted to streamline the environmental analysis and planning procedures , but did so in different ways .

s. 1784 would have prescribed a long - term , large - scale environmental document with statutorily specified analyses to cover most management actions .

h.r .

1526 would have allowed management actions to proceed primarily under existing oregon state law and would not have required compliance with certain federal environmental laws or regulations .

both bills would have altered the distribution of timber sale revenues and attempted to establish dependable revenue for the 18 o&c counties .

much of the published analytical comparisons of the bills focused on their potential impacts on county compensation .

however , comparing revenue projections relies on several assumptions that introduce high levels of variability into the analysis and uncertainty into the conclusions .

these assumptions include estimates about harvest volumes , revenues , and management costs .

in particular , projecting timber volumes sold and revenues collected relies on factors beyond federal control , such as market behavior in response to the presumed increased supply of federal timber .

other important assumptions include the feasibility and cost of compliance with the implementation timelines proposed in both bills , and the consequences for failing to do so .

the oregon and california land grant act of 2015 , s. 132 , was introduced by senator wyden on january 8 , 2015 .

s. 132 is substantively similar to s. 1784 from the 113 th congress .

