america's borders and ports are busy places , with tens of millions of cargo containers and hundreds of millions of lawful travelers entering the country each year , while tens of thousands of illegal cargo entries and hundreds of thousands of unauthorized migrants are seized , arrested , or turned away .

at the same time , hundreds of thousands of unauthorized migrants evade detection to enter the united states illegally ; thousands of kilograms of illegal drugs and other contraband are smuggled into the country ; and tens of thousands of migrants may be victims of human trafficking .

the breadth and variety of these statistics are reflected in the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) complex border security mission , which calls on the agency to "prevent the illegal flow of people and goods across u.s. air , land , and sea borders while expediting the safe flow of lawful travel and commerce ; ensure security and resilience of global movement systems ; [and] disrupt and dismantle transnational organizations that engage in smuggling and trafficking across the u.s .

border. .

to execute this mission successfully , dhs and congress must balance a number of competing priorities and allocate resources accordingly .

for example , how should enforcement programs weigh the facilitation of legal trade and travel against the competing goal of preventing illegal entries ? .

how should the allocation of border security resources be divided among programs designed to counter differing threats ? .

is it more efficient to invest enforcement dollars at ports of entry or on fencing and surveillance between the ports ? .

should additional personnel be added to the southwest border or at northern or coastal borders ? .

how do intelligence operations and cooperation with enforcement agencies away from the border enhance border security ? .

the answers to these questions depend on the variety of threats america confronts at its international borders .

dhs and its congressional supporters may have had the luxury of adopting an "all of the above" approach in the years following the september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , terrorist attacks ; but at a time of fiscal scarcity the department faces increasing pressure to invest prudently , and to ensure that effective enforcement strategy shapes agency budgets rather than the other way around .

in addition , because many threat actors are strategic ( i.e. , they may change their tactics in response to enforcement efforts ) , questions about the effectiveness of u.s. border security policy and the costs and benefits of competing approaches should be revisited on a regular basis .

in general , dhs's border enforcement strategy , like its overall approach to homeland security , is based on risk management , which dhs defines as "the process for identifying , analyzing , and communicating risk and accepting , avoiding , transferring , or controlling it to an acceptable level considering associated costs and benefits of any actions taken. .

in short , the goal of risk management is to target enforcement resources to specific threats in proportion ( 1 ) to the gravity of the associated risk , and ( 2 ) to the cost - effectiveness of the enforcement response .

this report focuses on the first major step in managing border - related risks: assessing the risk posed by different types of threats at u.s. borders .

risk assessment in the border security context presents particular challenges , as discussed below ( see " a framework for assessing border threats " ) .

but understanding these challenges and systematically assessing border threats provide a critical foundation for dhs's planning process , as well as for members of congress charged with making border security policy , overseeing enforcement efforts , and allocating agency resources .

this report begins with a discussion of the types of threats the united states confronts at its international borders ( see " types of border threats " ) , followed by an overview of dhs's risk management methodologies , including in the context of border security ( see " dhs and risk management " ) .

the following sections show how the principles of risk management may be used to describe and analyze threats to u.s. border security .

first , how can members of congress and others assess the risks associated with each of these threats ( see " a framework for assessing border threats " ) ? .

second , for selected border threats , what conclusions may be drawn about current risk levels ( see " assessment of selected border threats " ) ? .

the report concludes by placing threat assessment within the broader context of border security policymaking .

america's concern for national security at the border long predates the post - 9 / 11 focus on "homeland security," though the nature of border threats has changed over time .

the first federal immigration laws , passed in 1798 , authorized the president to arrest or deport any alien deemed to be dangerous to the united states and any adult male alien from a country at war with the united states .

over the course of the 20 th century , laws were passed to exclude security threats such as anarchists ( in 1903 ) , aliens considered a threat to public safety during times of war ( 1918 ) , communists ( 1950 ) , and terrorists ( 1996 ) .

the mission and focus of u.s. border enforcement has also changed over time .

the u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) was established in 1924 and focused initially on preventing the entry of inadmissible chinese migrants and on preventing alcohol inflows during prohibition , with the majority of agents stationed on the northern border .

unauthorized migration from and through mexico first emerged as a major policy concern beginning in the late 1960s and early 1970s , and 1971 marked the beginning of tightening border controls as part of america's "war on drugs. .

thus , beginning in the 1970s , the united states engaged in sustained and intertwined efforts to combat illegal migration and drug flows at the southwest border .

border patrol staffing ( focused primarily on immigration control ) climbed eleven - fold between 1975 and 2011 , and spending by the drug enforcement administration ( dea , focused primarily on counter - narcotics ) increased about five - fold during the same period .

with the first world trade center bombing in 1993 and the interception of the so - called millennium bomber at port angeles , wa , in 1999 , counterterrorism became a third important focus of u.s. border security ( i.e. , in addition to immigration control and counter - narcotics ) during the 1990s — and the top concern after 9 / 11 .

thus , dhs's border security responsibilities were defined by the homeland security act ( hsa , p.l .

107-296 ) to include , among other responsibilities , preventing the entry of terrorists and terrorist weapons ; securing u.s. borders , territorial waters , ports , and transportation systems ; immigration enforcement ; and customs enforcement ( including preventing the entry of illegal drugs ) .

as figure 1 illustrates , dhs's border security mission includes its efforts to prevent the entry of unauthorized migrants , combat criminal networks that smuggle drugs and other contraband , and identify and interdict potential terrorists at america's borders .

the figure also illustrates several observations about the broader context in which these enforcement efforts occur .

first , while migration , drugs , and terrorism are dhs's highest - profile concerns at u.s. borders , border security encompasses a number of additional goals , including efforts to facilitate lawful travel and trade and to prevent the entry of persons with serious communicable diseases .

these additional aspects of border security are mainly beyond the scope of this report .

second , while dhs combats illegal migration , criminal networks , and potential terrorists at u.s. borders , its work on all three of these issues also extends beyond the border , both within the united states and through international partnerships .

third , dhs's efforts at u.s. borders and its efforts to combat unauthorized migration , drugs and criminal networks , and terrorism represent a subset of the department's overall homeland security mission space , as illustrated by the larger rectangle in figure 1 .

a final observation illustrated by figure 1 is that while the different elements of dhs's border security mission overlap , they also include distinct regions .

for example , the "criminal networks" circle in figure 1 includes characteristics of this threat that are unique to it .

trafficking organizations that specialize in specific crimes fall in this region of the diagram .

the circle intersects with "unauthorized migrants," describing possible ways in which these two threats relate , such as drug trafficking organizations that expand into migrant smuggling .

at the core of the diagram all three circles overlap and highlight arenas in which the threats converge — drug smugglers , unauthorized aliens , and terrorists may use the same smuggling routes or techniques , for example .

while one may be drawn to the core of figure 1 , the peripheral areas of each circle are important because threats encompass distinct features , and certain policy responses may be more appropriate to combat particular threats .

for example , while there likely is some degree of overlap among unauthorized migrants , drug smugglers , and potential terrorists as threat issues , the great majority of unauthorized migrants do not fall into the other categories .

none of the 9 / 11 hijackers or known post - 9 / 11 terrorist threats ( eg , richard reid , the "shoe bomber" ; umar farouk abdulmutallab , the "underwear bomber" ; and faisal shahzad , the "times square bomber" ) entered the united states illegally .

likewise , while most unauthorized migrants enter the country between ports of entry or by overstaying nonimmigrant visas , many illicit drugs are smuggled into the united states hidden within cargo containers , private vehicles , or in other non - commercial vehicles .

as a result , the enforcement tools targeting illegal migration — personnel and infrastructure between ports of entry , worksite enforcement , and visa overstay analysis — likely do little to reduce narcotic smuggling , and vice versa .

another set of enforcement measures may be ideally designed to combat terrorism , and yet another to prevent other border threats , such as fraudulent goods .

in general , border threats may be divided into actors and goods .

threat actors include potential terrorists , transnational criminals , and unauthorized migrants ( see text box ) , among other types of people whose entry into the united states may produce harmful consequences .

threatening goods include weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) and certain other weapons , illegal drugs and other contraband , counterfeit products , and products brought into the united states illegally and / or with potentially harmful effect .

while risk management methodologies may be used to analyze a wide variety of threats , this report focuses exclusively on physical threats at u.s. borders , including the inflow of dangerous and / or illegal people and goods .

the diversity of border threats and the complexity of dhs's border security and border management mission create challenges for border security policymaking and planning .

these challenges are amplified by the uncertainty and fear surrounding many border threats .

rather than attempting specific predictions about where , when , and how border threats will be realized , dhs and other analysts often rely on risk management as an approach to border security , and on probabilistic risk models as a framework for analyzing and describing different types of potential threats .

risk management and risk assessment procedures are rooted in economic theories of consumer behavior and formal models of decision - making that are used in a wide range of industrial , environmental , business , legal , and other settings .

"risk management" refers to a variety of methodologies for choosing the optimal response to a potentially hazardous situation by comparing the costs and benefits of possible interventions with the expected value of projected outcomes .

a specialized school of decision theory known as "probabilistic risk assessment" ( pra ) was developed during the 1960s and 1970s to focus on high - consequence , low - probability risks associated with nuclear power plants and other dangerous industrial processes ; pra has influenced some of dhs's thinking on how to respond to the risk of terrorism .

the likelihood - times - consequences framework is a standard way to evaluate risk , but the use of such a framework to understand border threats presents unique challenges and therefore remains somewhat controversial .

even where such models are well developed , as in industrial engineering and the insurance and finance industries for example , risk projections are probabilistic and may have a high degree of uncertainty .

predicting the likelihood of border threats may be far more difficult .

moreover , traditional risk management approaches were designed as unilateral decision systems .

yet when it comes to border security , risk models must accommodate strategic adversaries: threat actors like terrorists , criminals , and unauthorized migrants , who may change their behavior in response to u.s. defenses , making likelihood even more difficult to predict .

in addition , whereas traditional risk models are designed primarily to measure economic and physical consequences of certain events , the consequences of border threats may affect american society in much more complex ways ; and the evaluation of such consequences is likewise more complex .

the remainder of this report explores these challenges , and then uses the likelihood - times - consequences approach to assess selected border threats .

understanding the nuanced security issues posed by the flow of people and goods across u.s. borders is fundamental to shaping effective policy in this area .

this report describes a possible framework for describing the risks posed by specific hazards at the border based on their likelihood and their potential consequences .

while such an analysis may seem simple , its execution is complex , as described above , and there is no objectively correct way to evaluate the relative importance of any particular threat at u.s. borders .

nonetheless , the complexity and subjectivity of threat assessment does not diminish the importance of some form of threat assessment — explicit or otherwise — as a logical starting point for the policymaking process .

beyond the challenges of threat assessment , how border threats shape border security policies also depends on a pair of mediating issues , as illustrated in figure 4 .

first , while the border is a critical nexus for transnational flows , the strategic breadth of border threats and of policy responses extends well beyond the border region .

at the very least , this suggests the importance of understanding how border - specific policy proposals may impact other government initiatives or interests , and how other law enforcement activities may supplement efforts at the border .

for example , lawmakers concerned about illegal drug flows through the ports of entry may favor increased investments in specific dhs equities such as port of entry infrastructure , more cbp officers , non - intrusive inspection scanners , and drug sniffing dogs .

for members focused on counterterrorism , priorities might include continued investments in dhs information systems , such as the cbp automated targeting system , the u.s .

visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) system , and the automated commercial environment , along with investments in intelligence collection programs to ensure that the right data are being analyzed .

yet such investments compete with other border priorities , such as fencing and surveillance equipment between ports .

border investments also complement and interact with law enforcement activities beyond the border , such as — in the case of illegal drugs — programs to combat traffickers' money laundering schemes and to detect and prevent southbound flows of money and guns .

some of the most important work with respect to counterterrorism and counternarcotics efforts may involve bilateral and multilateral partnerships with allies abroad .

and the u.s. government has vital competing interests in facilitating effective commercial flows and the efficient movement of legal travelers .

inevitably , decisions about "border security" must grapple with the full universe of threats and policies that intersect at u.s. borders .

second , the availability of resources also plays a role in framing border security policy .

immediately after the 9 / 11 attacks , the convergence of immigration control , the war on drugs , and the urgency attached to combating terrorism meant that dhs took more of an "all of the above" approach to border security .

yet even when budgets are expanding , congress and dhs face trade - offs among the different elements of dhs's border security mission .

as budgeting has grown tighter in the current fiscal climate , policymakers face increasingly difficult questions about how to set priorities and where to allocate scarce resources .

the answers , in turn , depend on a third set of questions concerning how to measure and evaluate the effectiveness of border security policies .

what does a secure border mean in real terms ? .

how do we measure progress toward this goal ? .

the secure fence act ( p.l .

109-367 ) defines operational control of the border to mean zero illegal inflows , yet many analysts doubt that an open country in a globalized economy can ever achieve a 100% interdiction rate — and some question whether such a standard is even worth aspiring to .

clearly articulated and attainable policy goals help in the development of effective metrics and appropriate benchmarks .

how to measure the success of policies designed to curb unauthorized migration may be especially important — and challenging — during a period experiencing net unauthorized migration flows at around zero .

two key measurement - related questions are how recent dhs policies like increased border personnel , cbp's consequence delivery system , and ice's secure communities program have contributed to the recent trend of falling illegal inflows ; and the degree to which unauthorized flows will increase as the u.s. economy recovers and new hiring resumes .

surveying the border policymaking context as described in figure 1 , members of congress may ask whether the u.s. approach to particular threats is too narrow or perhaps too broad .

for example , should policy be designed to prevent all forms of unauthorized migration and illegal movement of goods , or should policies be tailored to target specific threats such as terrorists , transnational gangs , or illegal drugs ? .

if the answer lies somewhere between — involving both sweeping and targeted programs — how should mediating issues such as resource allocation and the prioritization of one effort over another be weighed ? .

finally , in addition to setting overall priorities , members of congress may evaluate policies by asking where dhs may get the most effective return on its enforcement investments .

in addition to terrorism prevention , some members may emphasize investments in resiliency , or the ability to survive and manage a terrorist attack .

members concerned with preventing the inflow of illegal drugs may question whether the enforcement component of overall u.s. drug policy is properly balanced with non - enforcement investments .

members focused on countering the movement of bulk cash , counterfeit goods , and other smuggled items across the u.s. borders may weigh the value of investing in enforcement personnel at the border , versus focusing on international cooperation and domestic intelligence collection and information .

