the electric power industry is in the process of transformation .

the electricity infrastructure of the united states is aging , and uncertainty exists around how to modernize the grid , and what technologies and fuels will be used to produce electricity in the future .

unresolved questions of transmission and reliability of the grid are arising from potential cybersecurity threats and continuing interest in harnessing renewable energy and other low carbon sources of electricity .

concerns about reliability and electricity prices are being complicated by new environmental regulations and the rising availability of natural gas for the production of electric power from unconventional resources such as gas shales .

congress will likely be faced with policy issues regarding how the modernization of this vital industry will unfold .

as with electric power plants , electric transmission and distribution system components are also aging , with power transformers averaging over 40 years of age , and 70% of transmission lines being 25 years or older .

as components of the system are retired , they are replaced with newer components often linked to communications or automated systems ( i.e. , the smart grid ) .

with changes in federal law encouraging electricity competition and markets , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system capable of accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy between regions of the united states .

damage from storms to transmission and distribution systems appears to be increasing .

but undergrounding transmission and distribution systems is not always a solution .

underground lines can be more expensive , and take longer to repair .

replacing overhead lines with underground cable is also expensive .

upgrading the nation's transmission to accommodate current and future uses and ensuring the functioning and the security of the grid have been paramount concerns for the federal government .

the federal government has already tasked the ferc with responsibility for enforcing reliability standards for the bulk electric system , but cybersecurity and physical security of the grid remain key issues .

the information technology systems and capabilities of the smart grid add to the ability to control power flows and enhance the efficiency of grid operations .

but these attributes also potentially increase the susceptibility of the grid to cyber ( i.e. , computer - related ) attack since these two - way information and control capabilities are built around microprocessor devices whose basic functions are controlled by software programming .

safeguarding large transformers and key substations from a potential physical attack by terrorists is a concern .

protection from a major geomagnetic disturbance event caused by solar storms is also a key issue , as prolonged , widespread electricity outages could result .

coal has long been the major fossil fuel used to produce electricity .

however , burning coal results in environmental consequences , such as nitrogen oxides and sulfur emissions .

today , the burning of coal and other fossil fuels is also largely believed to be contributing to global climate change and its potentially damaging effects .

over the last 40 years , congress has directed the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to reduce the potential health and environmental impacts of fossil fuel use by limiting emissions or other consequences of combustion processes .

these environmental regulatory requirements have been evolving in the last decade due to various challenges to epa's implementation of federal laws .

new regulations under development at epa would impose new requirements on coal - fired power plants .

some of these rules would be implemented at the federal level , while others would be implemented at the state level .

they include the cross - state air pollution rule ( which replaced the clean air interstate rule ) ; the mercury and air toxics standards ( mats ) ( also known as the utility mact ) rule to reduce emissions of mercury , other metallic toxics , acid gases , and organic air toxics ; the proposals to regulate coal combustion residues ; and the clean water act section 316 ( b ) cooling water intake rule .

however , only the utility mact rule is currently in effect .

epa also issued standards for greenhouse gas emissions which would require all new power plants to restrict carbon dioxide emissions .

epa has yet to propose rules for ghg emissions from existing power plants , as is required by court order .

much attention has focused recently on the resulting finalization of these regulations , and their potential to contribute to the retirement of mostly small , older coal - burning power plants without modern environmental controls .

due to a general perception in the electric power industry that these new and pending environmental regulations present conflating requirements with unrealistic timeframes for compliance , the regulations have come to be referred to by the industry as the "train wreck" scenario due to a perception that a negative impact on reliability could result .

although environmental groups , and some in the electric power industry — mainly those with significant investments in nuclear or natural gas - fired generation — consider the concerns overstated .

prohibits any funds appropriated or otherwise available for the administrator of the environmental protection agency from being used to implement or enforce ( 1 ) a cap - and - trade program ; or ( 2 ) any statutory or regulatory requirement pertaining to emissions of one or more greenhouse gases from stationary sources that is issued or becomes applicable or effective after january 1 , 2011 .

defines ( 1 ) "cap - and - trade program" as any regulatory program established after the date of enactment of the bill that provides for the sale , auction , or other distribution of a limited amount of allowances that permit the emission of one or more greenhouse gases ; and ( 2 ) "greenhouse gas" to include carbon dioxide , methane , nitrous oxide , sulfur hexafluoride , hydrofluorocarbons , perfluorocarbons , or any other designated anthropogenic gas .

introduced february 1 , 2011 ; referred to the subcommittee on energy and power .

prohibits the secretary of the interior , before december 31 , 2013 , from issuing or approving any proposed or final regulation under the surface mining control and reclamation act of 1977 that would ( 1 ) adversely impact employment in coal mines in the united states ; ( 2 ) cause a reduction in revenue received by the federal government or any state , tribal , or local government , by reducing through regulation the quantity of coal in the united states that is available for mining ; ( 3 ) reduce the quantity of coal available for domestic consumption or for export ; ( 4 ) designate any area as unsuitable for surface coal mining and reclamation operations ; or ( 5 ) expose the united states to liability for taking the value of privately owned coal through regulation .

among many other actions , the bill amends the clean air act to prohibit the administrator of the environmental protection agency from promulgating any regulation concerning , taking action relating to , or taking into consideration , the emission of a greenhouse gas ( ghg ) to address climate change .

excludes ghgs from the definition of "air pollutant" for purposes of addressing climate change .

repeals and nullifies a number of federal rules and epa regulatory actions .

introduced november 14 , 2011 ; referred to the senate and referred to the committee on environment and public works .

crs report r41341 , epa's proposal to regulate coal combustion waste disposal: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41561 , epa regulations: too much , too little , or on track ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

epa regulations and electricity — better monitoring by agencies could strengthen efforts to address potential challenges , united states government accountability office , july 2012 , http: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 600 / 592542.pdf .

2012 state of reliability , north american electric reliability corporation , may 2012 , http: / / www.nerc.com / files / 2012_sor.pdf .

preparing for epa regulations: working to ensure reliable and affordable environmental compliance , the regulatory assistance project , july 2012 , http: / / www.raponline.org / document / download / id / 919 .

