for nearly five decades following indian independence in 1947 , the united states and india struggled to find common ground for a fruitful relationship .

prevailing geopolitical conditions during the cold war undermined the potential for sustained bilateral engagement .

dramatic geopolitical changes after the fall of the soviet union opened diplomatic space for major new collaborative initiatives between the united states and india .

symbolic of these changes , the two countries have since 2004 been pursuing a "strategic partnership" that incorporates numerous economic , security , and global initiatives .

the united states views security cooperation with india in the context of common principles and shared national interests and strategic objectives such as defeating terrorism , preventing weapons proliferation , and maintaining regional stability .

after initial uncertainty under president barack obama , senior pentagon officials assured new delhi that the current administration is fully committed to strengthening ties through the enhancement of the defense relationship made substantive under president george w. bush .

u.s. - india engagement on shared security interests is a topic of interest to the u.s. congress , where there is considerable support for a deepened u.s. partnership with the world's largest democracy .

congressional advocacy of closer relations with india is generally bipartisan and widespread ; house and senate caucuses on india and indian - americans are the largest of their kind .

caucus leaders have encouraged the obama administration to work toward improving the compatibility of the u.s. and indian defense acquisitions systems , as well as to seek potential opportunities for co - development or co - production of military weapons systems with india .

this report includes a brief outline of american security interests in relation to india , followed by an in - depth discussion of india's strategic interests and defense posture .

these sections provide context for a review of the variously convergent and divergent strategic interests of both countries .

it also discusses non - geopolitical obstacles to more substantive cooperation across the partnership , including mutual mistrust and bureaucratic misunderstanding .

it concludes with a brief discussion of the outlook for future security bilateral cooperation .

a companion piece to this report — crs report r42823 , india - u.s. security relations: current engagement , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] — discusses the details of current u.s. - india security engagement .

in the early decades following indian independence , the potential for positive security relations between washington and new delhi was hindered by three largely intertwined disagreements: the first was rooted in the all - consuming cold war calculus and ostensibly nonaligned india's soviet tilt ( the latter being a function of india's strongly - held anti - colonialist sentiments following nearly a century under london's direct rule as the "crown jewel" of the british empire ) .

added to these were washington's close ties with pakistan , india's most contentious rival , and the discomfort these elicited in new delhi .

finally , new delhi's abstention from the 1970 non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) and subsequent pursuit of nuclear weapons capability fueled american fears of further proliferation and the emergence of a destabilizing nuclear arms race on the asian subcontinent .

it was through this nuclear nonproliferation prism that the united states regarded india for decades to follow .

the 1989-1991 collapse of the soviet union nominally eliminated a major geostrategic obstacle to closer u.s. - india relations .

nonetheless , the end of the cold war initially set the united states and india on largely incompatible paths .

western democratic and free market ideals no longer faced any major ideological challenger with the demise of the soviet bloc .

as the world's sole superpower , the united states acted to define and consolidate its cold war victory .

for washington , this meant promoting liberal political and economic systems abroad with an eye toward winning dividends for u.s. prosperity and security at home .

in the early 1990s , india emerged from the losing side of the cold war .

cash - strapped and on the verge of economic collapse without its soviet benefactors , new delhi turned away from its traditionally statist economy and began to gradually incorporate itself into the liberal order , a move that no longer allowed new delhi to distance itself from washington .

while india had begun normalizing relations with the united states in the 1980s , the precipitous soviet collapse meant a sudden end to moscow's financial support for india , compelling new delhi's leaders to engage the west despite long - running fears of jeopardizing india's strategic autonomy .

in the new geopolitical environment , the u.s. - india defense ties that began in the mid - 1980s grew slowly .

the impetus for sustained relations notably emerged from the u.s. pacific command ( paccom ) .

in 1991 , paccom's army commander , general claude kicklighter , visited india to initiate the first set of concrete proposals establishing cooperation between the u.s. and indian militaries .

the continuation of these threadbare defense ties was significant given the unevenness of the broader bilateral relationship of the period .

around the same time , confrontation between washington and new delhi on the npt and comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty ( ctbt ) escalated .

in 1995 , the clinton administration pushed for the indefinite extension of the existing npt at the united nations .

for india , this meant seemingly permanent nuclear weapons pariah status .

from the american perspective , india's continued noncooperation on nuclear proliferation only served to destabilize the south asia region .

nonetheless , the 21 st century opened with relatively hopeful prospects for u.s. - india relations .

to new delhi's surprise , the clinton administration pressured pakistan into withdrawing its forces following the 1999 kargil war in the disputed kashmir region .

then , in 2000 , president bill clinton made a landmark visit to india , becoming the first u.s. president to visit the country in 22 years .

immediately prior to the visit , the administration had eased u.s. sanctions on india related to its 1998 nuclear tests .

in his speech to the indian parliament , president clinton referred to india as a "natural ally" and identified numerous shared values and potential areas for cooperation between the two countries .

that same year , the u.s. - india joint counterterrorism working group was established , formalizing an area of cooperation that long existed .

while president clinton's visit was generally considered successful , it did not have a transformational effect .

his administration's policies toward india remained mired in balancing the indo - pakistani rivalry and addressing concerns about the region's nuclear arsenals , despite washington's optimistic intentions and increasing realization of shared interests with india .

prior to the terrorist attacks of september 2001 , the wheels of the u.s. - india relationship were thus steadily , albeit gradually , in motion .

the incoming bush administration further energized clinton's pro - india policies .

when indian external affairs minister jaswant singh met with national security advisor condoleezza rice in april 2001 , president george w. bush met informally with singh in the oval office , a gesture most welcome by new delhi .

the next month , deputy secretary of state richard armitage made a stop in india to garner approval for the bush administration's controversial missile defense plans .

instead of seizing upon an opportunity to publicly criticize washington for its perceived hypocrisy with regard to relevant international agreements , singh welcomed the policy and contended that the two countries were "endeavoring to work out together a totally new security regime which is for the entire globe," a notion heretofore unimaginable in the context of the u.s. - india relationship .

while many u.s. allies criticized america's missile defense policy , india conspicuously , if only rhetorically , stood by washington's side .

nevertheless , the catastrophic events of 9 / 11 posed a major test of the budding friendship .

on one hand , the attacks brought into clear relief a growing realization of common strategic interests and vulnerabilities related to islamist terrorism .

on the other hand , pakistan reemerged as a key geopolitical facilitator of u.s. - led military efforts in afghanistan .

thus , a key question in new delhi was , "with whom will the americans align themselves ? .

just days after 9 / 11 , washington waived proliferation - related sanctions for both india and pakistan ( the latter country also benefitted from the waiver of democracy - and debt arrearage - related sanctions ) .

despite this sudden readjustment in bilateral ties , indian leaders felt resentment and became concerned that the united states was appeasing pakistan and ignoring new delhi's concerns about what they saw as pakistan - supported terrorism in india .

for its part , washington was consumed with responding to the 9 / 11 attacks , in part by securing pakistan's cooperation in afghanistan .

the crux of the challenge for washington "was to avoid either leaning on pakistan too hard , which could hurt [operations] in afghanistan , or not leaning on pakistan hard enough , which would alienate new delhi. .

it was a tall order considering the extent to which the situation had deteriorated after pakistan - based terrorists attacked india's parliament complex in december 2001 .

yet , by the opening month of 2002 , the united states had managed to secure india's restraint while also eliciting a pledge to tackle terrorism from pakistan's military ruler .

throughout much of the bush administration's first term , the balancing act between india and pakistan continued to be evident in u.s. policy toward south asia .

a major breakthrough in the u.s. - india relationship came soon after president bush's re - election .

in july 2005 , president bush and prime minister manmohan singh issued a joint statement resolving to establish a "global partnership" between the united states and india , through increased cooperation on numerous issues , including "full civilian nuclear energy cooperation" ( such cooperation would require changes in both u.s. law and international guidelines ) .

the "next steps in strategic partnership" ( nssp ) initiative involved progress through a series of reciprocal steps in which both countries took action designed to expand engagement on nuclear regulatory and safety issues , enhanced cooperation in missile defense , peaceful uses of space technology , and creation of an appropriate environment for increased high - technology commerce .

sanctions that remained after the 2001 easing were rolled back further .

only weeks earlier , the united states and india had signed a 10-year defense framework agreement that called for collaboration in multilateral operations , expanded two - way defense trade , increased opportunities for technology transfers and co - production , expanded collaboration related to missile defense , and establishment of a bilateral defense procurement and production group .

these agreements set the stage for unprecedented new levels of interaction and cooperation between the two countries .

throughout the cold war , u.s security interests with relation to india were largely confined to mitigating nuclear proliferation and the potential for nuclear conflict in south asia .

geopolitical realignments after 1991 dramatically increased india's visibility and potential utility in u.s. security calculations , eventually upgrading the country from a "growing global power with common interests" ( as described in president bush's 2002 national security strategy ) to a "linchpin" of u.s. strategy extending from the western pacific and east asia into the indian ocean region and south asia ( as described in a june 2012 speech by defense secretary leon panetta ) .

this transformation in washington's perception of india as a key strategic partner was undergirded by four major u.s. security interests: establishing a stable a balance of power in asia ; reducing the threat posed by terrorism and religious extremism ; curtailing nuclear proliferation in asia ; and protecting u.s. economic and political interests in the asia - pacific region .

the still - nascent u.s. - india defense partnership has been halting and uneven to date , despite a seemingly persuasive case for closer cooperation .

this section identifies key areas of both convergent and divergent perspectives on the security challenges faced by both countries , with the latter providing a basis for better understanding what has so far been slow , if steady , progress toward greater cooperation .

in cases where the two countries simultaneously hold converging and diverging perspectives on a particular issue ( for example , on iran ) , the issue is addressed in both sub - sections .

the discussion seeks to clarify potential opportunities and limitations for what top u.s. officials call one of america's defining defense partnerships in the 21 st century .

as both countries endeavor to cooperate on shared security concerns , rapidly evolving geopolitical dynamics continue to test the bilateral relationship .

in a landmark november 2010 speech to the joint session of indian parliament , president obama laid out the broad , but fundamental interests driving the u.s. - india partnership: now , india is not the only emerging power in the world .

but the relationship between our countries is unique .

for we are two strong democracies whose constitutions begin with the same revolutionary words — "we the people. .

we are two great republics dedicated to the liberty and justice and equality of all people .

and we are two free market economies where people have the freedom to pursue ideas and innovation that can change the world .

and that's why i believe that india and america are indispensable partners in meeting the challenges of our time .

the united states and india share a number of security perspectives , including those on china and asian balance of power calculations ; terrorism ; afghanistan ; maritime issues ; and weapons of mass destruction .

the united states government considers any threats to maritime security and / or freedom of navigation in the asia - pacific region ( including the ior ) to pose a major threat to its own regional interests , as well as to the interests of its allies and partners in asia .

concerns about an increasingly assertive or even aggressive china appear to have led american friends in the region to issue new calls for a greater u.s. security role there .

in washington , dc , india's rapidly growing military capabilities tend to be viewed by american officials and analysts as providing at least a partial hedge against the emergence of any new hegemonic power on the asian continent .

while indian officials refrain from any overt expressions of support for an increased u.s. military presence in the region , india's own disputes with china — and its economic and military disadvantages in comparison with china — create a circumstance in which the u.s. military presence receives tacit welcome .

along with this historic shift in indian perceptions of the u.s. military , however , is an increasing chinese wariness at the emerging strategic relationship between the united states and india , and beijing has expressed concerns about potential realignments in asia that could result in china's "encirclement" by unfriendly governments .

for example , beijing protested discussions under the george w. bush administration to develop a quadrilateral group of like - minded democracies in asia that would include the united states , japan , australia , and india .

still , while indians can at times appear to be overly focused on comparing their country to china , the chinese are generally far more complacent , giving the rivalry an appearance of one - sidedness .

according to some analysts , in the long run , and when beijing potentially agitates asia's international relations with non - traditional military and diplomatic pressure , the united states and india will naturally move closer together .

many analysts claim that chinese "blunderings" in recent years — mainly what were viewed as a series of ham - fisted policies toward neighbors with whom beijing has territorial disputes — have had the effect of pushing washington and new delhi into closer relations , perhaps overriding other concerns .

the 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states instantly made terrorism the primary security threat perceived by americans and their government .

although u.s. officials had already been taking action to address the growing challenge posed by islamist terrorism — especially after the 1998 attacks on u.s. embassies in east africa — they were notably less experienced than were their indian counterparts , who had been dealing with a similar challenge since the early 1990s .

new delhi had regularly prodded washington to redouble its counterterrorism efforts , especially with regard to the numerous islamist militant groups that appeared to enjoy safe haven inside pakistan .

if the united states appeared hesitant to prioritize its counterterrorism efforts before 2001 , 9 / 11 sharply focused the u.s. government's attention on tackling the problem .

at the policy level , washington and new delhi converged neatly on the common interest their two countries shared in combating terrorism .

the killing of eight americans in the november 2008 terrorist attacks in mumbai carried out by the lashkar - e - taiba ( let ) further underscored the importance of counterterrorism collaboration between the two countries .

some analysts contend that let's traditionally regional jihadist focus ( on kashmir , india , and afghanistan ) has expanded to include aspirations for attacks on the american homeland .

in recent years , the perceived encirclement of india by let cells reportedly being established in nepal , bangladesh , sri lanka , and the maldives , provides added motivation for u.s. - india collaboration in combating terrorist networks in south asia .

despite the growing incentives for collaboration , at the tactical and policy level there remain significant obstacles to the smooth development of bilateral counterterrorism collaboration .

these differences in tactics are discussed in a section below .

the united states and india both seek a politically stable afghanistan with a central government able to administer rule of law to the extent of denying safe haven to islamist terrorist networks planning attacks against western countries and india .

the nato military presence in afghanistan has been welcomed by new delhi , which has long perceived of afghanistan as providing pakistan "strategic depth" against india , particularly in the form of training grounds for anti - india terrorist groups .

apart from fighting insurgent and terrorist elements directly , both countries agree on the need to encourage stability in afghanistan through supporting the government in kabul and broader development initiatives to help institutionalize the government over the long term .

president obama's mid - 2011 announcement of a substantive 2014 military drawdown from afghanistan left many in india both dubious and anxious about a u.s. - india partnership that did not ( in their view ) give sufficient consideration to india's security concerns about a potential future governance role for afghan taliban elements .

one of new delhi's major concerns has been the lack of u.s. transparency with india when making major strategic decisions with regard to afghanistan .

the failure to consult or inform india prior to the june 2011 drawdown decision has been cited as a case in point .

during 2012 , washington made significant efforts to reassure new delhi that the united states does not plan to abandon afghanistan .

to this end , the united states has signed a strategic partnership with afghanistan and strongly encouraged new delhi's subsequent strategic agreement with kabul .

government officials interviewed on both sides stated that cooperation on afghanistan had improved dramatically and new delhi was satisfied with washington's efforts to keep them informed .

a june 2012 joint statement issued by secretary of state hillary clinton and minister of external affairs s.m .

krishna on the occasion of the third u.s. - india strategic dialogue outlined the common goals and approach pursued by both countries with regard to afghanistan: the two leaders stressed the importance of sustained international commitment to afghanistan as it assumes full responsibility for governance , development and security .

they intend to explore opportunities to work together to promote afghanistan's development , including in areas such as agriculture , mining , energy , capacity building and infrastructure .

noting the importance of women's economic empowerment for afghanistan's economic success , they plan to work to further increase their ongoing vocational training and empowerment initiatives .

to support their efforts in afghanistan , they agreed to hold a trilateral dialogue with the government of afghanistan .

they welcomed the announcement at the 2012 nato summit in chicago of progress in the security transition process and the participants' commitment to supporting afghanistan's security and development needs into the "transformation decade" ( 2015-2024 ) .

the two leaders discussed the vision for enhanced regional connectivity through south and central asia .

they reiterated the importance of taking concrete steps to promote expanded private investment and trade in afghanistan .

they acknowledged the critical importance of improving afghanistan's integration and linkages within the south and central asia region... .

they acknowledged that success in afghanistan requires , in addition to building up afghanistan's capacity to defend itself , an afghan - led and afghan - owned reconciliation process .

they reiterated that success in afghanistan and regional and global security require elimination of safe havens and infrastructure for terrorism and violent extremism in afghanistan and pakistan .

the united states and india share a keen interest in safeguarding slocs , especially in the asia - pacific region .

the ior is threatened by pirates who disrupt the secure transit of merchant ships between the gulf of aden and the south china sea .

a u.s. - india maritime security cooperation agreement , inked in 2006 , commits both countries to "comprehensive cooperation" in protecting the free flow of commerce and addressing a wide array of threats to maritime security , including piracy and the illicit trafficking of weapons of mass destruction and related materials .

the ability to conduct combined humanitarian relief efforts , as was seen during the 2004 tsunami response , has also been a focus of u.s. - india naval cooperation .

at a strategic level , both u.s. and indian security planners take note of china's rapidly increasing naval capabilities and beijing's demonstrated willingness to be highly assertive in its maritime territorial claims in the south and east china seas .

china is acutely dependent on indian ocean slocs for delivery of energy resources from the persian gulf , and there are concerns in both washington and new delhi that a number of port facilities financed and built by china on the ior littoral — in burma , bangladesh , sri lanka , pakistan , and oman — could in the future be used as bases for chinese naval vessels .

although there are presently few signs that this alleged "string of pearls" is being manifest , the presence in the ior of any significant and potentially adversarial naval forces is a shared concern in both washington and new delhi .

u.s. - india relations have improved considerably since the 1998 imposition of u.s. sanctions triggered by india's second set of nuclear tests .

for new delhi's leadership , the landmark bilateral agreement to launch cooperation in the civil nuclear sphere opened unprecedented ( and largely symbolic / psychological ) space for washington and new delhi to cooperate on a range of security issues , in particular those involving transfer of advanced technology .

while u.s. law still precludes collaborating with india on many nuclear weapons issues , the agreement represented at least tacit recognition of india's nuclear weapons arsenal .

there are concerns within the u.s. nonproliferation community that india has taken insufficient action to improve security at its nuclear sites .

new delhi reportedly remains reticent to discuss its nuclear security measures or to allow any inspections in this regard .

a response on joining the u.s. - led proliferation security initiative ( psi ) — a global effort that aims to stop trafficking of wmd , their delivery systems , and related materials to and from states and nonstate actors of proliferation concern — is currently pending .

india reportedly has suggested that its membership will be contingent on being included in the"core group" and provided that the coalition's activities were consistent with international law .

since 2009 , the indian mea has reported to the indian parliament that indian representatives have attended psi meetings as observers but no decision to join has been made on formal participation .

overall , as the united states focuses on strengthening its relationship with india , the issue of nuclear security cooperation has not been prioritized , in large part due to new delhi's resistance to engaging on the issue with washington .

with regard to the arms control treaties such as the npt , the ctbt , and the proposed fissile material cut - off treaty ( fmct ) , india's stance has remained consistent .

the npt was extended permanently in 1995 , barring any amendments , meaning india would have to accede to the treaty as is .

new delhi continues to hold out , deeming the treaty discriminatory and lacking a meaningful timeline for disarmament .

barring another major change in law with the civil - nuclear deal , the united states has tacitly accepted the status quo on this issue , even as official u.s. policy on the universality of the npt is unchanged .

india remains outside of the npt framework .

new delhi initially sponsored discussions on the ctbt , but has not signed the current version for reasons similar to those discussed above .

while the united states was pressuring india to sign the ctbt in the early 1990s , the u.s. senate's rejection of the treaty made the issue largely moot .

as for the fmct , india has agreed to participate in ongoing discussions in the conference on disarmament .

however , new delhi has expressed reticence to support a treaty that will not , in the indian view , sufficiently and fairly tackle the issue of nonproliferation and eventual universal disarmament .

according to some analysts , while india is not opposed to signing the fmct , it is happy to have pakistan lead the opposition to the agreement .

under the obama administration , discussions on the fmct were given an early boost , but subsequently stalled due to opposition from pakistan , in particular .

again , as in the case of the ctbt , the de - prioritization of the fmct at present has reduced potential cause for disagreement between the united states and india in this realm .

over the past two years , india has become increasingly supportive of u.n. sanctions targeting iran's controversial nuclear program , a leading nonproliferation concern of the united states .

the indian navy is also playing a more proactive role in enforcing u.n. sanctions on the transfer of nuclear material and weapons equipment to sanctioned countries .

in 2009 , the in interdicted a ship carry suspicious cargo to north korea through the indian ocean .

overall , both within the u.n. framework and outside of it , differences between washington and new delhi on tackling proliferation are somewhat narrowed .

differing geopolitical , historic and economic experiences of the united states and india constitute the basis for considerable friction on a number of foreign policies and perspectives .

india is located in the south asian sub - continent astride burgeoning east and southeast asia , and politically tumultuous , yet natural resource - rich west and central asia .

in contrast , the united states is a distant power that has only recently identified key national interests in some parts of the region .

new delhi's leaders have felt compelled to pursue policies aimed at consolidating regional relations , in large part so as to engender a peaceful periphery that will allow india to focus on domestic development , but also as a means of establishing the international prestige that india has long sought .

as an aspirant to both regional and global power status , new delhi's tack has tended to be a cautious one , often reactive to the most acute security threats .

increasing u.s. - asian economic and security interdependence and new delhi's assessment that india's growing power needs to be consolidated , appear to be narrowing the historical gap in u.s. - indian perspectives .

nonetheless , on a practical as opposed to strategic level , considerable differences remain .

apart from divergent perspectives on foreign policy , bureaucratic obstacles to improved government - to - government relations , and the transactional aspects of the partnership , continue to hinder cooperation .

india's bureaucratic lethargy can tend to magnify such constraints .

the following section will discuss the major divergent interests and obstacles that have thus far set limits on the extent of bilateral security engagement: divergent strategies toward pakistan irrespective of mutual end goals ; terrorism ; divergent stances on iran ; divergent perspectives on the promotion of liberal values ; mutual mistrust ; and mutual misunderstanding of bureaucratic functioning .

the u.s. and india both support the emergence of a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistan that is not a base for islamist militant groups .

irrespective of mutually shared end goals , however , strategies for dealing with threats posed by pakistan and pakistan - based terrorist groups continue to pose a conundrum for u.s. - india security relations .

the george w. bush administration's pointed 21 st century efforts to de - couple or "de - hyphenate" the decades - old u.s. policy toward india and pakistan realized considerable if incomplete success , and have for the most part been pursued by president obama .

a wide range of u.s. policy engagement with india now takes place independently and with minimal consideration of washington's relations with islamabad .

thus , a broader and deeper u.s. - india "strategic partnership" has been allowed to develop .

likewise , the bush administration's "war on terrorism" framework posed pakistan as a "front - line state," and the united states became largely dependent upon pakistan's military and its air and land supply routes to pursue u.s. goals in neighboring afghanistan .

the u.s. - pakistan estrangement of the 1990s ended almost overnight in september 2001 ; washington soon promoted pakistan to "major non - nato ally" status , and a prodigious flow of u.s. military and economic aid resumed after an 11-year hiatus .

this most recent embrace of pakistan has entailed costs for washington in its dealings with new delhi .

nonetheless , at present , the u.s. military presence in afghanistan necessitates cooperative relations with pakistan .

washington has tended to overlook signs of pakistani malfeasance in the form of its alleged official support for anti - afghan and even anti - india terrorist groups based on pakistani soil .

as a nominal u.s. ally , pakistan did establish more robust security on its western border , cooperate with efforts to neutralize al qaeda elements inside pakistan , provide crucial land and air transit for nato , and offered at least tacit permission for reported cia - launched drone strikes .

yet , following the 2008 mumbai attack by pakistan - based terrorists ; osama bin laden's 2011 killing in abbottabad , pakistan ; and increasing evidence that the haqqani network of afghan militants enjoyed unmolested safe havens in pakistan's tribal areas , more and more u.s. - based observers have concluded that pursuing a "strategic partnership" with islamabad is misguided policy , and that abiding pakistan's regional "sensitivities" — a euphemism for pakistan's existential fears of india — may not be serving core u.s. interests .

new delhi's policies toward pakistan have often been at odds with those of the united states .

although the current new delhi government has actively engaged in a peace process with pakistani military ruler general pervez musharraf and his democratically elected civilian successors , indian officials have long maintained that pakistan's security services — in particular its inter - services intelligence agency — are at the heart of the region's and perhaps even the world's problems with islamist extremism .

this perspective places new delhi in fundamental disagreement with washington where , for most of the past decade , policy has conceived of pakistan's security institutions as key players in resolving such problems , even as american doubts persist .

the sensitivities between india and pakistan filter into u.s. - india security relations most often on issues such as defense trade and intelligence sharing .

u.s. policy toward pakistan has also resulted in efforts to moderate india's response to terrorist attacks inside india , many of which new delhi alleges are supported by islamabad .

the mutually dependent nature of the u.s. - pakistan relationship and its potential to deliver better spoils for the pakistani military to use against india remain serious concerns for new delhi .

one of the major indian considerations while choosing to buy frontline u.s. defense systems is whether or not the items are already a part of pakistan's arms inventory .

in an ironic twist on traditional dynamics , the deterioration of relations between the united states and pakistan since 2011 has led india to solicit washington's patience with islamabad in order to encourage a stable pakistan .

this reversal has also occurred in the context of bilateral economic and security dialogue between india and pakistan over the past year .

ultimately , both the united states and india are vested in a stable , democratic , and economically viable pakistan , which they hope will undercut active and passive support for terrorism .

u.s. outreach to india on counterterrorism cooperation has traditionally been hampered by its relationship with pakistan and washington's interest in deescalating tensions between india and pakistan .

until recently , the war in afghanistan has also constrained washington's willingness to press the pakistani government on counterterrorism .

one indian analyst describes american efforts as remaining "half - hearted" so long as pakistan is of significant importance to american interests in afghanistan .

although there is a shared awareness of the increasing presence of let across south asia , some analysts argue that new delhi's sensitivity to increasing u.s. influence in the region continues to constrain joint efforts , despite initial capacity building efforts by the u.s. department of defense .

india is also reported to be wary of intelligence and military contacts between the united states and its south asian neighbors , particularly pakistan .

india's traditionally lenient stance on iran and , until 2003 , iraq , two countries on the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism , has been a perennial source of friction .

since 2011 , gradual political shifts are loosening these kinds of strategic limitations .

the united states has grown less tolerant of the islamabad's arguably poor record on counterterrorism , especially as nato troops in afghanistan come under attack from pakistani - based afghan terrorist groups such as the quetta shura taliban and the haqqani network .

india's votes against tehran in the unsc and major reduction of oil imports from iran have apparently narrowed the gap at present .

india's relations with iran traditionally have been positive and are marked by centuries of substantive interactions between the indus valley and persian civilizations .

yet , as india has grown closer to the united states and other western countries in the new century , new delhi's policy has slowly shifted — perhaps most notably when india voted with the united states ( and the majority ) at key international atomic energy agency sessions on iran's nuclear program in 2005 and 2006 — leaving most aspects of the envisaged india - iran partnership unrealized .

while india has reluctantly supported some measures against tehran , it has been careful not to break ties .

soured relations with iran would increase india's energy dependence on the arab persian gulf states , referred to by one indian analyst as the "islamist - bankrolling oil monarchies. .

a break with iran would also deprive india key access to landlocked afghanistan and central asia through iran's chabbahar port on the arabian sea .

not long ago , india and iran shared common allies in afghanistan during the 1990s , both supporting the northern alliance in its fight against the pakistan - supported taliban .

washington and new delhi have for many years disagreed on how to approach iran's alleged weaponization of its civil nuclear program .

the united states has maintained a two - track policy incorporating both sanctions / diplomatic pressure on and dialogue with tehran , without dismissing the option of a military attack .

under the obama administration , the approach has involved u.s. - led global financial sanctions with pressure on countries to reduce oil imports from iran .

these sanction policies are being complemented with a diplomatic opening through multilateral dialogue with iran lead by the european union .

new delhi emphatically supports tehran's right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy .

yet india is also keen to prevent the emergence of another nuclear power in the region .

in the face of tensions arising with these policy positions , india has endorsed the iaea's central role in resolving disagreements on iran's nuclear program and has voted in favor of iaea resolutions and unsc sanctions against iran over the past decade .

despite its support for calling iran to account for the clandestine nature of its nuclear program , india has refrained from any sharp pullback in its relations with iran , a pullback at times encouraged by the united states .

iranian president mahmoud ahamadi - nejad's visit to india in 2008 , and the may 2012 travel of an indian trade delegation to iran , are among the signals that new delhi seeks to keep ties with tehran active , even at the risk of washington's ire .

india remains firm in protecting its diplomatic and trade ties with iran not only to demonstrate its strategic autonomy , but also to ensure diversity in energy resource providers .

despite new delhi's longstanding traditional resistance to participation in sanctions regimes not endorsed by the united nations , significant diplomatic pressure from the united states during the first half of 2012 spurred india to plan another 11% reduction in iranian oil imports for the year ending march 2013 .

since 2008 , iranian oil imports have dropped from 16% to 10% of india's total import volume .

during her may 2012 visit to india , secretary of state clinton openly called on india to reduce its oil imports from iran .

one month later , in recognition of new delhi's efforts in this regard , the u.s. government granted india ( among other countries ) an exemption called for in new u.s. sanctions legislation .

many analysts interviewed for this report agreed that , in light of india's longstanding relations and strategic objectives with regard to iran , such exceptions are appropriate .

at present , it appears that washington and new delhi have reached a temporary middle ground on the iran nuclear issue .

during the 2012 u.s. - india strategic dialogue , secretary clinton voiced u.s. satisfaction on the issue: we worked through some of the issues that we have fielded in common because of the concerns about iran's continuing search for a nuclear weapon , and india has made it clear that — iran , like all countries , must live up to their international obligations and , as i reported to congress this week , india has taken steps to diversify its sources of imported crude by reducing purchases of iranian oil .

we recognize the important energy needs that india has , and we're working with india , not only to ensure stable oil markets , but to do more to open up other sources of energy for india .

this progress may not , however , obtain in the event that the united states deems the current p5+1 dialogue with iran a failure .

india's strong opposition to military options against iran is not likely to change and is in line with new delhi's broader stance on international military interventions in the middle east over the past year .

the united states and india both strongly endorse the liberal values of representative government , pluralism , and rule of law .

the 2005 joint establishment of the u.n. democracy fund is symbolic of their shared values .

nonetheless , the two governments differ significantly on the means by which such values are best expanded internationally .

the united states typically has taken a proactive approach to introducing liberal political values abroad and calling on states to account for their domestic human rights abuses and restrictions on civil liberties .

in contrast , india , with its not - so - distant colonial history , has generally been an energetic advocate of non - intervention and non - interference in foreign affairs .

as with many other post - colonial states , india ranks protection of national sovereignty above other values .

ongoing domestic insurgencies render new delhi particularly sensitive to international intervention in domestic security matters .

india thus has been cautious not to advocate international intervention with an eye on protecting its own sovereignty .

these competing perspectives have given rise to significant policy differences in recent years .

for at least two decades , washington and new delhi were at loggerheads on policy approaches toward burma's repressive military regime .

the united states long favored isolating the regime through the imposition of a rigorous set of economic and diplomatic sanctions against burma up until 2011 , when sanctions were eased following positive political reforms by rangoon's military regime .

new delhi , meanwhile , had openly opposed washington's approach and resisted international pressure to isolate burma on the assumption that india's participation in such a strategy would jeopardize its own national interests in the region .

instead , after a 1988 reversal , india pursued an engagement policy toward rangoon and remained largely silent about human rights abuses in burma .

some indian accounts suggest , perhaps self - servingly , that india's sustained diplomatic engagement , and notable trade and investment links have facilitated renewed talks between washington and rangoon , leading to burma's 2012 opening .

much like the disagreement on burma , new delhi objected to u.s. intervention in iraq and , under heavy domestic political pressure , even withdrew logistical support for the operations prior to a request from the united states .

washington and new delhi have long been at odds on the rightful use of sanctions and military intervention in the case of states accused of serious human rights abuses .

with india's election to the unsc as a non - permanent member in 2011 , the united nations is providing the primary framework within which most of these disagreements are played out .

india's non - permanent seat on the council , initially seen as favorable to the united states , has resulted in outcomes clouding opportunities for u.s. - india collaboration on global democracy and human rights issues .

new delhi's response to the "arab spring" uprisings disappointed many in washington who seek greater indian activism in encouraging democratization on the global stage .

a ready remedy for reconciling the divergent u.s. and indian approaches to spreading liberal political values does not appear to be on the horizon .

both countries are seen to be adjusting their expectations of one another in this context , accommodating the other where possible and standing their ground where they cannot .

more than nine years after its formal launch , the u.s. - india strategic partnership continues to be hindered by lingering mistrust on both sides .

some observers contend that india's polity remains skeptical about being subsumed into a u.s. "imperialist agenda," with particular fears that india will be drawn into a military alliance with the united states , potentially one that antagonizes china .

along with the term "allies" — even casual use of the label in the context of u.s. - india relations can cause strong negative reactions in indian listeners — the word "interoperability" has also become troublesome in conversations about the bilateral defense relationship .

some political and bureaucratic quarters in india are also said to maintain a cold war - era "nonalignment" mindset entailing deep mistrust of u.s. intentions in india .

washington's close ties with pakistan drive further suspicion of the u.s. agenda in south asia .

with regard to expanding defense trade , deep - seated doubts about u.s. reliability remain strong .

the 1998 nuclear sanctions are not a distant memory for the acutely sensitive indians , and new delhi appears unwilling to buy front line u.s. defense equipment that will require long - term servicing contracts , precisely due to concerns that potential future sanctions could render them moot .

indians are also highly suspicious of the end - user monitoring requirements for u.s. arms sales ; some perceive monitoring as nothing less than a means by which washington can gather intelligence on the indian military .

beyond these narrower , defense - related issues , an increasing number of u.s. - based india analysts express concern over a perceived lack of reciprocity in the u.s. relationship with new delhi .

their argument contends that washington has overreached and been willing to give too much in its effort to partner with india .

from this perspective , new delhi has repeatedly disappointed the united states by rejecting high - profile economic , military , and diplomatic proposals put forward by washington , and by failing to undertake significant domestic economic reforms .

some u.s. observers are concerned that washington is overinvesting in a partner that demonstrates insufficient intention to offer substantive benefits for the united states .

a related critique is skeptical about india's capacity to deliver on the expectations associated with its rise , even if the intentions are there .

other observers contend that india has yet to demonstrate that it can both act as a global power is expected to act and to sustain the economic growth it has enjoyed over the past decade .

new delhi's ongoing sluggishness in reforming and upgrading its military are among weaknesses pointed to by critics .

those who disagree argue that the relationship cannot and should not be evaluated in such transactional terms .

rather , they assert , it must be viewed in the context of the broader and longer - term security , economic , and diplomatic dividends to be gained by the united states .

u.s. and indian government officials are seen as working overtime to better understand one another's bureaucratic processes and policies .

contact between the two governments is increasingly regularized through a wide range of annual meetings on various security matters: in the representative words of one u.s. defense official working on india , the security relationship is "rapidly maturing. .

nevertheless , mutual levels of familiarity are still rudimentary as compared to the longstanding ties washington and new delhi have with other international partners .

many indian observers suggest that the "understanding deficit" produces significant frustration on both sides , and this in turn leads to overly high expectations for "headline" events to validate progress in the relationship .

defense trade relations represent an area in which such frustration is expressed with particular zeal .

new delhi is critical about a perceived lack of transparency and what they experience as a byzantine u.s. licensing process .

washington officials , for their part , emphasize a lack of clarity and standardization in new delhi's procurement procedures .

a quintessential example has been the alleged mismatch between the u.s. defense department's complex foreign military sales ( fms ) system and india's lowest bidder ( l1 ) competitive procurement format .

one u.s. official contends that the mmrca bid was important because the united states was able to successfully place a competitive proposal , signaling that the fms system could in fact compete in the indian procurement environment .

the mmrca bid was also considered a success in terms of increasing u.s. understanding of the indian procurement process .

apart from bureaucratic aspects of the security relationship , washington and new delhi are quickly familiarizing themselves with the implications domestic politics can have for the defense relationship , especially within india .

the bilateral partnership has required the expenditure of considerable political capital on both sides , often constraining the space in which compromises can be made .

the fragile nature of recent coalition politics in india can place a heavy burden on new delhi's security relations with washington , not least as some constituencies there remain wary of any signs that india is becoming a "junior partner" subservient to u.s. policies .

the subordination of the indian military to new delhi's civilian government presents another obstacle to smooth relations between the two militaries .

according to one u.s. official , the micromanagement of military affairs by the indian mod tends to limit cooperation between the two armed forces .

in particular , the official suggested that the indian mod's extensive vetting process of minutes even at the lowest level bilateral meetings sheds greater uncertainty on the planning process and significantly curtails indian military personnel's ability to make even less consequential decisions .

overall , both governments are making efforts to ease bureaucratic hurdles and familiarize themselves with one another's procedures and politics .

the emphasis on reducing bureaucratic barriers has been made particularly clear by the u.s. administration in the latter half of 2012 .

apart from the state department's efforts to expedite the current export control regime , deputy secretary of defense ashton carter was recently assigned to work on streamlining defense relations with india .

in an october 2012 policy speech , carter described the pentagon's approach and his role: we believe that given the inherent links between india and the united states , in values , in political philosophy , that the only limit to our cooperation with india should be our independent strategic decisions — because any two states can differ — on bureaucratic obstacles .

so i personally am working daily to remove those obstacles .

the indian government is also addressing these issues and u.s. officials working closely on india have appeared hopeful that their indian counterparts were making sincere efforts to collaborate .

officials in both capitals emphasize a need for patience over the long term , and a corresponding de - emphasis on short - term expectations and payoffs .

over the past decade , the u.s. and indian governments have dramatically revised and expanded their understanding of and familiarity with one another .

this report describes strengthened cooperation in areas where both countries share similar strategic objectives .

much of the potential for such cooperation arguably remains unexplored and unfulfilled .

u.s. - india coordination on afghanistan provides one example: only recently has there been a more concerted u.s. effort to involve india in supporting stability and development efforts in afghanistan .

the unrealized potential is to a large extent a result of divergent strategic perspectives that presently limit the depth of the bilateral partnership , as in the case of pakistan .

nevertheless , both governments are working to narrow their differences where possible , even on strategically significant issue - areas such as iran .

to date , the approach of strengthening collaboration on similarities as a confidence - building measure , and tackling differences as and when they arise , has been successfully sustained across multiple administrations in both countries .

this success speaks to the broad consensus in both political establishments on the importance of the bilateral strategic partnership .

in the latter half of the previous decade , the u.s. congress took formal and major steps to amend u.s. nonproliferation and export control laws so as to provide an exception and special status for india in the realm of civil nuclear and high - technology trade .

the changes also served to open doors to both broader and smoother engagements in bilateral security cooperation and defense trade .

while the ( ostensible ) proximate goals of the breakthrough 2008 u.s. - india civilian nuclear deal were to boost india's electricity generating capacity and benefit the u.s. economy through nuclear trade — goals as yet unmet — few reasonable observers would dismiss the largely unspoken , but arguably more far - reaching goal of paving the way for truly strategic cooperation with new delhi by engendering indian trust and confidence in washington as a partner .

confusion arises from short - term versus long - term analyses of u.s. - india security relations .

the obama administration — along with numerous pro - india analysts in washington — has tended to emphasize the anticipated benefits of long - term engagement as opposed to a short - term approach that seeks gains derived through more narrow transactions .

this latter tack can have the effect of raising and then thwarting expectations in washington , as was the case with the ultimate failure of u.s. defense firms to secure the multi - billion - dollar contracts to supply new jets fighters to india .

at the same time , growing u.s. frustrations have arisen from the sense that india's enthusiasm for further deepening bilateral security cooperation is limited , and that new delhi has been insufficiently reciprocating in its approach .

looking ahead , there is widespread concurrence among many officials and analysts , alike , that the security relationship would benefit by undergirding ambitious rhetoric with more concrete action in areas of mutual agreement .

in their view , defining which such actions would provide meaningful gains , even on a modest scale , appears to be the central task facing u.s. and indian policy makers in coming years .

congress can guide the course and pace of this process with legislative consideration and through its oversight of u.s. foreign relations in asia .

