recent years have witnessed a growing interest , in congress , in the executive branch , and in the broader policy community , in re - examining how well the u.s. government conducts the business of national security — from decision - making , to strategy - making , to budgeting , to planning and execution , to accountability and oversight .

that interest reflects concerns with effectiveness — how well the u.s. government accomplishes the mission — and with efficiency — how well the u.s. government stewards scarce resources — in the national security arena .

within the context of these debates , a number of practitioners and observers have called for the adoption of "unified" — or "consolidated" or "integrated" — approaches to national security budgeting .

the primary concern of this unified national security budgeting school , loosely defined , is not to improve u.s. budgeting practices per se , but rather to use budgetary mechanisms to drive changes in the priorities and practice of national security .

members of the school broadly share the view that some u.s. national security concerns , such as counter - terrorism , or stabilization and reconstruction , are inherently cross - cutting: that is , they require the participation of multiple agencies , and their associated responsibilities could conceivably be divided up any number of ways among various agencies .

in turn , members of the school argue that the current system allows little space for holistic consideration of such cross - cutting national security issues , and they propose an array of budgetary tools designed to promote cross - fertilization .

they suggest that for such cross - cutting issues , more "unified" budgeting approaches could facilitate the identification of overlaps and gaps among agencies' efforts ; enable more deliberate assignment of roles and responsibilities ; catalyze closer collaboration ; and provide greater transparency to help support congressional oversight .

such changes , they add , could improve effectiveness and save money .

the school itself is far from unified — there is no single model for "unified national security budgeting. .

various proponents have put forward quite different proposed remedies and are — apparently — aiming to solve quite different underlying problems .

the fact that the debate itself is not cohesive has no logical bearing on the value of the various associated proposals , but it suggests a need to define terms , as a starting point .

for congress , constitutionally mandated to control the power of the purse , fundamental issues at stake include both oversight of the effectiveness and efficiency of u.s. government national security activities , and the integrity of the overall federal system of budgeting .

of particular interest may be the extent to which , if any , efforts to optimize the overall system , and efforts to optimize its national security "sub - system," constitute competing imperatives .

this report describes and characterizes the unified national security budgeting school's broadly shared critique of the current system ; describes and analyzes various proposed unified national security budgeting approaches ; and offers a succinct list of considerations for members and staff of congress who may be interested in this issue .

the u.s. government system of budgeting for national security activities is part of a much larger , highly complex system of federal budget development — based on the constitutional distribution of roles and responsibilities between congress and the president , on statute , and on a wide array of established practices by key stakeholders .

the system necessarily covers the full panoply of u.s. government responsibilities and activities , and therefore by definition — de facto if not explicitly — adjudicates among all competing concerns .

in a sense , the federal budget system not only reflects the distribution of power among branches , but also refines and institutionalizes that power balance .

so the stakes associated with any possible revision of the federal budget system are quite high .

while a number of practitioners and outside experts have called for adopting more "unified" approaches toward budgeting for national security , those calls themselves have hardly been unified in the prescriptions they have put forward .

they vary greatly in content and — more fundamentally — in intent .

in evaluating proposals and options for possible refinements to budgeting for national security activities , congress may wish to consider the following issues .

the debates about unified budgeting for national security lack a shared sense of the basic problem that needs to be solved .

accordingly , they also lack a shared sense of the basic goal that needs to be achieved .

for any given unified budgeting proposal , what problem is it designed to solve — for example , are current u.s. national security efforts perceived to be too expensive , too ineffective , or imbalanced in the distribution of labor across the executive branch ? .

in reality , how if at all does the current system of budgeting for national security fall short ? .

what advantages if any might it have over proposed alternative systems ? .

to what extent might cross - cutting consideration of national security issues be expanded within the formal constraints of the current system ? .

how do various proposals balance the magnitude of the perceived problem and the anticipated benefits of proposed changes , against the anticipated costs of change in terms of time , energy and resources , together with the risks of unanticipated damage to the rest of the system ? .

in theory , many different choices could be made regarding the appropriate boundaries of national security writ large , or of explicitly "cross - cutting" issues within the field of national security , for use in unified budgeting approaches .

in budgeting for national security activities , regardless of the mechanisms for doing so , what purchase might be gained by considering national security as a whole ? .

what advantages might examination , instead , of explicitly cross - cutting national security activities , offer ? .

if either cross - cutting national security issues , or national security issues writ large , deserve explicit attention in the budgeting process , what should those categories include ? .

what are the broader stakes — for both agencies and issues — of exclusion from or inclusion under a national security umbrella ? .

regardless of the specific goals that any changes to national security budgeting might be designed to achieve , any number of different approaches , or combinations of approaches , might theoretically be selected to help achieve those goals .

which of the various possible "ways and means" put forward in different proposals would in principle be compatible with each other ? .

for any given desired end , which ways and means would best achieve the desired results ? .

for any proposed set of ends / ways / means , which of the ways and means are essential to making the approach work , and which are merely helpful additions ? .

almost any changes to current ways of doing business would be likely to carry some near - term financial costs as a reflection of adjustments to new practices .

but some changes might introduce longer - term savings , either because the process itself becomes more efficient , or because new processes yield a more effective practice of national security writ large .

for any given proposal , what would be the likely near - term associated resource requirements ? .

what longer - term savings , if any , might it generate ? .

how might the likelihood that refined budget processes would reduce future u.s. requirements through the more effective execution of national security activities — for example , through better - integrated or better - balanced instruments of national power — best be calculated ? .

how might the likelihood that refined budget processes would increase future u.s. requirements — either through initial investments as changes are institutionalized , or through unanticipated consequences — best be calculated ? .

any analysis of unified budgeting proposals would sensibly include a consideration of risk .

in taking apart various facets of the current system ( together with the myriad behavior patterns that inevitably develop in any bureaucratic order to compensate for the inefficiencies of the formal system ) , what unanticipated ripple effects might be created ? .

what steps if any do proposals offer for mitigating such risks ? .

a particularly vexing problem for both national security practice and organizational theory concerns assessments — knowing in what ways , to what extent , and why introduced changes are generating desired results .

one unsatisfying approach would be to consider immediate "outputs" — for example , does the system produce decisions ? .

a much more sophisticated approach would consider effects — for example , what additional contributions , if any , does a modified system of budgeting for national security make to the protection of u.s. national security interests ? .

what quickly becomes apparent is the great difficulty of distinguishing among the impacts of many different variables — budgeting , but also decision - making , strategy - making , planning , execution .

for any unified budgeting proposal , how would the impact of its use on both effectiveness and efficiency be determined ? .

how would its impact be distinguished from that of other facets of the national security process ? .

how much time would it take for any results to manifest themselves ? .

to what extent if any might the tools provided by the gpra modernization act of 2010 , p.l .

111-352 , be helpful for ascertaining the impact of any changes to modalities for budgeting for national security on the effectiveness and / or efficiency of results in that field ? .

some unified budgeting approaches suggest — while others would seem to require — changes in the modalities of congressional oversight .

to what extent if any could congress , in theory , without any formal changes , engage in more holistic consideration of national security matters ? .

what benefits if any might that have ? .

to what extent , if any , would any given unified national security budgeting proposal necessitate changes in the modalities of congressional oversight , of authorizations as well as appropriations ? .

what impact if any might proposed changes in congressional oversight — for example , holding more frequent joint hearings concerning cross - cutting national security issues , or increasing the size of appropriations committee staffs — have on the effectiveness and / or efficiency of u.s. national security efforts , even without changes in the structure or organization of executive branch national security budgeting ? .

