federal financial reporting — defined here as the process of recording retrospective executive department - level financial and performance information — may provide both a snapshot of the government's financial health at a given moment in time , as well as an accounting of its financial performance over a given time frame .

according to the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) , the committee that establishes accounting standards for federal entities , "financial reporting" may be defined as the process of recording , reporting , and interpreting , in terms of money , an entity's financial transactions and events with economic consequences for the entity .

reporting in the federal government also deals with nonfinancial information about service efforts and accomplishments of the government , i.e. , the inputs of resources used by the government , the outputs of goods and services provided by the government , the outcomes and impacts of governmental programs , and the relationships among these elements .

responsible stewardship of public money is integral to governmental accountability , and federal financial reports supply information that links stewardship to accountability .

according to fasab , "because a democratic government should be accountable for its integrity , performance , and stewardship , it follows that the government must provide information useful to assess that accountability. .

reliable financial information may facilitate informed decision making , government management , and policy implementation .

in addition , federal financial reports may make it easier to monitor waste , fraud , and abuse in federal programs .

several types of federal financial reports are required by law .

each report presents a distinct array of financial information intended to permit various stakeholders — congress , the president , agency heads , program managers , and citizens — to evaluate the federal government's performance relative to the collection and disbursement of public money .

congress , in particular , may utilize the information in federal financial reports for policy formulation and planning , programmatic decision making , and exercising oversight authority ( figure 1 ) .

during the past two decades , congress has further developed federal financial reporting through enactment of three statutes: ( 1 ) the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) , the government management reform act of 1994 ( gmra ) , and ( 3 ) the accountability of tax dollars act of 2002 ( atda ) .

each agency produces a range of reports on its financial activities .

these reports are produced on different timetables and include different data and may be intended for either internal or external audiences .

table 1 presents a selection of required annual federal financial reports .

these reports provide data and analyses that are particularly useful for stakeholders wishing to examine agencies' financial performance in the previous year .

more than two decades have passed since the enactment of the first of the modern financial reporting statutes — the cfo act .

as recounted below , the congressional efforts to upgrade federal financial reporting have produced significant achievements ; however , challenges remain .

congress has recently considered legislation relating to audits of federal financial statements .

in the 113 th congress , representative barbara lee has introduced legislation ( h.r .

559 ) that would require a 5% reduction in a federal agency's discretionary budgetary authority for failure to produce an annual financial statement or failure to receive either an unqualified or qualified audit opinion on its annual financial statement .

the 112 th congress considered similar legislation , as well as legislation on audited annual financial statements at dod and dhs , specifically .

in the 112 th congress , senator tom coburn introduced the audit the pentagon act ( s. 3487 ) .

s. 3487 would have mandated auditable financial statements by dod for its fy2017 statements .

specifically , this legislation would have amended section 1003 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 ( 2010 ndaa , p.l .

111-118 ) .

the 2010 ndaa required dod's chief management officer ( cmo ) , in consultation with the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , to ensure that its financial statements are validated as ready for audit no later than september 30 , 2017 .

s. 3487 differed from the 2010 ndaa in that it would have required the statements to be auditable , not just validated as ready for audit .

the legislation also would have required dod to provide a complete and validated statement of budgetary resources by fy2014 .

failure to obtain an unqualified opinion on its fy2017 financial statements would have resulted in ( 1 ) the cessation of authorities on reprogramming and availability of funds authorized under the act , ( 2 ) a prohibition of expenditures of funds for major defense acquisition program activities beyond milestone b , and ( 3 ) a reorganization of the cmo position .

s. 3487 was referred to the senate committee on armed services and was not enacted by the 112 th congress .

representative lee introduced companion legislation ( h.r .

6528 ) in the house on september 21 , 2012 .

h.r .

6528 differed from the senate version in that it did not amend the auditability requirement .

it would have imposed a 5% reduction in the discretionary budgetary authority of any agency required to produce an annual auditable financial statement that failed to ( 1 ) submit a financial statement for the previous fiscal year or ( 2 ) obtain either an unqualified or qualified audit opinion by an independent external auditor .

the bill excluded from reduction accounts for military , reserve , and national guard personnel and the defense health program account of dod .

in addition , the president would have been permitted to waive the reduction in discretionary budget authority if it jeopardized national security or members of the armed forces in combat .

h.r .

6528 was not enacted by the 112 th congress .

in the 113 th congress , representative lee introduced the audit the pentagon act of 2013 ( h.r .

559 ) .

it was referred to the committee on oversight and government reform and the committee on armed services .

h.r .

559 is nearly identical to the legislation proposed in the 112 th congress .

congress also considered legislation to address problems at the department of homeland security in the 112 th congress .

senator scott brown introduced the dhs audit requirement target act ( dart , s. 1998 ) on december 15 , 2011 .

representative todd platts introduced the house version of the bill on june 8 , 2012 .

unlike the audit the pentagon act , the purpose of the dart act is not auditability .

the dart act directs dhs to obtain an unqualified audit opinion beginning with its fy2013 annual financial statements .

in addition , the legislation requires dhs to provide congress with its plan for meeting the deadline and for achieving better financial management .

congress instituted this requirement for the purposes of enhanced monitoring and oversight .

the dart act of 2012 ( 126 stat .

1591 ) was signed into law on december 20 , 2012 .

