federal assistance to public transportation is provided primarily through the public transportation program administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) .

the federal public transportation program was authorized through fy2014 as part of the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) and extended through may 31 , 2015 , as part of the highway and transportation funding act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-159 ) .

map - 21 made significant modifications to the public transportation program .

while maintaining the previous funding level , map - 21 simplified the structure of the public transit program by eliminating some programs and consolidating others , recast some discretionary programs as formula programs , strengthened fta's role in safety oversight , and introduced performance management into the planning process .

this report highlights some of the issues likely to arise as congress considers further extension of map - 21 or reauthorization .

it begins with an overview of public transportation , its funding , and the federal public transportation program as currently authorized .

public transportation ( also known as public transit , mass transit , and mass transportation ) is defined in federal law ( 49 u.s.c .

§5302 ) as regular , continuing shared - ride surface transportation services that are open to the general public or open to a segment of the general public defined by age , disability , or low income ; and … does not include — ( i ) intercity passenger rail transportation … ; ( ii ) intercity bus service ; ( iii ) charter bus service ; ( iv ) school bus service ; ( v ) sightseeing service ; ( vi ) courtesy shuttle service for patrons of one or more specific establishments ; or ( vii ) intra - terminal or intra - facility shuttle services .

the main forms of public transportation are bus , heavy rail ( subway and elevated ) , commuter rail , light rail , paratransit ( also known as demand response ) , and ferryboat .

about 51% of public transportation trips are made by bus , 35% by heavy rail , 5% by commuter rail , and 5% by light rail ( including streetcars ) .

paratransit accounts for about 2% of all public transportation trips , and ferries less than 1% .

transit ridership dropped precipitously at the end of the second world war due to a number of interrelated factors , particularly rising incomes , growing automobile availability and use , and residential and employment decentralization .

despite the longer - term downward trend , ridership has risen over the past two decades from a low of 7.8 billion trips in 1995 to 10.6 billion trips in 2012 .

consequently , ridership is at a level not seen since the late 1950s , although the population has grown by about 140 million people since then .

public transportation accounts for about 2% of all daily trips and about 5% of trips to and from work ( commute trips ) .

ridership is heavily concentrated in a few large cities and their suburbs .

about 75% of all public transportation trips are made in 10 large urbanized areas: new york , los angeles , chicago , washington , san francisco , boston , philadelphia , seattle , miami , and atlanta .

the new york city urbanized area alone , including parts of new jersey and connecticut , accounts for about 4 of every 10 public transportation trips nationally .

almost a third of workers in the new york metropolitan area commute by public transportation , but in only four others ( san francisco , washington , boston , and chicago ) does the share exceed 10% .

major federal involvement in public transportation dates to the urban mass transportation act of 1964 ( p.l .

88-365 ) .

in the mid - 1960s , with much lower ridership than existed at the end of world war ii and mounting debts , many private transit companies were reorganized as public entities , and federal funding was initially used to recapitalize them .

today , most federal support still goes for capital projects , but the program has evolved to support operational expenses in some circumstances , as well as safety oversight , planning , and research .

map - 21 authorized $10.6 billion for the federal public transportation program in fy2013 and $10.7 billion in fy2014 .

funding made available for those years in appropriations bills was slightly higher ( table 1 ) .

the highway and transportation funding act of 2014 extends the fy2014 authorized funding level though may 31 , 2015 .

excluding funding provided in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) and the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 ( draa ; p.l .

113-2 ) , public transportation program funding has been between $10 billion and $11 billion since 2009 ( figure 1 ) .

arra provided an extra $8.4 billion in fy2009 .

draa provided $10.9 billion in fy2013 for fta's public transportation emergency relief program in response to hurricane sandy , particularly to repair the damage to the public transportation systems of new york and new jersey .

about 5% of the $10.9 billion , approximately $545 million , was subject to sequestration , leaving about $10.3 billion for emergency relief .

typically , about 80% of federal public transportation program funding comes from the mass transit account of the highway trust fund and 20% comes from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

it should be noted , however , that the distinction between money from the highway trust fund and money from the general fund has become artificial to an extent , in that congress authorized a $4.8 billion transfer of general fund money into the mass transit account of the highway trust fund in fy2010 and another $4.0 billion transfer in fy2014 .

moreover , arra and draa funding for public transportation came exclusively from the general fund .

public transportation also receives support through provisions that make it an allowable use of some federal highway funds .

most funds "flexed" to transit programs come from the surface transportation program ( stp ) and the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) .

flexing is at the discretion of state and local decision - makers , so the amount transferred from highways to public transportation can vary widely from year to year .

about $1 billion was flexed in fy2009 , whereas $2.4 billion was flexed in fy2012 .

the percentage of highway funds transferred to transit has ranged from about 2.0% in fy1998 to about 5.7% in fy2012 .

the transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) program has been another source of federal funding for public transportation over the past few years .

enacted initially as part of arra , the tiger program has been funded in five subsequent appropriations bills .

funding , appropriated from the general fund , was $1.5 billion in fy2009 , $600 million in fy2010 , $527 million in fy2011 , $500 million in fy2012 , $474 million in fy2013 ( after an across - the - board rescission and sequestration ) , and $600 million in fy2014 .

of the $584 million awarded in fy2014 , for example , $187 million ( 32% ) went to transit projects .

special - needs paratransit is another area in which funding is available from the federal government outside the public transportation program .

special - needs paratransit , also known as demand response or dial - a - ride , is non - fixed - route service for people with disabilities and the elderly , and typically involves the use of small buses , vans , or passenger cars .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has identified 73 federal programs in seven federal agencies other than the department of transportation ( dot ) that fund special - needs transportation services .

although gao could not estimate the transportation spending in all of these programs , in 21 programs for which data were available transportation funding amounted to $2.3 billion in fy2010 .

this compares with fta spending on special - needs paratransit in the same year of about $270 million .

the costs of providing public transportation service fall into two main categories , operating expenses and capital expenses .

operating expenses include vehicle operation and maintenance , maintenance of stations and other facilities , general administration , and purchase of transportation from private operators .

capital expenses are related to the purchase of equipment , such as buses , rail lines , and rail stations .

in general , federal public transportation programs allow an 80% maximum federal share for capital projects and a 50% maximum share for operating expenses .

operating costs account for about two - thirds of all costs for public transportation and capital expenditures for about one - third .

fares and other operating revenues cover only one - quarter of the total cost , with the remainder provided by federal , state , and local governments .

the federal government supports less than 10% of operating expenditures , but more than 40% of capital expenditures ( table 2 ) .

there are six major funding programs administered by fta: ( 1 ) urbanized area formula ; ( 2 ) state of good repair ( sgr ) ; ( 3 ) new starts ; ( 4 ) rural area formula ; ( 5 ) bus and bus facilities formula ; and ( 6 ) enhanced mobility of seniors and individuals with disabilities .

in addition , about 5% of the public transportation program funding is authorized for the growing states and high density states formula ( $519 million in fy2013 and $526 million in fy2014 ) .

this is not a program per se , but provides additional money to some places and is distributed through the urbanized and rural area formula programs ( figure 2 ) .

the growing states apportionment is based on forecasted state population growth , and the high density apportionment is to states with a population density greater than 370 persons per square mile .

funding for all of these programs , except new starts , comes from the mass transit account of the highway trust fund .

new starts funding comes from the general fund .

there are also several much smaller programs ( see the appendix for a full listing ) .

under map - 21 , the use of performance management is required throughout the transportation planning process .

performance management involves establishing performance measures and setting targets .

for example , map - 21 requires metropolitan planning organizations ( mpos ) to establish performance targets , including targets for public transportation , that address performance measures established by the secretary of transportation ( 49 u.s.c .

§5303 ) .

each mpo must include in its plan an evaluation of the region's progress toward achieving its performance targets and must develop its transportation improvement program ( tip ) to align with the performance targets .

performance targets pertaining to public transportation are to be coordinated with providers of public transportation "to the maximum extent practicable. .

in a similar vein , public transportation agencies are required to develop an asset management system , including an asset management plan with performance targets based on metrics developed by the secretary for state of good repair standards ( 49 u.s.c .

§5326 ) .

public transportation agencies must report their progress toward meeting their performance targets annually , but there are no sanctions for failing to meet those targets .

dot is also required to develop performance measures with regard to the enhanced mobility of seniors and individuals with disabilities program .

these performance measures are to be developed in consultation with national non - profit groups that advocate for transportation services on behalf of the elderly and disabled .

a new discretionary pilot program for transit - oriented development ( tod ) planning was established by map - 21 , with funding authorized at $10 million per year in fy2013 and fy2104 .

transit - oriented development is concerned with locating housing and businesses near transit stations to promote ridership , job accessibility , and local economic development .

this new program provides grants to sponsors of new or expanded fixed - guideway systems to enhance their tod planning .

to date , no funding from this program has been made available .

fta had a limited role in public transportation safety prior to map - 21 , but several provisions in the authorization expanded and strengthened that role .

fta is required to develop a national public transportation safety plan , with safety performance criteria for all modes of public transportation and minimum performance standards for public transportation vehicles ( except commuter rail vehicles , which are regulated by the federal railroad administration , or fra ) .

fta is also required to establish a certification training program for federal , state , and local employees who conduct safety audits or are responsible for safety oversight .

recipients of urbanized and rural formula funds may use up to 0.5% of their apportionment , about $22 million annually , to pay for the training program .

this funding requires a minimum 20% state or local match .

each public transportation agency and state is required to establish a comprehensive safety plan .

additionally , each state with a rail system not regulated by fra must have a state safety oversight ( sso ) program .

formula funding for the sso program is set aside from the urbanized area formula program and is provided with an 80% maximum federal share .

fta has authority to inspect and audit the equipment and operations of transit agencies and may issue directives , require more frequent agency oversight , and require that federal funding be spent to correct safety deficiencies .

authorization in map - 21 of the federal public transportation programs extends through september 30 , 2014 .

specific issues that may come up as congress considers extending or reauthorizing the programs include funding levels and revenue sources ( particularly as they relate to the highway trust fund ) , problems with the bus and bus facilities program , support for operating expenditures , privatization , the operation of the new starts program , and special - needs paratransit .

growth in public transportation ridership has been used to support calls for significantly higher federal spending .

these arguments are often buttressed by infrastructure needs assessments , a number of which have been conducted over the past few years .

all of these assessments estimate a substantial gap between current levels of public transportation capital spending and the amount required to prevent an overall deterioration in the condition of public transportation assets and ultimately operational performance .

for example , in its most recent report on the condition and performance of highway and public transportation systems , dot estimates that to bring transit assets up to a good state of repair over the next 20 years would cost about $2 billion more per year than is currently being expended by all levels of government ( in 2010 dollars ) .

this estimate does not include any funding for expanding systems .

paying for the backlog plus expanding systems is projected to cost between $5.5 billion and $8.0 billion per year over current spending depending on the expected level of ridership growth .

dot does not make any recommendations about the relative shares of funding that should be borne by federal , state , and local governments .

another view is that funding of public transportation programs should be the responsibility of states and localities rather than the federal government ( see , for example , h.r .

3486 / s. 1702 in the 113 th congress ) .

this does not directly challenge the notion that transportation infrastructure requires greater funding , but it suggests that decisions about funding levels and investment priorities should be made below the federal level .

absent a change in the taxes used to finance the highway trust fund , a reduction in federal involvement in public transportation would leave a greater share of motor - fuel tax revenues to be spent for the benefit of road users .

traditionally about 80% of the funding for the federal public transportation program has come from the mass transit account of the highway trust fund and about 20% from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

outlays from the mass transit account have outpaced receipts over the past few years , an imbalance the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects will continue in the future under current law .

congress has chosen to transfer general fund monies into the mass transit account to maintain the balance above a minimum prudent level ( figure 3 ) .

the primary revenue source for the highway trust fund is the fuels tax .

currently , of the 18.3 cents - per - gallon tax on gasoline and 24.3 cents per gallon on diesel that go to the highway trust fund , 2.86 cents is deposited in the mass transit account .

the tax was last raised in 1993 .

the revenue from the fuels tax for the mass transit account is about $5 billion a year , an amount that is not expected to change very much at the current tax rate .

revenue from the fuels tax and funds flexed from the highway account together amount to about $6 billion per year in total receipts , excluding transfers from the general fund .

outlays from the mass transit account are expected to be about $8 billion in fy2014 , and are projected to grow to about $9 billion in fy2018 .

according to cbo's estimates , the balance in the mass transit account will reach zero toward the end of fy2015 , although a balance of $1 billion is low enough to create cash flow problems in the account .

a balance of $1 billion or less would likely require some kind of administrative action , such as slowing payments to transit agencies , or legislative action , such as a general fund transfer .

because of the imbalance between receipts and outlays , a more sustainable solution for the mass transit account would have to involve a cut in program spending , an increase in revenues paid in to the account , or a combination of the two .

an increase in revenues to the mass transit account could involve a commitment to regular transfers from the general fund .

funding shortfalls in the highway account of the highway trust fund have also required general fund transfers .

consequently , actions will likely need to be taken in the highway program as well as the public transportation program .

like those in public transportation , actions in the highway program might involve a cut in program spending , an increase in revenues paid into the account , or another transfer from the general fund .

another possible solution , proposed in h.r .

7 ( 112 th congress ) during the 2012 debate over reauthorization of surface transportation programs , is to redirect revenues from the mass transit account to the highway account and to fund the transit account with a general fund appropriation .

this was not a popular idea at the time and was dropped from the legislation approved by the house of representatives .

however , this option or options like it may be proposed in the future , particularly as some argue that taxes paid by highway users should not be diverted to non - highway uses .

bus - only transit agencies in small urbanized and rural areas have expressed concern that the bus and bus facilities program does not provide sufficient help for bus acquisition and bus - related investment needs such as construction of bus garages .

two changes made in map - 21 contribute to the concern .

first , funding directed specifically to buses was reduced by more than half , from $984 million in fy2012 to $421 million in fy2013 and $428 million in fy2014 , although funding for other programs , which can be used for bus investment , was increased .

second , prior to map - 21 , the bus and bus facilities program was a heavily earmarked discretionary program that provided substantial sums of money to transit agencies at irregular intervals for large capital expenses , whereas map - 21 directs smaller amounts to be distributed by formula annually .

for small transit systems , these allocations may be too small to provide the resources necessary for substantial bus investments in a single year .

to deal with these issues , the american public transportation association has suggested "the restoration of funding to the bus and bus facilities program and the return of a transparent and efficient discretionary element of the program. .

federal operating support for public transportation in urbanized areas over 200,000 was largely eliminated in 1997 with the enactment of the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ) .

tea - 21 continued to allow providers in urbanized areas under 200,000 to use federal funding for both capital and operating expenses , at their option .

because of the serious budget problems faced by many transit agencies whose local revenue sources have been squeezed , there has been pressure to increase the availability of federal funding for operating expenditures .

one way in which congress has done this in the past is by liberalizing the definition of "capital expense" in federal law , allowing federal capital funding to be used to pay for items traditionally considered operating expenses , such as maintenance .

for the most part , map - 21 maintained the prohibition on the use of federal funds for operating expenses in urbanized areas of 200,000 or more residents .

however , it added an exception to this general prohibition that is generally known as the "100 bus rule. .

map - 21 permitted transit systems in these larger urbanized areas operating 76 to 100 buses in peak service to use 50% of their urbanized area apportionment for operating expenses .

for transit systems operating 75 or fewer buses in the peak period , the allowable amount is 75% .

map - 21 did not include a provision contained in s. 1813 ( 112 th congress ) that would have allowed the use of urbanized area funds for operating expenses in urbanized areas of 200,000 or more residents with high unemployment rates .

congress is likely to face calls for providing transit operating support in reauthorization legislation .

one approach to doing this was included in s. 3189 / h.r .

2746 ( 111 th congress ) , which proposed to allow transit agencies operating 100 or more fixed - route buses to use a portion of urbanized area formula program funds for operating expenses .

agencies in urbanized areas of between 200,000 and 400,000 people would have been allowed to use up to 50% of program funding for operating purposes , with lesser shares allowed in larger urbanized areas .

this measure was not enacted .

alternatively , congress could consider eliminating federal transit operating assistance altogether .

this might lead to improvements in productivity , as without federal support transit agencies might pay more attention to the cost - effectiveness of their services .

many government - owned transit agencies contract with private companies to operate some or all of their services , and in some cases private contractors have taken responsibility for building as well as operating rail lines .

congress has periodically considered whether to encourage privatization .

in the 112 th congress , for example , h.r .

7 included a provision to increase the federal cost share of bus projects from 80% to 90% if the local transit agency contracted out at least 20% of fixed - route bus service .

this idea was not adopted in map - 21 .

a related issue is federal labor requirements in the transit industry , known as 13 ( c ) .

as a precondition of federal transit funding 13 ( c ) requires , among other things , the preservation of existing employment rights , privileges , and benefits and the continuation of collective bargaining rights .

these protections are thought to be an impediment to privatization and , hence , advocates of privatization have often called for their repeal .

critics of privatization argue that cost savings , if there are any , typically come at the expense of employees in the form of lower wages and reduced benefits .

a common criticism of the new starts program is the length of time required to develop and deliver projects , a criticism that several changes in map - 21 sought to address .

an issue in reauthorization , therefore , will likely be whether the changes in map - 21 do actually speed the project process , and whether or not this has any effect on the quality of new starts projects .

in addition , map - 21 is likely to result in a change in the types of projects funded , as newly eligible core capacity projects may divert funds that would otherwise go to building new systems and extending existing systems , and streetcar and bus rapid transit projects may become more prominent in the mix .

the net result may be to reduce federal funding available for traditional light rail and heavy rail projects .

special - needs paratransit , also known as demand response or dial - a - ride , is non - fixed - route service for people with disabilities and the elderly , and typically involves the use of small buses , vans , or passenger cars .

the demand for special - needs paratransit has grown relatively rapidly since the passage of the americans with disabilities act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-336 ) required that transit agencies with fixed - route service provide "complementary paratransit" to people unable to use fixed - route service due to a disability .

many communities offer a range of non - ada paratransit services as well .

between 1991 and 2012 paratransit ridership tripled , compared with a 23% increase in public transportation ridership overall .

the general aging of the population may portend growing demand in future years .

in 2012 , operating expenditure per passenger trip for paratransit was $23.33 , compared with $3.66 for motor buses and $3.75 for transit service on average .

between 2002 and 2012 , paratransit operating expenses doubled in inflation - adjusted terms .

the growth in costs means that special - needs paratransit is taking an ever larger slice of transit agency operating budgets , limiting the resources available for fixed - route service .

paratransit accounted for 12% of public transit systems' operating costs in 2012 , up from about 4% in 1991 .

as noted earlier , paratransit currently accounts for about 2% of all public transportation trips .

increasing costs and service demands may lead to pressure for greater federal help for special - needs paratransit .

one question is whether congress wishes to widen or narrow the level of service mandated by the ada , a change with immediate cost implications .

without addressing the quality or quantity of service , congress may seek to rein in the costs of special - needs paratransit by requiring or encouraging greater enforcement of eligibility rules ; making fixed - route service as accessible as possible ; improving the coordination of all paratransit and human services transportation ; and encouraging greater use of wheelchair - accessible taxicabs .

some transit agencies already seek to control costs by providing travel training to persons with disabilities and allowing disabled riders to use fixed - route buses and rail systems for free , and such efforts could be encouraged in transit legislation .

