the alien tort statute ( ats ) states that "district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action by an alien for a tort only , committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the united states. .

codified at 28 u.s.c .

ยง 1350 , the ats is "a jurisdictional provision unlike any other in american law and of a kind apparently unknown to any other legal system in the world. .

created as part of the judiciary act of 1789 , the ats is an opaque statute initially intended to provide foreign nationals redress for violations of the law of nations .

the statute lay dormant until 1980 , when it was used by paraguayan plaintiffs in a case involving the wrongful death of their son in paraguay , at the hands of a paraguayan official .

this was the first of the ats "foreign cubed" cases , in which a foreign plaintiff brings a suit against a foreign defendant for torts committed on foreign soil .

soon victims of human rights violations used the ats as a vehicle for claims against foreign corporations that aided and abetted local foreign governments in committing human rights abuses .

the debate soon focused on whether those corporations could be held responsible for committing those torts under the ats .

in april 2013 , the supreme court decided a long - awaited case , kiobel v. royal dutch petroleum co .

in this case , nigerian nationals sued royal dutch petroleum co. ( royal dutch ) , a dutch company , and shell transport and trading ( shell ) , a british company , for aiding and abetting the nigerian government in committing human rights violations .

the case began when residents of the ogoni region of nigeria began protesting the environmental effect of the companies' oil drilling in ogoni .

in response to these protests , the plaintiffs claimed that the oil companies enlisted the aid of the nigerian militia , who went on to rape , beat , and kill ogoni residents , and loot and destroy their property .

royal dutch and shell argued that the ats does not extend liability to corporations , and the controversial question of corporate liability was argued before the supreme court .

after oral arguments , the court then requested supplementary briefs and arguments on a new inquiry that called into question the past 30 years of ats jurisprudence: "whether and under what circumstances courts may recognize a cause of action under the ats , for violations of the law of nations occurring within the territory of a foreign sovereign. .

applying a judicially created doctrine called the presumption against extraterritoriality , the court held that because it was not the intent of congress that the ats apply to cases occurring abroad , kiobel and similar foreign cubed cases are not justiciable in federal courts .

the presumption acts to prevent courts from making foreign affairs and policy decisions that might best be left to its coordinate political branches .

the kiobel court held that nothing in the text , history , or purpose of the ats rebutted the presumption , and unless congress speaks to the jurisdiction of the courts over foreign cubed cases , judicial caution would be best .

the court left a door open for cases that "touch and concern the territory of the united states," but only if those cases do so with enough force to rebut the presumption .

the court provided only one guidepost , that "mere corporate presence" in the united states is insufficient .

the majority declined to comment on the question of corporate liability , resolving the case on the issue of extraterritorial jurisdiction .

this report will briefly survey the historical background of the alien tort statute .

it will then look at the past 30 years of ats case law , starting with filartiga and tracing the question of corporate liability .

next , it will examine the decision in kiobel and the arguments made by the majority and concurrences about the extraterritorial application of the ats ; the history , text , and purposes of the act ; and the "touch and concern" test .

finally , it will survey the possible implications of the kiobel decision on pending and future cases , and possible congressional responses to the court's invocation of the presumption .

in his 1984 tel - oren concurrence , judge bork said , "since section 1350 appears to be generating an increasing amount of litigation , it is to be hoped that clarification will not be long delayed. .

however , 30 years later the ats still resides in murky waters .

while the supreme court has decided two cases involving the ats , in each instance the court has been careful to address only the narrow questions before it .

as a result , while the "touch and concern" test has likely narrowed the number of justiciable ats cases , the actual scope of its jurisdiction is still unknown .

early responses from the academic community in the wake of the kiobel decision have varied .

on the practical application of the ats , some have opined that the narrow "touch and concern" test will compel human rights plaintiffs to seek redress under other federal laws , or from state courts .

some have argued that this was "an all but categorical 'no,'" and that the door to the ats is , for all intents and purposes , closed .

one observer predicts that the kiobel case "will help to usher in a brave new world of transnational litigation where federal , state , and foreign courts compete to regulate international human rights claims. .

the majority of commentators , however , have focused on the question of how the kiobel holding will affect claims of corporate liability , an issue the court did not address .

at least one commentator has read the court's comment that "mere corporate presence" is insufficient to meet the touch and concern test as an implication that other potential ties to u.s. territory could be enough for corporate liability .

another commentator has gone so far as to claim that , "it's clear that all the justices believe that some cases involving abuses by corporations , even those involving injuries in foreign countries , may still be brought. .

another has argued that the door left open by the court and by justice kennedy's vague concurrence results in a purgatorial state for corporate liability claims .

while plaintiffs in human rights claims are certain to argue that corporations with headquarters in the united states are responsible even for injuries occurring abroad , uncertainty about the application of the "touch and concern" test and the remaining unanswered questions leaves the fate of corporate liability cases in the air .

commentators who have focused more heavily on the political atmosphere surrounding the life of the ats as a human rights vehicle say that there is little surprise in the court's decision .

while the decision and its reliance on the presumption may "radically revise[] and undermine[] the way the statute has been applied for a generation," commentators have pointed out that it should not be too surprising that the filartiga line of cases have met this end .

the filartiga decision , as one commentator noted , came at the end of a phase where judge - made law and implied rights of action ruled the day .

since that time , power in the federal courts has shifted .

filartiga and its human rights progeny rested on "a mountain of judge - made law" because the text and history of the statute provide little guidance for causes of action and jurisdiction .

in fact , nearly every decision made about human rights cases brought under the ats would involve judge - made law .

so when the court's first look at the ats came in the 2004 sosa decision , this commentator believes , it should have been obvious that the court was unwilling to say more than necessary to solve the case at hand .

that silence was read by some to imply approval of filartiga , and was also seen as only limiting ats jurisdiction with sosa's specificity test .

that commentator believes seeing things in sosa that were not there should be a cautionary tale for those looking to read too much into kiobel , particularly those that believe the court implied that corporate liability is possible by giving the example of mere corporate liability as insufficient to rebut the presumption .

this cautionary approach to interpreting the case seems to have taken hold in the lower courts in recent post - kiobel decisions .

sarei v. rio tinto , a case on the court's docket at the time of the kiobel opinion , was remanded to the district court in light of that decision .

the district court held , and the ninth circuit affirmed , that based on kiobel , the court had no jurisdiction over this foreign cubed case .

this has been the fate of several recent cases , with judges cautiously concluding that , "the supreme court appears to have set a very high bar for plaintiffs asserting jurisdiction under the ats for claims arising out of conduct occurring entirely abroad. .

one case particularly stands out among the post - kiobel decisions because it is the first opinion to decide if a case has passed the "touch and concern" test .

mwani v. bin laden is an ongoing litigation involving the kenyan victims of an explosion caused by al qaeda outside the american embassy in nairobi .

magistrate judge facciola of the d.c. district court felt that because the events that occurred were directed at the united states government with the intention of harming our country and its citizens , "[s]urely , if any circumstances were to fit the court's framework of 'touching and concerning the united states with sufficient force,' it would be a terrorist attack that ( 1 ) was plotted in part within the united states , and ( 2 ) was directed at a united states embassy and its employees. .

however , judge facciola certified the issue for appeal under 28 u.s.c .

ยง 1292 ( b ) because as it is a matter of first impression "there may be a substantial difference of opinion among judges whether it is correct. .

while the case is pending appeal , judge facciola's decision indicates that the "touch and concern" test may not close the door to extraterritorial application as drastically as some commentators believe .

however , as this case involves a terrorist attack directed at the united states embassy , it could be distinguished in future cases applying the "touch and concern" test in human rights litigation .

since the nuremberg trials at the close of the second world war , the importance of redressing human rights cases has been acknowledged by countries around the world .

however , plaintiffs in foreign cubed cases , especially those featuring corporate aiding and abetting , face a great challenge in overcoming the presumption against extraterritorial application .

justice kennedy's concurrence suggests that some human rights cases may be the exception to the rule , but until a third ats case reaches the supreme court , clarification on the fate of ats cases may have to come from other sources .

in 1991 congress enacted the torture victim protection act ( tvpa ) in order to provide redress for those victims of torture and extrajudicial killing committed by individuals acting in an official capacity in other countries .

because of limitations on defendants , foreign cubed cases claiming corporate liability cannot seek redress under the tvpa .

with the new test for jurisdiction under the ats , the kiobel case has created some uncertainty for foreign cubed human rights cases .

if congress wishes to provide redress for extraterritorial torts , or establish corporate liability , it is within its power to do so .

