given its size , strength , location and the enormity of its impact , hurricane sandy was a storm of historic proportions and importance .

the damage inflicted by this huge storm rivaled the damages of the gulf coast storms during the summer of 2005 , particularly due to the population density and overall development of the areas that received the brunt of the storm's impact .

as with other major natural disaster events , members of congress responded to hurricane sandy by holding a series of hearings , visiting the affected region , and introducing and acting on legislation .

in addition to evaluating the need for supplemental appropriations in response to this catastrophic disaster , the 112 th and 113 th congresses considered reforming provisions of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act , p.l .

93-288 as amended ) .

generally , concerns were raised that the recovery from hurricane sandy would be plagued by perceived delays and bureaucratic burdens that inhibited the recovery following hurricane katrina .

the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 , as passed as division b of p.l .

113-2 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 , revises the stafford act as a result of these concerns as well as other considerations .

division a of p.l .

113-2 provided a $50.7 billion package of disaster assistance largely focused on responding to hurricane sandy .

additionally , congress increased the national flood insurance program's borrowing authority by $9.7 billion , from $20.725 billion to $30.425 billion ( p.l .

113-1 , to temporarily increase the borrowing authority of the federal emergency management agency for carrying out the national flood insurance program ) .

both of these supplemental relief laws are discussed separately in crs report r42869 , fy2013 supplemental funding for disaster relief .

this report examines the potential effect of the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 on disaster assistance procedures and programs .

part of the legislative intent of the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 is to streamline administrative procedures and improve the effectiveness of several disaster assistance programs authorized by the stafford act , namely the public assistance program , the individual assistance program , and the hazard mitigation grant program .

the law reforms the stafford act in part by reauthorizing several "pilot" programs established previously in title vi of p.l .

109-295 , the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( pkemra ) .

p.l .

113-2 also authorizes tribes to request a declaration of an emergency or major disaster , as was previously only allowed for states .

it also directs fema to establish procedures for arbitrating disputes relating to disaster assistance , and directs fema to create a national strategy for mitigating the cost of future disasters .

in the context of overall supplemental funding for disaster relief being debated by the congress , the disaster assistance programs modified by the law are funded by the disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

more detailed explanations of the modifications enacted by the law are provided below .

on december 28 , 2012 , near the end of the 112 th congress , the senate approved h.r .

1 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 .

the bill would have provided $60.41 billion in supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance and mitigation , and included a suite of legislative provisions that included reforms to several disaster assistance authorities .

included within the bill was the disaster recovery act of 2012 ( provided as a general provision , section 609 , to the homeland security title ) .

no further action was taken on this bill during the 112 th congress .

on january 14 , 2013 , the house passed h.r .

219 , the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 .

this bill had many similarities to the disaster recovery act of 2012 , as passed by the senate in the 112 th congress , including many provisions that were identical or very similar to each other .

for more on these similarities , see the appendix .

pursuant to the provisions of h.res .

23 , in the engrossment of h.r .

152 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 , the text of h.r .

219 as passed by the house was added as new matter at the end of h.r .

152 ( division b — sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 ) .

h.r .

152 was passed by the house on january 15 , 2013 , and received by the senate on january 22 , 2013 .

the senate passed h.r .

152 unchanged on january 28 , 2013 , and it was signed into law as p.l .

113-2 the next day .

the following sections of the report examine the effect of the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 on disaster assistance procedures and programs .

the provisions are not analyzed in numerical order , but rather consolidated by the program or policy subject affected by the provisions .

the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 contains no generally applicable effective date .

in the absence of explicit language stating otherwise , the effective date of an enacted provision is presumed to be the day on which it was enacted , january 29 , 2013 , in this case .

it is in keeping with existing practice that the changes in law effectuated by the act will apply to disasters declared on or after this date .

however , it is less clear whether , and to what extent , these provisions will apply to disasters declared before january 29 , 2013 , although support can be found in the text and legislative history for applying at least some of these amendments to the declarations arising out of hurricane sandy .

the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 revised numerous disaster assistance programs authorized by the stafford act .

many of these changes will require fema to develop policies and regulations to implement the law .

for example , as discussed above , fema will determine key features of the new alternative procedures for the public assistance program mandated by section 1102 of the law ( within certain statutory guidelines ) .

as of march 7 , 2013 , fema has not released any proposed or final rulemakings to implement these changes , though future rulemakings are anticipated ( in addition to those mandated by the law ) .

therefore , congress may wish to oversee the implementation of these reforms through hearings or other inquiries to ensure that the changes to the disaster assistance programs align with the future interests of congress .

the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 , as passed by the 113 th congress ( p.l .

113-2 ) , included many similar provisions to the disaster recovery act of 2012 , as passed by the senate in the 112 th congress ( h.r .

1 ) .

the disaster recovery act of 2012 was part of the senate - passed disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 that was not taken up for a vote in the 112 th house .

however , as evidenced by their legislative similarities , it influenced the eventual passage in the 113 th congress .

table a - 1 provides a comparison of how the legislation can be matched , starting from the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 .

because of the differing structures in the legislation , many of the similarities are not immediately obvious .

there were two policy provisions unique to each bill ( one each ) .

these provisions are listed at the end of the table .

the unique provision of the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 is discussed previously in the full report .

an explanation of the unique provision of the disaster recovery act of 2012 , which did not become law , section 609 ( 1 ) , is included after the table in this appendix .

section 609 ( l ) — report on impacts to government budgets and the community disaster loan program section 609 ( l ) of senate - passed h.r .

1 ( 112 th congress ) would have required the recently established hurricane sandy rebuilding task force to submit a report to various committees of the house and senate .

this provision was not included in the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 .

among other issues , this report would have evaluated the impact of hurricane sandy on local and state budgets , especially the impact on the revenue streams of these governments .

the shortage of local revenues , and the resulting limitation on the financial capacity and budget of the local government , has been cited as one of the most significant and consistent hurdles to long - term disaster recovery .

the task force's report would also have evaluated whether loan assistance is available from private sources to compensate this loss in revenue and impact to their budgets , and whether federal resources and assistance is available to address these budget impacts .

more specifically , the task force would have been required to evaluate the ability of fema's community disaster loan ( cdl ) program to "effectively and expeditiously" address these budgetary impacts .

the core purpose of the cdl program , currently codified in section 417 of the stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§5184 , as amended ) and administered by fema , is to provide financial assistance to local governments that are having difficulty providing government services because of a loss in tax or other revenue following a disaster .

the program assists local governments by offering federal loans to compensate for this temporary or permanent loss in local revenue .

the program is funded through the disaster assistance direct loan program account , rather than the disaster relief fund that funds the majority of other stafford act programs .

the task force was instructed to provide a thorough assessment of the cdl program , to include an analysis of the loan size limitation and fema's regulations and procedures governing most aspects of the program .

they were also instructed to provide recommendations on how the program could be legislatively amended .

if the provision had become law , the report was required within 90 days of enactment .

