this report briefly summarizes the history of futuregen , discusses why it has gained interest and support from some members of congress and the administration while remaining in initial stages of development , and offers some policy considerations on barriers that challenge its further development as a model for a ccs program .

a timeline history of futuregen is found at the end of this report .

futuregen is a clean - coal technology program managed through a public - private partnership between the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) and the futuregen 2.0 industrial alliance .

the futuregen program as originally conceived in 2003 by the george w. bush administration had the intent of constructing a net zero - emission fossil - fueled power plant with carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) technology .

ccs is a process envisioned to capture carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) — a greenhouse gas associated with climate change — emitted from burning fossil fuels and store it in deep underground geologic formations , thus preventing its release into the atmosphere .

if widely deployed in the united states , ccs could decrease the amount of u.s. - emitted co 2 .

in 2008 , doe withdrew from the futuregen partnership , citing rising costs of construction as its reason .

subsequently , doe restructured the futuregen program to instead develop two or three demonstration projects at different power plants around the country .

in 2010 , the obama administration announced another change to the program with the introduction of futuregen 2.0 , which would retrofit an existing fossil fuel power plant in illinois with ccs technology .

the futuregen project was originally conceived as a cost - share between the federal government , which would cover 76% of the cost , and the private sector , which would provide the remaining 24% .

between fy2004 and fy2008 , congress appropriated $174 million to the original futuregen project .

doe obligated $44 million and expended $42 million between fy2005 and fy2010 toward the original project .

under the obama administration , congress appropriated almost $1 billion in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) for futuregen 2.0 .

furthermore , doe has obligated nearly $60 million but has expended $2 million from regular appropriations to futuregen 2.0 since fy2010 .

together with the approximately $74 million expended on the project from arra funding ( discussed below ) , total expenditures for futuregen since its conception were between $110 and $120 million as of early 2014 .

the futuregen industrial alliance estimated the total cost of the futuregen 2.0 program to be nearly $1.3 billion , with $730 million used toward retrofitting and repowering ameren corporation's power plant in meredosia , illinois , and $550 million used for the construction of a co 2 pipeline , storage site , and training and research center .

in 2011 , they estimated that the project would create approximately 1,000 construction jobs and another 1,000 jobs for suppliers across the state .

a 2013 report from the university of illinois predicted that the project could create an average of 620 permanent jobs for 20 years and approximately $12 billion of business volume by 2037 for the state of illinois .

after more than 10 years and two restructuring efforts since futuregen's inception , the project is still in its early development stages .

although the futuregen 2.0 industrial alliance completed drilling a characterization well at the storage site in morgan county , il , and installed a service rig over the well for further geologic analysis , issues with the power plant itself have not yet been resolved .

among the remaining challenges are securing private sector funding to meet increasing costs , purchasing the meredosia power plant from ameren , obtaining permission from the doe to retrofit the plant , performing the retrofit , and then meeting the goal of 90% capture of co 2 .

in addition , the alliance is awaiting approval for a class vi well permit for the injection and sequestration wells .

congressional consideration of ccs has focused on balancing competing national interests , such as fostering low - cost domestic sources of energy like coal versus reducing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions in the atmosphere .

legislative proposals during the 109 th and 110 th congresses focused on advancing carbon capture technologies that reduce co 2 emissions to mitigate ghg - induced global warming .

congress began appropriating funds specifically for futuregen beginning in 2005 .

previously , doe had allocated funds under its clean coal power initiative ( ccpi ) program .

with the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , congress appropriated approximately $1 billion for the futuregen 2.0 project .

the revival of futuregen under the obama administration as futuregen 2.0 has sparked increased scrutiny of the future of integrated ccs technology on a commercially viable scale .

futuregen was originally proposed to demonstrate the feasibility of using ccs technology to mitigate co 2 emissions into the atmosphere .

among the challenges that continue to influence the development of futuregen 2.0 are rising costs of construction , ongoing issues with project development , lack of incentives for investment from the private sector , and time constraints on project development .

despite congressional and obama administration commitments to the futuregen 2.0 project , particularly the $1.0 billion appropriation from arra , questions remain as to whether or not futuregen 2.0 will succeed .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) published a report in june 2012 stating that the success of ccs technology depends on reducing technical costs , ensuring the effectiveness of ccs , and adopting policies that provide incentives for industry to pursue the high - cost demonstration technologies .

the report explained that if regulations , tax credits , or policies such as carbon taxation or cap - and - trade that increase the price of electricity from conventional power plants are adopted , then ccs technology may become competitive enough for private sector investment .

even then , industry may choose to forgo coal - fueled plants for natural gas or other sources that emit less co 2 compared to coal , according to cbo .

the timeline that follows shows a chronology of the history of futuregen since 2003 .

