even though u.s. coal production remained strong over the past decade , coal is losing its share of overall u.s. energy production , primarily to natural gas .

one of the big questions for the industry is how to penetrate the overseas coal market , particularly for steam coal , to compensate for declining domestic demand .

in the past few years , coal production was at or near record levels and exports were up , while domestic demand declined .

as u.s. energy policy and environmental regulations are constantly debated , there is ongoing congressional interest in the role of coal in meeting u.s. and global energy needs .

the question may not be whether the domestic production of coal is here to stay but , rather , how much u.s. coal will be burned , what type , and under what regulatory framework .

the gap between u.s. coal production and consumption may continue to widen as low cost natural gas becomes more attractive to power plants ( at least in the short run ) and as older coal plants idle or close and uncertainties with emission regulations potentially inhibit new coal plant investments .

the energy information administration ( eia ) forecasts coal exports to continue to rise over their forecast period ( 2015-2040 ) .

exports to the asian market are expected to increase , but there are potential bottlenecks such as infrastructure ( eg , port development and transportation ) that could slow export growth .

factors contributing to lower coal demand in the united states include low economic growth , high coal prices , lower natural gas prices , and coal plant retirements .

table 1 illustrates the current coal supply - demand balance .

the coal industry is highly concentrated in the united states , with just a handful of major producers , operating primarily in four states , and the dominant holder of reserves ( about one - third ) being the u.s. government .

coal deposits ( resources ) are spread throughout the united states ( see figure1 ) .

there has been considerable congressional interest in coal , with over 100 bills that were introduced in the 112 th congress many of which addressed environmental and worker safety issues , neither of which are covered in this report .

the discussion below is intended to provide some background and context for potential coal debates during the 113 th congress .

this report serves as a primer on u.s. and world coal resources and production and highlights some of the congressional interest related to coal production on u.s. federal lands .

the report primarily describes the past 10 years of coal activity but also includes a discussion of future coal production projections and federal coal incentives , many of which do not expire .

coal consists of the fossilized remains of ancient plant life that have been transformed through metamorphosis into carbon - rich mineral deposits .

it occurs as seams in sedimentary rock strata as old as 300 million years , though the most abundant deposits in the united states were deposited during the geologic carboniferous period between 210 and 250 million years ago .

coal mineral classification considers type , rank , and grade .

the plant life that coal originated from determines its type , and the degree of metamorphosis determines its rank , grade , and the amount of inorganic mineral matter present .

qualities such as moisture , carbon , sulfur , and ash content contribute to a coal's heating value as a fuel ( measured in british thermal units [btus] ) .

the content of sulfur is significant because of the sulfur dioxide ( so2 ) emissions that occur during coal combustion .

under the clean air act , there are federal limits on the amount of so 2 , among other pollutants , allowed from coal - fired power plants .

western coal ( low sulfur and low energy content ) primarily produced in the powder river basin ( prb ) of wyoming , is used generally for power generation , while eastern coal has been used domestically for power generation and exported for coking and metallurgical purposes .

moisture adds weight to the coal , increasing shipping costs while decreasing its heating value .

minerals deposited with the plants that formed coal create ash when coal burns .

table 2 below illustrates the various coal classifications .

assessing the amount of coal in the united states is quite complex .

two very different terms used to describe coal deposits — resources and reserves — are sometimes used interchangeably , but have very different meanings .

resources provide a broad measure of coal production potential , or amount of coal "in the ground" summing the identified and undiscovered deposits of a minimum thickness .

reserves are known quantities that can be produced given current prices and technology .

resource assessments are complex and rely on bed thickness as a major factor in determining recoverability , with direct correlation between bed thickness , depth , and recoverability .

coal rank ( degree of metamorphism ) and coal quality ( heating value ) contained in a unit of coal are factors as well .

a february 2013 assessment by the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) estimate the powder river basin coal resource alone at about 1.07 trillion short tons .

a national research council ( nrc ) study cautions that it is not sufficient to know there is a vast resource base in the united states because only a small amount can be mined economically ( the reserves ) and advises caution when using coal resources to estimate the life of the u.s. coal base .

resources , however , can become reserves .

reserve data is temporary and subject to change based on public policy , coal versus natural gas prices , production rates , transportation issues , exports , technology , and other conditions .

reserves are only an estimate of what might be recovered .

reserves must be developed from a better defined resource base according to the virginia center for coal and energy research report .

a maturity index is used to measure the ratio of the amount of remaining economically recoverable resources to the previously mined tonnages .

the interior and appalachian regions have less than a 0 index meaning their recoverable reserves are less than the amount already mined .

those areas are far more developed than the western regions .

the remaining eastern resources may be thinner and of lower quality overall , which may lead to more mining underground than before because much of the surface resources have already been mined .

the united states has the largest amount of coal reserves and resources in the world .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) estimates there are about 261 billion short tons of recoverable domestic coal reserves .

the total demonstrated resource base ( drb ) is estimated at about 484.5 billion tons .

eia statistics show that more than half ( 55% ) of u.s. coal reserves are located in the west , of which montana and wyoming together account for 43% ( see table 3 ) .

when including the top five producing states ( three of which are in the east ) , 70% of u.s. coal reserves are accounted for .

the united states government owns about one third , or 87 billion short tons ( bst ) , of u.s. domestic reserves , followed by great northern properties limited partnership ( 20 bst ) , and peabody energy corporation ( 9 bst ) .

all together , the top three reserve owners account for about 45% of u.s. coal .

in recent decades , the u.s. coal industry has changed significantly .

coal production has shifted from high - sulfur to low - sulfur driven by the steady demand from electric power plants ( coal's primary customer ) need to comply with environmental standards .

coal production has fluctuated since 2002 ( see table 4 ) but overall production has been higher than in previous decades .

coal production in the united states reached an all - time high ( in tonnage ) of 1,174.8 million short tons in 2008 , before declining to slightly under 1,100 million short tons from 2009 to 2011 .

however , natural gas has been the recent fuel of choice for new power plants , reducing coal's domestic market share from 42% in 2011 to 32% by april 2012 .

out of the four major u.s. fuel sources — oil , natural gas , coal , and uranium — coal has the largest domestic reserve base and has accounted for the largest share of u.s. energy production in btus since the early 1980s .

in 2005 , coal production was 33% of all u.s. energy production .

however , in 2011 , natural gas surpassed coal and accounted for 30% of u.s. energy production because of sharp production increases , while coal fell to 28% of u.s. energy production .

eia's reference case ( 2011 ) predicts that coal will continue to lose energy production market share to natural gas as coal would drop from 28% to 24% by 2040 ( see table 5 ) .

cases in which coal production rises more than the reference case involve assumptions of higher natural gas prices , lower coal prices , and higher economic growth .

coal production would grow at a 0.2% annual average rate through 2040 in the reference case .

coal production on federal lands accounts for about 43% of u.s. production , according to the bureau of land management ( blm ) .

coal production from the powder river basin ( prb ) , most of which is on federal lands , accounts for 41% of u.s. production , all of which is surfaced mined .

powder river basin coal production is projected to increase , according to the eia , becoming an even larger share of u.s. production as interior coal has declined in recent years and is projected to grow slowly over the eia forecast period ( 2016-2040 ) .

appalachian coal has declined sharply over the past couple of decades and is projected to continue to decline through 2020 after which production is projected to increase , particularly for coking coal exports but with fewer shipments of steam coal for the u.s. market .

sub - bituminous surface mining in the western region ( lower rank and lower sulfur coal ) has become the dominant feature of u.s. coal mining since the mid - 1970s .

surface mining has grown from 55% of coal production in 1975 to 69% of production in 2011 .

western coal took the lead over eastern production in 1999 when it rose to 53% of production .

western production now accounts for 58% of u.s. coal production .

u.s. coal production from the west is projected to continue to dominate ( reaching 68% of u.s. production ) throughout the eia forecast period ( 2016-2040 ) .

eastern and underground coal may have peaked in 1990 at 630.2 and 424.5 million short tons , respectively .

a number of factors are behind this dramatic shift from underground eastern coal to western - based surface coal , and from bituminous coal to sub - bituminous coal including the ease of mining , coal utilization , mining conditions , mining technology , health and safety , environmental laws , and mining costs .

five coal - producing states account for 72% of total u.s. coal output ( see table 6 ) .

the national research council reported in 2007 that "the context for any assessment of future u.s. coal production is inextricably linked with the development of a national carbon emissions policy .

potential constraints on greenhouse gases ( especially co 2 ) emissions and the technical and economic feasibility of co 2 control measures are the dominant issues affecting the outlook for the future of coal use over the next 25 years and beyond. .

however , since 2007 , there are several other factors that will influence u.s. coal production , such as , natural gas prices , the development of the infrastructure to support the use of natural gas for electricity , and how much and how quickly u.s. western steam coal can penetrate the international market .

there are substantial federal coal resources ; about 957 billion short tons ( excluding alaska ) according to a 2007 interagency report on an inventory of federal coal resources .

production increases on federal land are possible given the industry's interest in seeking out international markets for prb coal .

the greatest growth opportunity and long term potential may be for thermal coal exports into the asian markets .

currently , there are a number of federal tax incentives available that support coal production , clean coal or advanced coal technologies , and coal mine safety .

certain states impose severance taxes — an excise tax on natural resource extraction — on coal .

global coal production and demand has grown significantly over the past decade and coal will likely be the dominant fuel for power needs over the eia forecast period , as asian and many emerging economies grow and more rapidly increase their demand for electric power .

despite the regulatory concerns , u.s. coal production was robust over the last decade , reaching an all - time production high ( in tonnage ) in 2008 , before a slight decline following the great recession .

u.s. coal production is forecast to rise at a rate ( < 1% ) slightly above projected u.s. demand through 2040 , according to the eia .

in 2011 , coal fell below natural gas as the leading source of primary energy production in the united states and will unlikely reclaim the top spot that it held for nearly the past three decades .

if trends continue , the u.s. coal industry will likely become more concentrated and produce more on federal lands .

this may raise the issue that lease sales could become no more competitive in the future than they are today and possibly even less competitive .

but since fair market value returns to the government consider all of the revenue streams , not just bonus bids at the lease sale , it will become increasingly important for the federal government to capture the correct valuation of federal coal ( price x volume ) and assign the appropriate royalty rate .

most of the federal coal ( 94% ) in the prb is accessible or possibly accessible ( pending land use plans or surface owner consent ) , but 70% of the resource base has not been screened for leasing because of low interest and higher costs .

this lack of interest could place a limit on just how much federal coal actually gets developed .

overall , u.s. coal production has been very strong over the past decade and if the industry is successful in penetrating the global market , primarily for steam coal , u.s. production may continue to grow faster than consumption .

although u.s. metallurgical coal will likely continue to be in demand on the world market , higher than predicted steam coal exports could further widen the gap between u.s. coal production and consumption .

