the u.s. auto industry is of interest to many in congress because of its large employment , economic impact , and geographic reach .

around the world , there are many automakers and thousands of parts suppliers , leading to intense international competition .

through the 2009 stimulus bill and financial support for general motors , chrysler , and their suppliers , the recovery of the domestic auto industry has been made a national priority .

the federal government has also provided loans and grants for electric vehicle manufacturing operations , research and development support for new electric , fuel cell , and natural gas vehicles , and federal tax credits for purchase of hybrid and electric vehicles .

in addition to steps supporting the domestic auto industry , congress and the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) have taken an interest in foreign trade and investment practices that adversely affect u.s. automakers .

for example , the emergence of japan's auto industry as a major global competitor in the 1980s and 1990s led to frequent conflict with the united states , as many u.s. policymakers argued that japan's trade policies harmed u.s. domestic auto and auto parts producers at home and abroad .

trade in autos and auto parts was one of the most contentious issues in negotiating the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement , which went into effect in 2012 .

the rapid rise of china's auto and auto parts industries in recent years has raised similar concerns and led to questions about some of the trade practices employed by the chinese government .

some in congress have called on the obama administration to take a tougher stand against china's industrial policies and other measures that may be distorting trade , including by making greater use of the world trade organization ( wto ) dispute settlement process to challenge chinese policies that may violate wto rules .

this report examines the rise of china's auto and auto parts industries , chinese government policies to promote these industries , trends in u.s. - china trade in autos and parts , auto - related trade disputes , and implications for u.s. - china commercial relations .

in the past five years , rising incomes and central government stimulus have made china into the world's largest auto market , in terms of both production and unit sales of vehicles .

china's annual output of cars and light trucks increased from less than 9 million units in 2007 to more than 19 million in 2012 , largely destined for domestic consumption .

by comparison , in the united states , just over 10 million vehicles were produced in 2012 .

autos and auto parts have been the subject of a number of trade disputes between the united states and china .

all of these disputes have arisen since december 2001 , when china was admitted to the wto .

while china has repealed overt pre - wto regulations favoring its domestic industry over imports , several parts of the 12 th five - year plan have generated charges that china is violating some of its wto obligations in its support for the industry .

trade concerns have been exacerbated by the challenges facing the u.s. vehicle parts sector .

u.s. parts makers were severely affected by the 2007-2009 recession and the steep decline in domestic auto production , as well as by import competition .

parts employment fell in every year from 2001 to 2009 , as many companies filed for bankruptcy .

while the industry has added 100,000 jobs since its low point of 386,000 in july 2009 , the sector provides roughly 350,000 fewer jobs than it did at the start of this century .

meanwhile , parts imports have been rising throughout the past decade , from about 21% of the total u.s. parts market to nearly a third in 2010 .

ten years ago , the chinese auto industry was in its infancy , with a very low level of production and sales , few imports or exports , and vehicles whose quality was not up to par with cars and trucks produced in countries with larger and more sophisticated auto industries .

the recession that hit the united states , japan , and europe did not affect china's economy so severely .

as vehicle production and sales lagged in europe , north america , and japan , they expanded dramatically in china , more than doubling from 2009 to 2012 .

no other nation's auto industry has seen such robust growth in the past decade .

china's growing middle class increasingly values car and truck ownership and , with a population of more than 1.3 billion , there is room for significant expansion of the chinese auto market even after its recent growth spurt .

china has not excluded foreign automakers from establishing a presence there , but they must be minority or 50 / 50 partners with chinese firms , many of which are owned by provincial and municipal governments .

parts makers , on the other hand , are permitted to own a majority share of operations in china .

it appears clear from china's five - year plans that building up the size and quality of the auto assembly and auto parts industries is a very high national priority .

moreover , china's long - term plan — its feasibility as yet untested — is to leapfrog over gasoline - powered internal combustion engine technology into new energy vehicles , such as electric and fuel - cell - powered cars .

nearly all major foreign automakers are participating in the chinese market .

the chinese government welcomes their role in expanding its domestic industry .

similarly , the chinese embrace investments by foreign parts makers , which build parts there to service the automakers from their home countries .

the chinese government's plan to consolidate auto and parts makers could in the future result in greater competition for u.s. , european , and japanese firms , which now have a decided edge over the fragmented chinese domestic industry .

however , chinese state intervention in the auto and auto parts industries could limit the benefits for non - chinese manufacturers relative to what would occur under more open markets and trade .

when china joined the wto in 2001 , it appeared to signal that it was on a path toward accelerating its transition to a market economy .

however , ustr has noted that since 2006 , there has been a "troubling trend in china toward intensified state intervention," and that china seems to be "embracing state capitalism more strongly. .

at a november 2011 wto review of china's wto compliance , the u.s. representative stated that the auto sector was one sector that the u.s. highlighted as having been particularly plagued by government intervention .

in addition to the commercial opportunities presented by the chinese market , there have also been growing pains in the u.s. - china motor vehicle trade relationship .

a half - dozen trade disputes have developed in the past 12 years , many resulting in wto rulings and changes in chinese laws and regulations affecting the motor vehicle industry .

when japanese auto companies began to export extensively to the united states in the 1980s and 1990s , many in congress argued that japanese auto policies were unfair , and legislation was introduced to limit imports of japanese cars .

this pressure led japanese auto firms to restrain auto exports to the united states and to build u.s. auto plants .

so far , china is exporting auto parts and not automobiles to the united states .

growing chinese investment in the u.s. auto and auto parts industry could alleviate concerns over increased u.s. imports of automotive products from china as long as such commercial activity is not seen as unfair under u.s. trade laws or wto rules .

a key factor in the growth of the chinese auto industry will be how well it can generate and sustain its own innovations , which regularly mark the growth of the auto industry everywhere in the world .

consolidation without innovation and home - grown technology applications may leave the indigenous chinese auto and parts makers reliant on foreign joint ventures .

