on october 1 , 2015 , under the authority of sections 108 and 109 of the clean air act ( caa ) as amended , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) finalized revisions to the national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) for ground - level ozone from the then - current level of 75 parts per billion ( ppb ) to 70 ppb .

as described in detail below ( see " implementation of the 2015 standards " ) , under the caa , revision of the standards sets in motion a process in which states and epa identify areas that do not meet the standards ( "nonattainment areas" ) and the states prepare implementation plans to demonstrate how emissions will be lowered sufficiently to reach attainment in those areas .

the revised standards are based on a review of more than 1,000 scientific studies by epa staff .

the epa science assessment was itself reviewed by a panel of 20 outside scientific experts , a group known as the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) .

the epa administrator was under a court order to sign any changes or reaffirm the standards by october 1 , 2015 .

a comment period , public hearings , and interagency review had followed the publication of a proposed range of standards in december 2014 .

ground - level ozone ( often referred to as "smog" ) is associated with potentially serious health effects when present in high enough concentrations .

these health effects include aggravated asthma , chronic bronchitis , and heart attacks , and in some cases premature death .

in the regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) accompanying the 2015 rule , epa stated that reducing concentrations to 70 ppb versus the previous standard of 75 ppb would avoid 320 to 660 premature deaths annually in 2025 nationwide ( excluding california ) .

california was excluded from epa's estimate of both costs and benefits of the nationwide standard , because most areas of the state will have until the 2030s to reach attainment of the naaqs .

california costs and benefits are presented separately in the " costs and benefits of control " section of this report .

high ozone concentrations also affect the growth of plants , causing damage to both forests and field crops .

in 2006 , the u.s. forest service examined 380 monitoring sites in the mid - atlantic and southeastern states and found visible injury to forest plants from ozone at 121 ( 32% ) of them .

at 20 of the sites , the damage was described as "severe. .

in addition , epa found that "several economically important crop species are sensitive to ozone levels typical of those found in the united states," and estimated that crop losses could be reduced by $400 million to $620 million annually by implementation of a more stringent ozone standard .

while epa's analysis has found that there would be substantial health and welfare benefits to reducing ozone , the agency also has concluded that there could be substantial costs .

in the ria , epa estimated the economic value of the benefits of reducing ozone concentrations to 70 ppb ( for areas other than california ) at $2.9-$5.9 billion annually by 2025 , with costs at $1.4 billion annually in 2025 .

the ozone naaqs are among epa's most far - reaching standards .

at the level set in march 2008 ( 75 ppb ) , 107 million people lived in areas that were designated nonattainment for the standards ( see figure 1 ) , as of june 2018 .

these 38 areas ( referred to as "nonattainment areas" ) include 168 counties in 17 states and the district of columbia .

the areas generally coincide with metropolitan areas , but may be larger or smaller .

of the 38 areas , 18 have ozone readings that indicate they have attained the standard , which would leave 20 areas with a combined population of nearly 78 million not attaining the standard .

when it promulgated the 2015 naaqs revision , epa stated that if the most recent monitoring data then available ( for the years 2012-2014 ) were used to identify nonattainment areas for the revised standards , the number of counties showing nonattainment would be 241 in 33 states and the district of columbia .

the actual nonattainment designations promulgated in 2018 are in most cases based on 2014-2016 monitoring data and include just over 200 counties or partial counties in 22 states and the district of columbia , plus two tribal areas .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

in the intervening years , the emissions that contribute to ozone formation have declined , in response to already promulgated standards for motor vehicles , gasoline , power plants , and other sources of emissions .

thus , the number of counties showing nonattainment is lower than the epa estimate released in 2015 .

the potential economic , health , and environmental impacts of a change in the ozone naaqs have led to great interest in epa's review and implementation of the standards .

to assist members and staff in evaluating the process and its potential impacts , this report provides background on naaqs , the process used to establish them , the 2008 and 2015 ozone standards , and issues that have been raised as epa implements the final rule .

naaqs are federal standards that apply to ambient ( outdoor ) air .

section 109 of the clean air act directs epa to set both primary naaqs , which are standards , "the attainment and maintenance of which in the judgment of the [epa] administrator ... are requisite to protect the public health," with "an adequate margin of safety," and secondary naaqs , which are standards necessary to protect public welfare , a broad term that includes damage to crops , vegetation , property , building materials , climate , etc .

the pollutants for which naaqs have been set are generally referred to as "criteria" pollutants .

the act defines them as pollutants that "endanger public health or welfare," and whose presence in ambient air "results from numerous or diverse mobile or stationary sources. .

six pollutants ( or categories of pollutants ) are currently identified as criteria pollutants: ozone , particulates , carbon monoxide , sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , and lead .

the epa administrator can add to this list if he determines that additional pollutants meet the definition , or delete pollutants from the list if they no longer meet the definition .

there have been no changes to the list , however , since the late 1970s .

naaqs are at the core of the clean air act even though they do not directly regulate emissions .

in essence , they are standards that define what epa considers to be clean air for the pollutant in question .

once a naaqs has been set , the agency , using monitoring data and other information submitted by the states , identifies areas that exceed the standards and must reduce pollutant concentrations ; these areas are referred to as "nonattainment areas. .

the designation process is often delayed by litigation over the standards , by epa's agreement to reconsider aspects of them , or by consultations with the states regarding the specifics of the areas to be designated .

designation of nonattainment areas for the 1997 ozone naaqs , for example , took seven years .

designations under the 2008 standards took four years .

after nonattainment areas are designated , state and local governments have up to three years to produce state implementation plans ( sips ) , which outline the measures that will reduce emission levels and attain the standards .

finalizing sips , through epa review and approval , often takes longer .

under the caa , actual attainment of the ozone naaqs is allowed to stretch over a three - year to 20-year period , depending on the severity of the area's pollution .

ozone nonattainment areas are designated as marginal , moderate , serious , severe , or extreme , depending on the level of pollution .

each of these classifications comes with required pollution control measures: the more severe the pollution , the more stringent are the required controls , and the longer the area is allowed before it must demonstrate attainment .

thus , establishment or revision of a naaqs is not an event that requires immediate compliance with an air quality standard ; rather , it sets in motion a long and complex implementation process .

that process may ultimately have far - reaching impacts for public health and welfare , for sources of pollution in numerous economic sectors , and for states and local governments .

epa has several tools available to encourage nonattainment areas to comply with a naaqs .

the most frequently mentioned of these is the potential for highway - fund sanctions: failure to submit or implement a sip adequate to attain or maintain compliance with the naaqs can lead to the temporary suspension of federal highway funds for new nonsafety - related projects .

ultimately , epa can impose a federal implementation or maintenance plan ( a fip ) in an area that does not have an approved sip .

imposition of sanctions or fips is relatively rare , however: generally the states avoid sanctions by submitting plans that require sufficient emission reductions to be deemed adequate by epa .

in addition to state and local actions to address ambient concentrations of naaqs pollutants , epa itself acts to control emissions and concentrations of criteria pollutants through national standards .

these national standards apply to products that contribute to ozone and other criteria pollution ( particularly mobile sources , such as automobiles ) and to stationary emission sources ( such as power plants ) .

these standards lead to emission reductions that states can factor into their implementation plans , reducing the need for local air pollution control measures .

section 109 ( d ) of the clean air act requires the agency to review each naaqs every five years .

that schedule is rarely met , but it often triggers lawsuits that force the agency to undertake or complete a review .

in june 2013 , the sierra club and three other groups filed suit over epa's failure to complete the required review of the 2008 ozone naaqs by the march 2013 deadline , and a court subsequently ordered epa to propose any changes to the standards by december 1 , 2014 , and complete the review , with promulgation of any revisions by october 1 , 2015 .

a historical review of the ozone naaqs and their revisions is presented in table 1 .

controlling ozone pollution is more complicated than controlling many other pollutants , because ozone generally is not emitted directly by pollution sources .

rather , it forms in the atmosphere when volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) and nitrogen oxides ( nox ) react in the presence of sunlight .

the ozone concentration is as dependent on the temperature and amount of sunshine as it is on the presence of the precursor gases .

thus , in general , ozone is a summertime pollutant .

other factors being equal , a cool , cloudy summer will produce fewer high ozone readings than a warm , sunny summer .

there are also complicated reactions that affect ozone formation .

in general , lower emissions of precursor gases ( particularly lower emissions of vocs ) lead to less ozone .

but under some conditions , higher emissions of nox lead to lower ozone readings .

this makes modeling ozone air quality and predicting attainment more difficult and contentious than the modeling of other air pollutants , and can affect consultations between epa and the states to determine the boundaries of nonattainment areas and the adequacy of sips .

most stationary and mobile sources of air pollution are considered to be contributors to ozone pollution .

thus , there are literally hundreds of millions of sources of the pollutants of concern , and control strategies require implementation of a wide array of measures .

among the sources of vocs are motor vehicles ( about one - fourth of total emissions ) , industrial processes , particularly the chemical and petroleum industries , and any use of paints , coatings , and solvents ( about 40% for these sources combined ) .

service stations , pesticide application , dry cleaning , fuel combustion , and open burning are other significant sources of vocs .

nitrogen oxides come overwhelmingly from fuel combustion by motor vehicles , electric utilities , and other industrial sources .

an emerging set of issues has arisen in regard to wintertime ozone pollution in rural areas of the western united states .

ozone is generally considered a summertime pollutant , but winter exceedances of the ozone naaqs have recently been found to occur near oil and gas fields in the west .

at times , ozone concentrations as high as those in los angeles , the nation's smoggiest city , have been found in these areas — principally the upper green river basin of wyoming , the uintah basin of utah , and a nearby area of colorado .

the mechanism of ozone formation in the areas is still being studied , but recent assessments have found that the thousands of oil and gas wells in the two basins release vocs that react with nox from oil and gas operations and coal - fired power plants to create ozone .

a study of the uintah basin by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , epa , the bureau of land management , the western energy alliance , the utah department of environmental quality , and seven universities found that sources external to the basin are not major sources of the ozone found within it , and that among inventoried sources within the basin , 98% to 99% of the vocs and 57% to 61% of the nox come from oil and gas operations .

the sunlight necessary for ozone to be created is magnified when it is reflected off of heavy snow cover .

snow cover also helps create temperature inversions that trap polluted air in the basins .

in winters with little snow , there have been few exceedances of the standards .

in 2012 , epa promulgated standards requiring the reduction of voc emissions from new and modified oil and gas production and transmission operations , including a requirement to use "green completions" on hydraulically fractured onshore natural gas wells .

in 2016 , these standards were extended to cover hydraulically fractured oil wells .

further , in 2015 , epa proposed control techniques guidelines intended to provide state , local , and tribal air agencies with information to assist them in determining "reasonably available control technology" for reducing voc emissions from existing oil and natural gas sources in ozone nonattainment areas and states in the ozone transport region .

 ( for a discussion , see crs report r42986 , methane and other air pollution issues in natural gas systems , by richard k .

lattanzio. ) .

the impact of these regulations on wintertime ozone concentrations is yet to be determined , but interestingly the upper green river basin , which was designated nonattainment under the 2008 ozone naaqs , has been designated attainment for the 2015 standard .

as noted elsewhere in this report ( " the role of cost ," below ) , epa is prohibited by statute from taking cost into account in setting naaqs .

despite that prohibition , in order to comply with an executive order ( e.o .

12866 ) , the agency produces a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) analyzing in detail the costs and benefits of new or revised naaqs standards when the naaqs are proposed and promulgated .

the 2015 ozone naaqs review has raised issues regarding the cost of attainment , background ozone levels , and the schedule for naaqs reviews .

the adequacy of the ozone monitoring network and the role of federal versus state and local pollution control measures are other important issues .

more recently , epa cited concerns about naaqs review and implementation and identified "naaqs reform" as one of four initiatives that the agency plans to undertake to reduce "unnecessary burdens on the development and use of domestic energy resources. .

in particular , epa's "back - to - basics" memorandum identified principles to guide forthcoming naaqs reviews .

among other things , epa seeks to streamline the naaqs review process and obtain clean air scientific advisory committee advice regarding background pollution and potential adverse effects from naaqs compliance strategies .

epa has also formed the "ozone cooperative compliance task force" to review issues related to the ozone naaqs and that the task force "is reviewing administrative options to enable states to enter into cooperative agreements with epa to provide regulatory relief and meaningfully improve ozone air quality. .

congress took an interest in what became the 2015 ozone standard even before a proposal was released .

three bills introduced in the 113 th congress would have affected the timing and / or epa's authority to promulgate an ozone naaqs .

in the 114 th congress , which followed proposal of the standards , there were 15 bills or resolutions introduced to address the revision of the ozone ( and , in some cases , other ) naaqs .

two of the bills , h.r .

4775 and h.r .

5538 ( §438 ) , passed the house , but were not acted on by the senate .

in the 115 th congress , as of the august recess , six bills had been introduced that would affect the timing and / or epa's authority to promulgate an ozone naaqs s. 263 ( senator capito ) / h.r .

806 ( representative olson ) , the ozone standards implementation act , would delay the deadline for designation of nonattainment areas under the 2015 ozone naaqs revision until october 2025 and the date for state implementation plan revisions under the standard until october 2026 ; would require future reviews of the naaqs at 10-year rather than five - year intervals ; would allow the administrator to consider , as a secondary consideration , likely technological feasibility in establishing and revising primary naaqs in cases where the administrator concludes that a range of levels of air quality for a pollutant are requisite to protect public health with an adequate margin of safety ; would require the administrator to publish regulations and guidance for implementing a new or revised naaqs concurrently with the publication of the standard ; would make changes to epa's authority to exclude from air quality monitoring data used to determine attainment of naaqs certain data influenced by "exceptional events" ; would require a report to congress on the impact of emissions originating outside the united states on attainment and maintenance of naaqs ; and other provisions .

h.r .

806 , but not s. 263 , would require an epa report to congress on ozone formation , including the factors contributing to winter ozone formation , and effective control strategies , and would require epa to incorporate the report's results into regulations and guidance implementing the 2015 ozone naaqs .

h.r .

806 was reported by the energy and commerce committee on july 14 , 2017 ; the bill passed the house on july 18 , 2017 .

s. 452 ( senator flake ) , the ordeal act of 2017 , would delay the enforcement and implementation of the 2015 ozone naaqs until january 1 , 2025 , and would require future reviews at 10-year rather than five - year intervals .

s. 1203 ( senator hatch ) would require the epa administrator to establish a program under which he shall defer the designation of an area as a nonattainment area for the eight - hour ozone naaqs if the area achieves and maintains certain standards under a voluntary early action compact plan .

h.r .

958 ( representative sam johnson ) , the wasteful epa programs elimination act of 2017 , would provide that no funds made available under any act may be used by epa to implement any ozone standard promulgated after its date of enactment , among other provisions .

h.r .

3354 ( representative calvert ) , the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriation act , 2018 , in section 432 would delay the deadlines for designation of nonattainment areas under the 2015 ozone naaqs revision until october 2025 and the date for state implementation plan revisions under the standard until october 2026 .

the bill was reported by the appropriations committee on july 21 , 2017 .

the ozone naaqs has also been challenged in court .

twenty - six parties , including 10 states , have challenged the standards in the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia ( d.c .

circuit ) .

a nearly equal number of parties , including six states and the district of columbia , have sided with epa .

oral argument in the case ( murray energy v. epa ) was scheduled for april 19 , 2017 , but 12 days before the argument , epa requested a delay in the proceedings to review the standards .

the court granted the agency's request to delay the oral argument and held the case in abeyance pending further orders .

epa was required to file status reports with the d.c .

circuit every 90 days as it reviewed the rule .

on august 1 , 2018 , epa notified the court that it does not intend to revisit the 2015 standard .

the agency also reported that it has begun the next ozone naaqs review , which will implement the principles from its may 2018 "back - to - basics" memorandum , and that it intends to complete this ozone naaqs review by 2020 .

in addition , lawsuits have been filed challenging epa's final designation of an area in wisconsin as attainment — after proposing to designate it nonattainment — with respect to the 2015 standard .

