the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , enacted in 1938 , is the federal legislation that establishes the general minimum wage that must be paid to all covered workers .

a full discussion of the coverage of the minimum wage is beyond the scope of this report , which provides only a broad overview of the topic .

in general , th e flsa mandates broad general minimum wage coverage .

it also specifies certain categories of workers who are not covered by flsa wage standards , such as workers with disabilities or certain youth workers .

the act was enacted because its provisions were meant to both protect workers and stimulate the economy .

the flsa also created the wage and hour division ( whd ) , within the department of labor ( dol ) , to administer and enforce the act .

in 1938 , the flsa established a minimum wage of $0.25 per hour .

the minimum wage provisions of the flsa have been amended numerous times since then , typically for the purpose of expanding coverage or raising the wage rate .

since its establishment , the minimum wage rate has been raised 22 separate times .

the most recent change was enacted in 2007 ( p.l .

110-28 ) , which increased the minimum wage from $5.15 per hour to its current rate of $7.25 per hour in three steps .

for employees working in states with a minimum wage different from that of the federal minimum wage , the employee is entitled to the higher wage of the two .

the flsa extends minimum wage coverage to individuals under two types of coverage — "enterprise coverage" and "individual coverage. .

an individual is covered if they meet the criteria for either category .

around 130 million workers , or 84% of the labor force , are covered by the flsa .

the most recent data available ( 2016 ) indicate that there are approximately 2.2 million workers , or 2.7% of all hourly paid workers , whose wages are at or below the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour .

of these 2.2 million workers , approximately 700,000 earn the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour , and the other 1.5 million earn below the federal minimum wage .

as the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) notes , the large number of individuals earning less than the statutory minimum wage does not necessarily indicate violations of the flsa but may reflect exemptions or misreporting .

the "typical" minimum wage earner tends to be female , age 20 or older , part - time , and working in a food service occupation .

the data in table 1 below show selected characteristics of the workers earning at or below the federal minimum wage .

the data are based on the universe of the estimated 2.2 million workers who earn $7.25 per hour or less .

states may also choose to set labor standards that are different from federal statutes .

the flsa establishes that if states enact minimum wage , overtime , or child labor laws more protective of employees than those provided in the flsa , the state law applies .

in the case of minimum wages , this means that if an individual is covered by the flsa in a state with a higher state minimum wage , the individual is entitled to receive the higher state minimum wage .

on the other hand , some states have set minimum wages lower than the flsa minimum .

in those cases , an flsa - covered worker would receive the flsa minimum wage and not the lower state minimum wage .

as of january 1 , 2017 , 29 states and the district of columbia have minimum wage rates above the federal rate of $7.25 per hour .

these rates range from $7.50 per hour in new mexico to $11.00 in massachusetts and washington state and $12.50 in washington , dc .

two states have minimum wage rates below the federal rate and five have no minimum wage requirement .

the remaining 14 states have minimum wage rates equal to the federal rate .

in the states with no minimum wage requirements or wages lower than the federal minimum wage , only individuals who are not covered by the flsa are subject to those lower rates .

the literature on the effects of the minimum wage is vast and represents one of the more well - studied issues in labor economics .

as such , this topic has resulted in hundreds of academic and non - academic publications .

it is beyond the scope of this section to summarize or synthesize this literature .

broadly speaking , there is not universal consensus on the causal relationship between changes in minimum wage and other economic outcomes .

this section presents a brief summary of the primary arguments that proponents and opponents make regarding minimum wage increases .

proponents of an increase in the minimum wage often assert that raising wages can be a component in reducing poverty for individuals and families and a direct way to increase earnings for lower - income workers .

assuming the minimum wage earner does not suffer a loss of employment , hours , or other wage supplements as a result of the increase , then an increased minimum wage should close the gap between earnings and the poverty line .

for example , a single parent with two children who works full - time , year - round at the current minimum wage has earnings of about 78% of the poverty line .

an increase in the minimum wage to $9 per hour would raise that family's earnings to about 97% of the poverty line and an increase to $12 per hour would increase family earnings to 129% of the poverty line .

proponents of minimum wage increases also argue that additional income for individuals will result in increased aggregate demand in the economy .

adult minimum wage households have a higher marginal propensity to spend additional income than higher - income households .

therefore , to the extent that minimum wage increases raise the income of adult minimum wage households , a minimum wage increase could have a stimulative effect on the economy .

proponents of an increase in the minimum wage argue that it could help reduce earnings inequality by setting a higher floor at the lower end of the wage scale .

at the level of an individual business , wage compression might occur if the minimum wage increases at the low end of the pay scale were offset by freezes or reductions in pay at higher levels of pay .

that is , the spread between the lowest earners and the highest earners at a business might narrow if the business adjusted to higher pay for minimum wage earners by keeping flat or reducing pay for higher earners .

economy - wide , the size of the gap between low - wage earners and middle and high earners might decrease depending on how widely wage compression was used as a channel of adjustment to minimum wage increases .

a higher wage may lead workers to choose to stay in their jobs longer than they otherwise would have under a lower wage .

because high turnover is costly to businesses , proponents of minimum wage increases argue that an increase in the minimum wage may be offset by lower turnover costs .

much of the popular discussion about the effects of a minimum wage increase focuses only on one channel of adjustment — employment .

in particular , opponents of a minimum wage or of minimum wage increases assert that increases in the minimum wage will result in increased unemployment , either broadly or for particular subpopulations of the labor market ( eg , youth , less skilled or experienced workers ) , or a reduction in hours worked .

in a standard competitive model of the labor market , the introduction of or increase in the minimum wage ( a price increase ) results in employment losses ( demand decrease ) .

because the minimum wage is not targeted to workers in low - income households , it is possible that the minimum wage does not reduce poverty to the extent a targeted policy might ( eg , tax credit ) .

the minimum wage is a relatively blunt anti - poverty policy as it may raise wages for people not in poverty such as suburban teenagers who live in a middle - or high - income household .

another way minimum wage increases might be absorbed is through changes in prices .

specifically , employers facing a higher mandated minimum wage might choose , if possible , to pass on the extra costs of labor to the consumers through higher prices .

if minimum wage increases result in an increase in the aggregate price level , then the inflationary effects would erode some of the purchasing power of both those receiving raises and everyone else in the economy .

a decrease in profits could be another means of adjustment to an increase in the minimum wage .

the ability of any given business to lower profits to pay for mandated increases depends on the profit margins of that firm .

