the central issue addressed by this report is how much congress should consider appropriating for the continued sustainment and modernization of the b - 52 , b - 1 , and b - 2 bombers over the remainder of their service lives .

many military experts note the advanced age of the united states' long - range bomber fleet .

the b - 52h stratofortress , b - 1b lancer , and b - 2a spirit are now about 50 , 28 , and 20 years old respectively .

in fact , air force global strike command declared 2012 the "year of the b - 52" in honor of the 50 th anniversary of the last delivery of a b - 52 and the 60 th anniversary of the first test flight of the yb - 52 .

the b - 1b celebrated its 25 th anniversary in 2010 .

the last b - 2 delivery was in 1997 .

although the department of defense and the air force are committed to the development and fielding of a new long - range strike - bomber ( lrs - b ) , flight - testing of the new bomber will likely not start until the mid - 2020s .

initial development of the b - 2 began in the early 1980s and the first aircraft was delivered on december 17 , 1993 .

if the b - 2 experience is the norm , potential delivery of the first operational lrs - b may be expected sometime in the 2030 timeframe .

with this in mind , can the u.s. air force's b - 52hs , b - 1bs , and b - 2as physically last and continue to be credible weapon systems until the lrs - b is fielded ? .

more importantly , does the nation's "legacy" bomber force possess the capabilities required to meet national security strategy objectives , especially in the face of potential adversaries possessing advanced , 21 st century anti - access / area - denial ( a2 / ad ) weapon systems ? .

the u.s. air force and aerospace industry's answer is "yes," provided sufficient sustainment and modernization funding is available over the remaining lifespan of these weapon systems .

without sufficient sustainment and modernization funding , many analysts argue the u.s. bomber fleet will quickly become a decrepit force ill - suited to the potential challenges posed by 21 st century adversaries .

the average age of the bomber force is 33 .

because of the physical wear - and - tear placed on these aircraft from the demands of military flight — compounded by 11 years of continuous combat — aging airframe structures need reinforcement , engines need to be replaced , and computer and electronic components need upgrading .

even if corrosion , metal fatigue , and parts obsolescence do not take their toll on the fleet , military analysts point out that potential adversaries are acquiring advanced , a2 / ad weapon systems that would make it harder for the bombers to reach their targets , thus relegating them to a "standoff" weapons employment role .

but even "standoff" weapons have their limits , especially against deeply buried and / or hardened targets found in places like north korea and iran .

consequently , most experts agree all three bombers are in need of upgrades to their systems in order to counter a2 / ad - equipped adversaries and require constant operational research and testing to evaluate and incorporate new and modern weapons into their arsenal .

this report addresses potential congressional oversight and appropriations concerns for the sustainment and modernization of the u.s. air force's bomber force .

it does not address air force efforts to develop and acquire the proposed lrs - b .

congressional interest in this subject stems from congress's authority to approve , reject , or modify air force funding requests for bomber sustainment and modernization , as well as their oversight of the nation's long - range strike requirements and capabilities .

in addition , sustainment , modernization , and size of the bomber force have been perennial legislative topics since the early 1990s .

as the air force progresses through development and acquisition of the lrs - b and begins the gradual phase - out of 50-year - old bombers , it is anticipated that congress will continue dealing with bomber sustainment and modernization legislation .

congress's decisions on appropriations for the bomber force could impact the nation's long - range strike capabilities and have additional consequences for the u.s. aerospace industry .

a key issue for congress is whether to continue providing sustainment and modernization funding for the air force's b - 52h , b - 1b , and b - 2a bombers , and if so , at what levels .

pertinent to the discussion is the potential for a shortfall in the nation's long - range strike capabilities if congress or the air force chooses to minimize funding for sustainment and upgrades that would keep these weapon systems viable against a2 / ad - equipped adversaries .

also , given air force plans to keep the b - 52 and b - 1 flying well beyond 2030 , congress may consider whether current bomber sustainment and modernization plans will meet the nation's long - range strike requirements until the lrs - b is operational .

additionally , congress may also consider whether the planned 80-100 lrs - bs will adequately replace the capabilities lost as the legacy bombers start retiring from service in the 2030s .

congress's oversight and decisions on these issues could also have implications for any potential future base realignment and closure ( brac ) decisions as well as impact the u.s. aircraft manufacturing industrial base .

ultimately , the priority the air force places on bomber sustainment and modernization , and any decisions considered by congress , could have potential consequences for future national defense strategies and on u.s. long - range strike capabilities .

 figure 7 depicts historical authorizations and appropriations for b - 52h , b - 1b , and b - 2 sustainment and modernization .

dollar amounts include funds authorized / appropriated in the "procurement" and "research , development , test and evaluation" sections as well as any funds authorized / appropriated for sustainment and modernization efforts directly tied to "overseas contingency operations" provided for in national defense authorization and appropriations acts from fy2002 to fy2013 .

figure 8 is a side - by - side graphical comparison of historical appropriations for all three bombers .

figure 9 is an overlay of historical appropriations for all three bombers and their average yearly mission capable rate .

mission capable rate is defined as the percentage of aircraft in each of the bomber fleet components that are capable of performing its intended wartime mission .

the follow is a brief summary of legislative actions involving u.s. air force bomber sustainment and modernization from fiscal years 2011 through 2013 .

it also highlights congress's interest in the potential threat posed by countries seeking to implement anti - access / area denial capabilities and strategies .

the complete legislative language for each of these efforts can be found in appendix e .

in the wake of fiscal constraints levied by the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 / s. 365 ) and the implementation of sequestration on march 1 , 2013 , congress and the air force will be faced with difficult decisions regarding fiscal appropriations for bomber sustainment and modernization .

the impacts of these fiscal measures on bomber appropriations can already be seen with implementation of the fy2013 defense budget .

from fy2002 through fy2012 , the sustainment and modernization appropriations for the b - 52 , b - 1 , and b - 2 averaged $160.15 million , $219.77 million , and $451.2 million per year respectively .

for the fy2013 budget , appropriations for the b - 52 were $63 million , down 61% from the prior 11-year average and the lowest amount appropriated since fy2002 .

fy2013 appropriations for the b - 1 were $167 million , down 24% from the prior 11-year average and also the lowest amount appropriated since fy2002 .

the b - 2 was the only bomber not affected by the budget cuts in fy2013 with $447 million appropriated , a drop of only 1% from the prior 11-year average .

meanwhile , potential foes and long - time allies in the asia - pacific are undergoing major ( in some cases unprecedented ) expansions of their defense capabilities in order to secure or expand their diplomatic , economic , and strategic influence in the region .

the result is an increase in the proliferation of advanced 21 st century weapon systems and a trend of countries adopting a2 / ad strategies to secure their national interests .

nevertheless , time and time again , the united states turns to its long - range bomber force as means of flexing its deterrent muscle , as it did most recently in response to renewed threats of war by north korean leader kim jong un .

in march and april of 2013 , the united states sent b - 52s and b - 2s on short - notice deployments for exercises with south korean forces and for shows - of - force over the korean peninsula as a visible signal to kim jong un that such threats by the north's regime will not go unchecked .

however , as potential a2 / ad equipped adversaries throughout the world become more prevalent and more capable , the question remains: will the air force's legacy bomber force keep pace with sustainment and modernization efforts in order to remain a credible response to such adversaries , or will they become increasingly irrelevant because the nation cannot afford them ? .

in large part , decisions by congress will determine just how much longer the b - 52 , b - 1 , and b - 2 will remain relevant , and ultimately , will likely determine the future of the nation's long - range strike capabilities .

appendix a .

existing bomber force this appendix presents additional information on the u.s. air force's existing fleet of b - 52h , b - 1b , and b - 2 bombers .

52h stratofortress mission the b - 52h is a long - range , heavy bomber that can perform a variety of missions .

the bomber is capable of flying at high subsonic speeds at altitudes up to 50,000 feet ( 15,166.6 meters ) .

it can carry nuclear or precision guided conventional ordnance with worldwide precision navigation capability .

features in a conventional conflict , the b - 52h can perform strategic attack , close - air support , air interdiction , offensive counter - air , and maritime operations .

during desert storm , b - 52s delivered 40% of all the weapons dropped by coalition forces .

it is also capable of ocean surveillance , and can assist the u.s. navy in anti - ship and mine - laying operations .

two b - 52hs , in two hours , can monitor 140,000 square miles ( 364,000 square kilometers ) of ocean surface .

all b - 52hs can be equipped with two electro - optical viewing sensors , a forward - looking infrared camera , and an advanced targeting pod , to augment targeting , battle assessment , and flight safety .

pilots wear night vision goggles , or nvgs , to enhance their vision during night operations .

night vision goggles provide greater safety during night operations by increasing the pilot's ability to visually clear terrain , avoid enemy radar , and see other aircraft in a lights - out environment .

starting in 1989 , on - going modifications incorporate the global positioning system , heavy stores adapter beams for carrying 2,000 pound munitions , and a full array of advance weapons currently under development .

the use of aerial refueling gives the b - 52h a range limited only by crew endurance .

it has an unrefueled combat range in excess of 8,800 miles ( 14,080 kilometers ) .

background the b - 52h is capable of dropping or launching a wide array of weapons .

this includes gravity bombs , cluster bombs , precision guided missiles , and joint direct attack munitions .

updated with modern technology the b - 52h will be capable of delivering the full complement of joint developed weapons .

current engineering analyses show the b - 52h's life span to extend beyond the year 2040 .

the b - 52a first flew in 1954 , and the b model entered service in 1955 .

a total of 744 b - 52s were built with the last , a b - 52h , delivered in october 1962 .

the first of 102 b - 52hs was delivered to strategic air command in may 1961 .

the h model can carry up to 20 air launched cruise missiles .

in addition , it can carry the conventional cruise missile that was launched in several contingencies during the 1990s , starting with operation desert storm and culminating with operation iraqi freedom .

in operations desert storm and allied force , b - 52s struck wide - area troop concentrations , fixed installations and bunkers , and decimated the morale of iraq's republican guard .

on september 2 and 3 , 1996 , two b - 52h's struck baghdad power stations and communications facilities with 13 agm - 86c conventional air launched cruise missiles , or calcms , as part of operation desert strike .

at the time , this mission was the longest distance flown for a combat mission , involving a 34-hour , 16,000 statute mile , round trip from barksdale air force base , la .

in 2001 , the b - 52h contributed to operation enduring freedom by loitering high above the battlefield and providing close air support through the use of precision guided munitions .

the b - 52h also played a role in operation iraqi freedom .

on march 21 , 2003 , b - 52hs launched approximately 100 calcms during a night mission .

only the h model is still in the air force inventory and is assigned to the 5 th bomb wing at minot afb , nd , and the 2 nd bomb wing at barksdale afb , la , which fall under air force global strike command .

the aircraft is also assigned to the air force reserve command's 307 th bomb wing at barksdale .

general characteristics primary function: heavy bomber contractor: boeing military airplane co. power plant: eight pratt & whitney engines tf33-p - 3 / 103 turbofan thrust: each engine up to 17,000 pounds wingspan: 185 feet ( 56.4 meters ) length: 159 feet , 4 inches ( 48.5 meters ) height: 40 feet , 8 inches ( 12.4 meters ) weight: approximately 185,000 pounds ( 83,250 kilograms ) maximum takeoff weight: 488,000 pounds ( 219,600 kilograms ) fuel capacity: 312,197 pounds ( 141,610 kilograms ) payload: 70,000 pounds ( 31,500 kilograms ) speed: 650 miles per hour ( mach 0.86 ) range: 8,800 miles ( 7,652 nautical miles ) ceiling: 50,000 feet ( 15,151.5 meters ) armament: approximately 70,000 pounds ( 31,500 kilograms ) mixed ordnance — bombs , mines , and missiles .

 ( modified to carry air - launched cruise missiles ) crew: five ( aircraft commander , pilot , radar navigator , navigator , and electronic warfare officer ) unit cost: $53.4 million ( fy1998 constant dollars ) initial operating capability: april 1952 inventory: active force , 76 ; ang , 0 ; reserve , 9 b - 1b lancer mission carrying the largest payload of both guided and unguided weapons in the air force inventory , the multi - mission b - 1 can rapidly deliver massive quantities of precision and non - precision weapons .

features the b - 1b's blended wing and body configuration , variable - geometry wings , and turbofan afterburning engines combine to provide long range , maneuverability , and high speed while enhancing survivability .

forward wing settings are used for takeoff , landings , air refueling , and in some high - altitude weapons employment scenarios .

aft wing sweep settings — the main combat configuration — are typically used during high subsonic and supersonic flight , enhancing the b - 1b's maneuverability in the low - and high - altitude regimes .

the b - 1b's speed and handling characteristics , large payload , radar targeting system , long loiter time , and survivability allow it to integrate with almost any joint / composite strike force .

the b - 1b is a multi - mission weapon system .

its synthetic aperture radar is capable of tracking , targeting , and engaging moving vehicles as well as self - targeting and terrain - following modes .

in addition , an extremely accurate global positioning system - aided inertial navigation system enables aircrews to navigate without the aid of ground - based navigation aids as well as engage targets with a high level of precision .

combat track ii data link radios provide a secure , beyond - line - of - sight reach back connectivity for command and control and in - flight re - tasking / re - targeting .

in a time sensitive targeting environment , the aircrew can use targeting data from the combined air operations center over combat track ii to strike emerging targets .

the b - 1b's onboard self - protection electronic jamming equipment , radar warning receiver , expendable countermeasures , and a towed decoy system complement its low - radar cross - section to form an integrated defense system that supports penetration of hostile airspace .

the electronic countermeasures system detects and identifies adversary threat radars and then applies the appropriate jamming technique either automatically or through operator inputs .

current b - 1b sustainment and modernization efforts build on this foundation .

radar sustainability and capability upgrades will provide a more reliable system and may be upgraded in the future to include an ultra - high - resolution capability and automatic target recognition .

the addition of a fully integrated data link , or fidl , will add link - 16 line - of - sight data link communications capability .

fidl combined with associated cockpit upgrades will provide the crew with a much more flexible , integrated cockpit .

several obsolete and hard to maintain electronic systems are also being replaced to improve aircraft reliability .

background the b - 1a was initially developed in the 1970s as a replacement for the b - 52 .

four prototypes of this long - range , high speed ( mach 2.2 ) strategic bomber were developed and tested in the mid - 1970s , but the program was canceled in 1977 before going into production .

flight testing continued through 1981 .

the b - 1b is an improved variant initiated by the reagan administration in 1981 .

major changes included the addition of additional structure to increase payload by 74,000 pounds , an improved radar , and reduction of the aircraft's radar cross section ( rcs ) by an order of magnitude .

the engine inlets were extensively modified as part of this rcs reduction , necessitating a reduction in maximum speed to mach 1.2 .

the first production b - 1b flew in october 1984 , and the first aircraft was delivered to dyess air force base , texas , in june 1985 .

initial operational capability was achieved on october 1 , 1986 .

the final b - 1b was delivered may 2 , 1988 .

the b - 1b was first used in combat in support of operations against iraq during operation desert fox in december 1998 .

in 1999 , six b - 1bs were used in operation allied force , delivering more than 20% of the total ordnance while flying less than 2% of the combat sorties .

during the first six months of operation enduring freedom , eight b - 1bs dropped nearly 40% of the total tonnage delivered by coalition air forces .

this included nearly 3,900 joint direct attack munitions ( jdams ) , or 67% of the total .

in operation iraqi freedom , the aircraft flew less than 1% of the combat missions while delivering 43% of the jdams used .

the b - 1 continues to be deployed today , flying missions daily in support of continuing operations .

general characteristics primary function: long - range , multi - role , heavy bomber contractor: boeing , north america ( formerly rockwell international , north american aircraft ) ; offensive avionics , boeing military airplane ; defensive avionics , edo corporation power plant: four general electric f101-ge - 102 turbofan engine with afterburner thrust: 30,000-plus pounds with afterburner , per engine wingspan: 137 feet ( 41.8 meters ) extended forward , 79 feet ( 24.1 meters ) swept aft length: 146 feet ( 44.5 meters ) height: 34 feet ( 10.4 meters ) weight: approximately 190,000 pounds ( 86,183 kilograms ) maximum takeoff weight: 477,000 pounds ( 216,634 kilograms ) fuel capacity: 265,274 pounds ( 120,326 kilograms ) payload: 75,000 pounds ( 34,019 kilograms ) speed: 900-plus mph ( mach 1.2 at sea level ) range: intercontinental ceiling: more than 30,000 feet ( 9,144 meters ) armament: 84 500-pound mk - 82 or 24 2,000-pound mk - 84 general purpose bombs ; up to 84 500-pound mk - 62 or 8 2,000-pound mk - 65 quick strike naval mines ; 30 cluster munitions ( cbu - 87 , - 89 , - 97 ) or 30 wind - corrected munitions dispensers ( cbu - 103 , - 104 , - 105 ) ; up to 24 2,000-pound gbu - 31 or 15 500-pound gbu - 38 joint direct attack munitions ; up to 24 agm - 158a joint air - to - surface standoff missiles ; gbu - 54 laser joint direct attack munition crew: four ( aircraft commander , copilot , and two weapon systems officers ) unit cost: $283.1 million ( fiscal 98 constant dollars ) initial operating capability: october 1986 inventory: active force , 63 ( test , 2 ) ; ang , 0 ; reserve , 0 b - 2 spirit mission the b - 2 spirit is a multi - role bomber capable of delivering both conventional and nuclear munitions .

features along with the b - 52h and the b - 1b , the b - 2 provides the penetrating flexibility and effectiveness inherent in manned bombers .

its low - observable , or "stealth," characteristics give it the ability to penetrate an enemy's most sophisticated defenses and threaten its most valued , and heavily defended , targets .

the blending of low - observable technologies with high aerodynamic efficiency and large payload gives the b - 2 important advantages over existing bombers .

its low observability provides it greater freedom of action at high altitudes , thus increasing its range and providing a better field of view for the aircraft's sensors .

its unrefueled range is approximately 6,000 nautical miles ( 9,600 kilometers ) .

the b - 2's low observability is derived from a combination of reduced infrared , acoustic , electromagnetic , visual , and radar signatures .

these signatures make it difficult for sophisticated defensive systems to detect , track , and engage the b - 2 .

many aspects of the low observability process remain classified ; however , the b - 2's composite materials , special coatings , and flying - wing design all contribute to its "stealthiness. .

the b - 2 has a crew of two pilots: an aircraft commander in the left seat and a mission commander in the right .

background the first b - 2 was publicly displayed on november 22 , 1988 , when it was rolled out of its hangar at air force plant 42 , palmdale , ca .

its first flight was july 17 , 1989 .

the b - 2 combined test force , air force flight test center , edwards air force base , ca , is responsible for flight testing , engineering , manufacturing , and development of the b - 2 .

whiteman afb , mo , is the only operational base for the b - 2 .

the first aircraft , spirit of missouri , was delivered december 17 , 1993 .

depot maintenance responsibility for the b - 2 is performed by air force contractor support and is managed at the oklahoma city air logistics center at tinker afb , ok .

in operation allied force , the b - 2 was responsible for destroying 33% of all serbian targets in the first eight weeks , by flying nonstop to kosovo from its home base in missouri and back .

in support of operation enduring freedom , the b - 2 flew one of its longest missions to date from whiteman to afghanistan and back .

the b - 2 completed its first - ever combat deployment in support of operation iraqi freedom , flying 22 sorties from a forward operating location as well as 27 sorties from whiteman afb and releasing more than 1.5 million pounds of munitions .

the aircraft received full operational capability status in december 2003 .

on february 1 , 2009 , the air force's newest command , air force global strike command , assumed responsibility for the b - 2 from air combat command .

the prime contractor , responsible for overall system design and integration , is northrop grumman integrated systems sector .

boeing military airplanes co. , hughes radar systems group , general electric aircraft engine group , and vought aircraft industries , inc. , are key members of the aircraft contractor team .

general characteristics primary function: multi - role heavy bomber contractor: northrop grumman corp. and contractor team: boeing military airplanes co. , hughes radar systems group , general electric aircraft engine group , and vought aircraft industries , inc. power plant: four general electric f118-ge - 100 engines thrust: 17,300 pounds each engine wingspan: 172 feet ( 52.12 meters ) length: 69 feet ( 20.9 meters ) height: 17 feet ( 5.1 meters weight: 160,000 pounds ( 72,575 kilograms ) maximum takeoff weight: 336,500 pounds ( 152,634 kilograms ) fuel capacity: 167,000 pounds ( 75750 kilograms ) payload: 40,000 pounds ( 18,144 kilograms ) speed: high subsonic range: intercontinental ceiling: 50,000 feet ( 15,240 meters ) armament: conventional or nuclear weapons crew: two pilots unit cost: approximately $1.157 billion ( fiscal 98 constant dollars ) initial operating capability: april 1997 inventory: active force: 20 ( 1 test ) ; ang: 0 ; reserve: 0 appendix b .

plans for b - 52h bomber sustainment and modernization b - 52h master plan and requirements the b - 5 h 2 bomber master plan outlines air force global strike command's ( afgsc's ) plans , programs , requirements , and strategic vision for the b - 52 platform to meet the nation's airborne strategic nuclear deterrence and global precision attack mission objectives .

near - term modernization and sustainment efforts are identified for the time period 2012 to 2018 .

far - term modernization and sustainment efforts are identified as those required in the 2019 to 2032 time period .

afgsc director of plans , programs and requirements ( hq afgsc a5 / 8 ) is responsible for producing and updating the master plan .

assumptions the b - 52h bomber master plan is based on the following assumptions: the b - 52h will conduct its assigned nuclear mission through 2040 .

the b - 52h will continue to conduct its assigned conventional mission through 2040 .

the b - 52h fleet size will consist of not more than 76 airframes through 2040 .

conversion of a required number of b - 52hs to a conventional - only role by 2018 for new start compliance .

the current b - 52h service life goal is 2040 .

there will be no change to current b - 52h basing .

unfunded risks and issues require prioritization and validation through the resource allocation and pom ( program objectives memorandum ) process .

the nuclear enterprise will continue to be a top priority for the air force and the primary mission of air force global strike command .

current b - 52h sustainment and modernization efforts the following is a summary of b - 52h sustainment and modernization initiatives currently in the program of record ( por ) that are either just being completed or are currently in progress .

 ( asterisks denote sustainment and modernization efforts that could be considered essential to the b - 52h's ability to operate in a2 / ad threat environments. ) .

* combat network communications technology ( conect ) : the b - 52 conect acquisition program supports nuclear and conventional operations by upgrading the b - 52 fleet with tactical datalink and voice communications capability along with improved threat and situational awareness to support participation in network centric operations .

* military - standard - 1760 modernization: improves the b - 52's conventional warfare capability with additional mil - std - 1760 smart weapons and improved weapons carriage and fully integrates advanced targeting pods with the b - 52's offensive avionics system .

b - 52 trainer upgrades: includes modernization upgrades to b - 52 training devices to support aircrew and maintenance training with the latest b - 52 capabilities .

upgrades and modernizations under this program ensure weapons system trainers ( simulators ) are current with ongoing b - 52 modifications .

arms control: arms control activities under the new start create the need to modify a number of b - 52s to a conventional only role by removing the aircraft's nuclear code enable switch and associated equipment .

this effort requires a complete design to remove the equipment from the aircraft and install metal plates prohibiting reinstallation of removed equipment to comply with treaty protocols .

* mode s / 5 identification friend or foe ( iff ) : the mode s / 5 program replaces the b - 52's aging apx - 64 iff transponder with a modern apx - 119 transponder .

mode s / 5 iff is required for flight by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , and the dod .

low cost modifications: miscellaneous , low - cost modernization efforts that stem from the operation and maintenance of a 50-plus - year - old aircraft , such as parts obsolescence , diminishing manufacturing resources , and emerging requirements to add or maintain the existing b - 52 capabilities .

b - 52 anti - skid replacement: the b - 52 anti - skid system is used to maintain control of the aircraft during landing and taxi operations by preventing aircraft skidding .

this modification replaces the current anti - skid system with an updated system that resolves obsolescence issues .

if not upgraded , the unsupportability of the current anti - skid system is projected to affect aircraft availability starting in 2015 .

* b - 52 modernization research development test and evaluation efforts: b - 52 modernization rdt&e efforts is a comprehensive program to ensure the b - 52's ability to perform current and future wartime missions .

it includes upgrades to data links , navigation , sensors , weapons , and electronic warfare and training capabilities .

* 1760 internal weapons bay upgrade ( iwbu ) : the 1760 iwbu modification allows the b - 52 to carry j - series weapons such as the joint direct attack munitions ( jdam ) , joint air - to - surface standoff missile ( jassm ) , jassm - er ( extended range ) , and miniature air launched decoy ( mald ) weapons in the b - 52's internal weapons bay .

future b - 52h sustainment and modernization requirements while the current b - 52h weapon system is capable of meeting today's strategic deterrence and conventional taskings , it may require continued sustainment and modernization efforts to remain airworthy and viable against 21 st century a2 / ad threats .

for the b - 52h to continue meeting mission requirements , air force global strike command recommends considering the following modernization and sustainment efforts for future appropriations consideration .

these efforts are organized into five broad categories: airframe , avionics , communications systems , weapons interfaces , and supporting infrastructure .

a detailed explanation of each category's specific recommendations can be found in the b - 52h's master plan .

airframe: the airframe is comprised of structural components , engines , flight controls , and miscellaneous mechanical systems .

several b - 52 airframe subsystems such as the existing b - 52 analog yaw electronic control unit / pitch electronic control unit and the anti - skid control unit within the anti - skid system are becoming unsupportable due to parts obsolescence , lack of test equipment , specialized tools , troubleshooting guides , and experienced repair personnel .

continued full funding for these programs could mitigate these problems .

avionics systems: avionics systems are comprised of defensive systems , offensive systems , and navigation systems .

several avionics subsystems are suffering from obsolescence and supportability issues .

for example , the current radar antenna was never upgraded , uses 1950s technology and is projected to become unsupportable in the near future .

in addition , the electronic warfare ( ew ) suite is experiencing parts obsolescence , diminishing manufacturing sources , and ineffectiveness against the technologically advancing a2 / ad threats .

communications systems: communications systems are comprised of cryptographic , tactical , emergency , and survivable subsystems .

the biggest near - term communications concern involves the family of advanced beyond line - of - sight terminals .

delays in the program are putting the extremely high - frequency ( ehf ) program at risk by not meeting u.s. strategic command's ( usstratcom ) need dates based on projected military strategic and tactical relay satellite ( milstar ) ultra high frequency satellite communications ( uhf satcom ) end - of - life projections .

further delays will impact the b - 52's ability to receive emergency action messages ( eams ) and report - backs in support of usstratcom's nuclear command and control requirements .

longer - term communications concerns involve the integration of an advanced tactical datalink and an advanced secure , broadband , beyond line - of - sight datalink for continuous , survivable command and control coordination , and improved reception of weapons retargeting data and mission updates .

weapons interfaces: weapons interfaces are systems designed to support , carry , communicate with and / or launch weapons from the b - 52 .

near - term needs include the integration of an advanced targeting pod , on - going military - standard - 1760 internal weapons bay upgrades , integrated weapons interface unit ( iwiu ) integration on external weapons pylons , and a gps interface unit / programmable keyboard upgrade to the offensive avionics system .

supporting infrastructure: b - 52 supporting infrastructure includes trainers , simulators , test equipment , aircraft ground equipment , and weapon system testing that support the b - 52 platform .

appendix c. plans for b - 1 bomber sustainment and modernization b - 1 strategic action and investment plan ( saip ) similar to the b - 52h and b - 2's master plans , the b - 1 sustainment and modernization plan is captured in the b - 1 strategic action and investment plan ( saip ) .

b - 1 requirements are managed by air combat command's ( acc's ) b - 1 aircraft branch ( acc / a8a1 ) within the acc / a8a combat aircraft division .

in 2011 , the b - 1 aircraft branch contracted with the consulting firm of whitney , bradley & brown , inc. to research , study , and develop a cost optimized and time phased b - 1 sustainment and modernization plan .

the resulting b - 1 saip provides detailed analysis and recommendations for the period 2014 to 2025 and presents optimum b - 1 portfolios of sustainment and modernization efforts for the fy14 , fy16 , and fy18 programs objective memorandum ( pom ) .

the results of this effort produced three sustainment and modernization plans designed to maximize the benefit to be received from three , assumed funding levels dependent on air force requested and congressionally provided appropriations .

appropriation of $179 million per year ( out to 2022 ) should complete existing sustainment and modernization programs and fund only those sustainment programs needed to maintain existing b - 1 capabilities .

the b - 1 saip concludes that $179 million represents the minimum feasible b - 1 modernization and sustainment funding level .

the b - 1 saip concluded that appropriations of $250 million per year ( out to 2022 ) is the minimum recommended funding level for b - 1 sustainment and modernization .

at this level , several high benefit capabilities could be funded , which would reduce air force ownership costs and potentially increase the b - 1's operational effectiveness .

appropriations of $400 million per year is the highest considered funding profile recommended by the b - 1 saip and would be sufficient to fund most of the recommended b - 1 sustainment and modernization efforts out to 2022 .

the b - 1 saip concludes that the air force should request at least $250 million per year for b - 1 sustainment and modernization .

appropriations at this level and above are anticipated to provide near - term solutions to weapon system capability gaps and shortfalls while ensuring the b - 1 is capable of supporting national security objectives .

assumptions the b - 1 bomber strategic action and investment plan ( saip ) is based on the following assumptions: there will be a continued requirement to strike fleeting or time sensitive targets .

the overall force structure within the air force will continue to be reduced , emphasizing the need for availability of existing platforms such as the b - 1 .

b - 1 force structure will remain steady over the saip timeline .

b - 1s may be employed from the continental united states or applicable forward - deployed locations , as warranted by the scenario and theater requirements .

budget pressures dictate that b - 1 aircraft be sustained in the most affordable manner possible .

reductions in manpower will continue to highlight the need for efficiencies .

irregular warfare operations will continue throughout the service life of the b - 1 .

current b - 1 sustainment and modernization efforts the following is a summary of the major b - 1 sustainment and modernization initiatives that are currently in the program of record ( por ) that are either just completing or are currently in progress .

the costs of these pors were factored into the saip's sustainment and modernization funding analysis and are reflected in the three assumed funding levels .

 ( asterisks denote sustainment and modernization efforts that could be considered essential to the b - 1's ability to operate in a2 / ad threat environments. ) .

* fully integrated data link: fidl will provide the b - 1 with link - 16 line - of - sight ( los ) and joint range extension ( jre ) beyond - line - of - sight ( blos ) data link capability and supports machine - to - machine transfer of targeting data to the b - 1's weapons control computers .

simulator digital control loading: simulator digital control loading is a modification to the b - 1's weapon system trainer ( s ) ( wsts ) that will replace the existing hydraulically - operated control loading system with a digital control loading system .

control loading provides force feedback for the pilot's flight control stick and pedals ; the wst flight stations are unusable without a working control loading system .

the existing system faces obsolescence and diminishing manufacturing sources ( dms ) issues , with some critical parts having no spares .

central integrated test system: cits is the b - 1's fault diagnostic and fault isolation system .

the current cits processor is at maximum memory / throughput , thus inhibiting fault detection and isolation for current systems and future b - 1 upgrades .

this modification provides a new processor , upgraded displays , and new software that will enhance diagnostic capabilities , improve aircraft turnaround time , and reduce maintenance costs .

this program will also alleviate the current diminishing manufacturing source issue with this system .

* inertial navigation system replacement: provides for the replacement of a line replaceable unit ( lru ) in the b - 1's inertial navigation system .

the b - 1 ins provides autonomous capability to navigate globally , without the aid of ground - based and global positioning system navigation aids , as well as engage ground targets with a high level of precision .

the current ins system is plagued with severe diminishing manufacturing source issues .

* radar improvement upgrade: the b - 1b radar reliability and maintainability improvement program ( rmip ) consists of the replacement of two high - failure - rate radar line replaceable units ( lrus ) and the supporting software conversion of legacy radar modes .

the radar rmip is intended to provide b - 1b combat forces with an updated offensive radar system that should improve mission capable ( mc ) rates and eliminate issues with diminishing manufacturing sources ( dms ) .

* visual situation display upgrade: the vertical situation display upgrade ( vsdu ) is a safety - critical program that replaces the b - 1's pilot and co - pilot primary flight displays and associated flight instruments .

the current vsds are monochrome cathode ray tube displays and "steam gauge" primary flight instruments which are experiencing severe diminishing manufacturing source issues with the potential to ground the aircraft .

spares are no longer procurable due to obsolescence .

vsdu installs two 8" x 6" color displays at the pilot and co - pilot stations to provide primary flight information and backups to meet flight safety standards .

self - contained attitude indicator: the scai is a backup to the b - 1's primary flight instruments and provides pilots with indications of aircraft attitude , airspeed , mach , altitude and vertical velocity .

this development effort will replace the current obsolete legacy scai with a more reliable and supportable off - the - shelf display .

gyro stabilization system replacement ( gssr ) : this program is procuring and installing line replaceable units ( lrus ) in the b - 1's gss , which is part of the aircraft's navigation system .

this modification provides for replacement of the high maintenance / high cost / high failure rate gss lrus with high reliability lrus .

b - 1 training support: this effort modifies and replaces computer components in the b - 1 aircraft maintenance training devices ( mtds ) .

these mtds are currently running on computer systems from the late 1990s and are using nearly 100% of the computer resources available to them .

as such , no excess computer capacity exists to support current updates , including current b - 1 modification efforts .

this modification will update the hardware with modern commercial off - the - shelf ( cots ) computer systems and will re - host the software on the new hardware , allowing these mtds to accept new upgrades and remain concurrent with b - 1 upgrades .

* digital communications: the digital communications upgrade provides for replacement of a currently installed ultra high frequency ( uhf ) satellite communications ( satcom ) beyond line of sight datalink radio system with a demand assigned multiple access ( dama ) compliant , uhf satcom radio .

the current system , a temporary modification , was installed in 2002 to support combat operations in southwest asia .

the current system is not dama compliant , which severely limits accessibility to satcom channels .

in addition , the current system utilizes a system unique datalink , which is not interoperable with standard , joint uhf satcom systems .

* b - 1 link 16 cryptographic materials: assistant secretary of defense for command , control and communications ( asd / c3i ) directed implementation of the dod cryptographic modernization initiative ( cmi ) on 23 february 2001 .

cjcs notice 6510 / nsa 3-9 directs the modernization of all cryptography in military systems in the us , nato and coalition nations .

to prevent information compromise , the national security agency mandate requires link 16 cryptographic systems to be upgraded .

* laptop controlled targeting pod: lctp provides advanced targeting pod control , display , and information to all b - 1 crewmembers .

it allows aircrew to derive precision coordinates for gps guided weapons , guide laser - guided weapons , and allows aircrew to conduct inflight re - planning of long - range standoff weapons .

this effort permanently installs three rack mounted computers and removes temporary targeting pod laptops .

low cost mods: these modifications are low cost b - 1 upgrades that address safety , reliability , maintainability , and / or improved system performance issues on the aircraft , support equipment , and simulators / trainers .

these funds are required for mission essential b - 1 low cost modifications to ensure readiness and b - 1 operational requirements .

* miscellaneous b - 1 modernization research , development , test and evaluation efforts: this program provides rdt&e funding for the b - 1 modernization program .

the modernization program addresses potential aircraft obsolescent issues due to diminishing manufacturing sources ( dms ) and provides new and improved capabilities to the b - 1 weapon system that require significant hardware and software development and testing .

future b - 1 sustainment and modernization requirements optimal $250m / year b - 1 modernization and sustainment funding scenario figure c - 1 depicts the $250 million / year funding scenario for current programs of record ( por ) and the recommended future b - 1 modernization and sustainment requirements .

$250 million / year is the minimum funding level recommended by the b - 1 saip where 32 , high - benefit capabilities could be funded that could reduce air force ownership costs and potentially increase the b - 1's operational effectiveness .

authors of the b - 1 saip believe the 32 , high - benefit capabilities represent the optimal combination of future modernization and sustainment needs that could provide the highest benefit at the $250 million / year funding level and is a point of departure when considering other funding levels and future requirements .

a detailed description of each of the 32 capabilities can be found in the b - 1 saip .

appendix d. plans for b - 2 sustainment and modernization b - 2 master plan and requirements the b - 2 bomber master plan outlines air force global strike command's ( afgsc's ) plans , programs , requirements , and strategic vision for the b - 2 platform to meet the nation's airborne strategic nuclear deterrence and global precision attack mission needs .

near - term modernization and sustainment efforts are identified for the time period 2012 to 2018 .

far - term modernization and sustainment efforts are identified as those required in the 2019 to 2032 time period .

afgsc director of plans , programs and requirements ( hq afgsc a5 / 8 ) is responsible for producing and updating the master plan .

assumptions the b - 2 bomber master plan is based on the following assumptions: the b - 2 will continue to conduct currently assigned nuclear and conventional missions well into the 2050s .

the b - 2 fleet size will remain at 20 aircraft through 2058 .

the b - 2 planned end - of - life will remain 2058 .

there will be no change to current b - 2 basing .

unfunded risks and issues require prioritization and validation through the resource allocation and program objective memorandum ( pom ) process .

the b - 2 will continue to be required to penetrate and employ weapons in highly defended anti - access / area denial environments well into 2050 .

the b - 2 will continue to be a primary component in the usaf long range strike ( lrs ) family of systems .

the b - 2 will incorporate all new , applicable air - to - ground weapons including the new cruise missile and the ability to employ weapons to defeat and destroy hardened and deeply buried targets .

the b - 52 will incorporate beyond - line - of - sight ( blos ) connectivity for conventional , as well as nuclear taskings [survivable , assured nuclear command and control] .

air force global strike command and air combat command will continue to work cooperatively on b - 2 requirements in accordance with applicable memoranda of agreement .

current b - 2 sustainment and modernization efforts the following is a summary of b - 2 sustainment and modernization initiatives currently in the program of record ( por ) that are either just completing or are currently in progress .

 ( asterisks denote sustainment and modernization efforts that could be considered essential to the b - 2's ability to operate in a2 / ad threat environments. ) .

* extremely high frequency satellite communications ( ehf satcom ) and computer upgrade program: the aging ultra high frequency ( uhf ) military satellite communications system is being phased out and replaced by the advanced extremely high frequency ( aehf ) satellite communications ( satcom ) system .

the b - 2 extremely high frequency ( ehf ) satcom program supports the replacement of the b - 2's uhf terminal set with an ehf satcom system that will be compatible with the legacy milstar i / ii satellite constellation and the future aehf satellite constellation .

* massive ordnance penetrator integration: the b - 2 is the only anti - access penetrating platform capable of delivering the massive ordnance penetrator ( mop ) against hardened , deeply buried targets .

integration of the 30,000 lb class mop provides the ability to hold additional hardened , deeply buried targets at risk beyond those achievable with current munitions .

the mop integration program will design , develop , integrate , and test hardware and software required for carriage , jettison , and release of mop from the b - 2 .

* low observable signature and supportability mod ifications ( lossm ) diagnostics: lossm diagnostics equipment projects help reduce low observable ( lo ) maintenance , increase aircraft availability and improves the combat ready lo signature for the b - 2 fleet .

b - 2 trainer system upgrade: trainer system upgrades keep the b - 2 family of trainers current with aircraft system updates while countering equipment obsolescence issues .

enhancements are provided to the b - 2 family of trainers to include the weapon system trainers , mission trainer , cockpit procedures trainers , computerized maintenance training system , weapon system training aids , weapons load trainer , crew escape system maintenance trainer , flight control system trainer , instructor - operator station , and training system support center .

* link - 16 / center instrument display / in - flight replanner ( cid / ifr ) : link - 16 cid / ifr allows the b - 2 access to theater tactical data links , improving on - board situational awareness while greatly enhancing the ability of theater commanders to coordinate the b - 2 with other assets .

the center instrument display digital video recorder provides the ability to record video signals from the display to the existing recorders in the cockpit .

this capability allows mission playback , operational assessments and de - briefs , and provides aircrew training .

radar modernization program ( rmp ) : completed in the third quarter fy12 , this program brought all operational and flight test b - 2 aircraft radars into frequency compliance .

* low observable signature and supportability modifications ( lossm ) program structures / materials : this program implements a mix of over 20 improvements to the b - 2's low observable ( lo ) support equipment , structures , and materials designed to slow signature degradation and to improve lo supportability .

lossm projects decrease low observable ( lo ) maintenance , increase aircraft availability , and maintain and improve the combat - ready lo signature for the b - 2 fleet .

* defensive management system modernization ( dms - m ) : the dms - m program addresses capability gaps , obsolescence , and supportability issues associated with the b2's legacy dms system .

dms - m will upgrade the b - 2's self - defense capabilities against improved , 21 st century a2 / ad enemy air defenses .

dms - m is the #1 priority modification program in the b - 2 program office and will resolve the #1obsolescence issue in the b - 2 fleet .

* stores management operational flight program ( sm of p ) re - host and mixed carriage modification: this program will re - host the b - 2's stores management operational flight software onto a larger , more capable processor , enabling the b - 2 to carry a mixed weapons carriage with a rotary launcher assembly ( rla ) in one weapons bay and a smart bomb rack assembly ( sbra ) in the other weapons bay .

* common very low frequency receiver ( cvr increment 1 ) : this program provides the b - 2 with a survivable , beyond - line - of - sight communication path for receipt of emergency action messages ( eams ) to support united states strategic command's ( usstratcom ) nuclear command and control requirements .

low cost engine modifications: b - 2 engine improvements include the f118 engine service life extension program , the extended mission oil tank upgrade , and stage one and three engine fan blade improvements that will reduce engine changes and increase aircraft availability .

low cost modifications: these modifications are low cost b - 2 upgrades that address safety , reliability , maintainability , and / or improved system performance issues on the b - 2 aircraft , support equipment , and simulators / trainers .

these funds are required for mission essential b - 2 low cost modifications to ensure readiness and b - 2 operational requirements .

* b - 2 modernization research , development , test and evaluation efforts: to ensure the b - 2 fleet can accomplish its nuclear and conventional mission in highly defended and anti - access environments , periodic modernization efforts must be undertaken to upgrade combat capability as well as improve the viability , supportability , and survivability of the weapon system .

rdt&e funding ensures recent and ongoing investments in necessary avionics , structures , communications , and weapons upgrades keep the b - 2 viable in the immediate future .

baseline support: baseline support maintains the b - 2 unique flight test aircraft , as well as obtains , modifies , and operates a flying test bed , developmental hardware / software and test equipment , to support developmental systems integration and flight test .

future b - 2 sustainment and modernization requirements while the current b - 2 weapons system is capable of meeting today's strategic deterrence and conventional taskings , it may require continued sustainment and modernization efforts to remain airworthy and viable against 21 st century anti - access / areal denial ( a2 / ad ) threats .

consequently , the b - 2 will require continued system review and testing , adaptation to emerging technologies and threats , and attention to facilities and ground support equipment in order for the weapon system to remain viable out to the 2050s .

the following is a brief summary of air force global strike command's recommendations to support the b - 2 from 2012 through 2032 .

the recommendations are designed to address sustainment challenges while ensuring future modernization and acquisition efforts remain integrated and synchronized to meet the b - 2's operational requirements .

the guidance is organized into three broad categories: airframe , communications systems , and supporting infrastructure .

a detailed explanation of each category's specific recommendations can be found in the b - 2's master plan .

airframe: the airframe category is comprised of avionics , low - observable , weapons interfaces , flight controls , engines , and miscellaneous mechanical subsystems .

many issues within these systems currently affect viability , availability , and turnaround time of the b - 2 weapon system .

for example , low - observable maintenance continues to be problematic due to high repair costs , labor - intensive procedures , supportability issues , and degradation of aircraft radar signature .

the 1980s era defensive management system technology suffers from obsolescence and supportability issues and requires modernization .

mixed weapons carriage flexibility is constrained due to system limitations such as computer processing , memory and throughput .

these issues should continue to be addressed as they reduce the b - 2's flexibility to deliver desired effects , its ability to penetrate a2 / ad threats , and ultimately , its combat survivability .

communications system: the communications system category is comprised of cryptographic , tactical , emergency and survivable communications subsystems .

the cryptographic system requires modernization due to obsolescence and decertification issues leading to security and sustainment concerns .

currently , the aircraft's primary beyond - line - of - sight ( blos ) communications capability is provided via the uhf military strategic and tactical relay satellite ( milstar ) system , which has already exceeded its design life and is nearing life expected end - of - life .

supporting infrastructure: the supporting infrastructure category includes — but is not limited to — depot , trainers , simulators , test equipment , aerospace ground equipment ( age ) , flight testing , and software that support the b - 2 weapon system .

test and support equipment are aging and beginning to suffer from design life , supportability , and parts obsolescence issues .

appendix e. legislative activity fy2011-fy2013 fy2011 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

111-383 ) title 1 - procurement subtitle c - joint and multiservice matters sec .

126 .

integration of solid state laser systems into certain aircraft .

 ( a ) analysis of feasibility required. — the secretary of defense shall conduct an analysis of the feasibility of integrating solid state laser systems into the aircraft platforms specified in subsection ( b ) for purposes of permitting such aircraft to accomplish their missions , including to provide close air support .

 ( b ) aircraft — the aircraft platforms specified in this subsection shall include , at a minimum , the following: ( 1 ) the c – 130 aircraft .

 ( 2 ) the b – 1 bomber aircraft .

 ( 3 ) the f – 35 fighter aircraft .

 ( c ) scope of analysis. — the analysis required by subsection ( a ) shall include a determination of the following: ( 1 ) the estimated cost per unit of each laser system analyzed .

 ( 2 ) the estimated cost of operation and maintenance of each aircraft platform specified in subsection ( b ) in connection with each laser system analyzed , noting that the fidelity of such analysis may not be uniform for all aircraft platforms .

title x - general provisions subtitle f - studies and reports sec .

1056 .

required reports concerning bomber modernization , sustainment , and recapitalization efforts in support of the national defense strategy .

 ( a ) air force report. — ( 1 ) report required. — not later than 360 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the air force shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report that includes — ( a ) a discussion of the cost , schedule , and performance of all planned efforts to modernize and keep viable the existing b – 1 , b – 2 , and b – 52 bomber fleets and a discussion of the forecasted service - life and all sustainment challenges that the secretary of the air force may confront in keeping those platforms viable until the anticipated retirement of such aircraft ; ( b ) a discussion , presented in a comparison and contrast type format , of the scope of the 2007 next - generation long range strike analysis of alternatives guidance and subsequent analysis of alternatives report tasked by the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics in the september 11 , 2006 , acquisition decision memorandum , as compared to the scope and directed guidance of the year 2010 long range strike study effort currently being conducted by the under secretary of defense for policy and the office of the secretary of defense's cost assessment and program evaluation office ; and ( c ) a discussion of the preliminary costs , any development , testing , fielding and operational employment challenges , capability gaps , limitations , and shortfalls of the secretary of defense's plan to field a long - range , penetrating , survivable , persistent and enduring ''family of systems'' as compared to the preliminary costs , any development , testing , fielding , and operational employment of a singular platform that encompasses all the required aforementioned characteristics .

 ( 2 ) preparation of report. — the report under paragraph ( 1 ) shall be prepared by a federally funded research and development center selected by the secretary of the air force and submitted to the secretary for submittal by the secretary in accordance with that paragraph .

 ( b ) cost analysis and program evaluation report. — not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the director of the cost analysis and program evaluation of the office of the secretary of defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report that includes — ( 1 ) the assumptions and estimated life - cycle costs of the department's long - range , penetrating , survivable , persistent , and enduring ''family of systems'' platforms ; and ( 2 ) the assumptions and estimated life - cycle costs of the next generation platform program , as planned , prior to the cancellation of the program on april 6 , 2009 .

title xii - matters relating to foreign nations subtitle c - reports and other matters sec .

1238 .

report on united states efforts to defend against threats posed by the anti - access and area - denial capabilities of certain nation - states .

 ( a ) finding. — congress finds that the 2010 report on the department of defense quadrennial defense review concludes that ''[a]nti - access strategies seek to deny outside countries the ability to project power into a region , thereby allowing aggression or other destabilizing actions to be conducted by the anti - access power .

without dominant capabilities to project power , the integrity of united states alliances and security partnerships could be called into question , reducing united states security and influence and increasing the possibility of conflict'' .

 ( b ) sense of congress. — it is the sense of congress that , in light of the finding in subsection ( a ) , the secretary of defense should ensure that the united states has the appropriate authorities , capabilities , and force structure to defend against any potential future threats posed by the anti - access and area - denial capabilities of potentially hostile foreign countries .

 ( c ) report. — not later than april 1 , 2011 , the secretary of defense shall submit to the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives a report on united states efforts to defend against any potential future threats posed by the anti - access and area - denial capabilities of potentially hostile nation - states .

 ( d ) elements. — the report required under subsection ( c ) shall include the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of any potential future threats posed by the anti - access and area - denial capabilities of potentially hostile foreign countries , including an identification of the foreign countries with such capabilities , the nature of such capabilities , and the possible advances in such capabilities over the next 10 years .

 ( 2 ) a description of any efforts by the department of defense to address the potential future threats posed by the anti - access and area - denial capabilities of potentially hostile foreign countries .

 ( 3 ) a description of the authorities , capabilities , and force structure that the united states may require over the next 10 years to address the threats posed by the anti - access and area - denial capabilities of potentially hostile foreign countries .

 ( e ) form. — the report required under subsection ( c ) shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may contain a classified annex if necessary .

 ( f ) definitions. — in this section — ( 1 ) the term ''anti - access'' , with respect to capabilities , means any action that has the effect of slowing the deployment of friendly forces into a theater , preventing such forces from operating from certain locations within that theater , or causing such forces to operate from distances farther from the locus of conflict than such forces would normally prefer ; and ( 2 ) the term ''area - denial'' , with respect to capabilities , means operations aimed to prevent freedom of action of friendly forces in the more narrow confines of the area under a potentially hostile nation - state's direct control , including actions by an adversary in the air , on land , and on and under the sea to contest and prevent joint operations within a defended battlespace .

fy2012 department of defense appropriations ( h.rept .

112-331 to accompany h.r .

2055 ) retirement of b - 1 aircraft the fiscal year 2012 budget request includes a proposal to retire six b – 1 bomber aircraft .

the conferees understand that the b – 1 fleet continues to operate almost constantly over afghanistan in support of troops on the ground and that the b – 1 is a critical component of the nation's long - range strike capabilities .

the air force proposed to reinvest less than 40 percent of the savings from aircraft retirements in the b – 1 modernization program across the future years defense program .

the conferees are concerned that premature retirement of six b – 1 aircraft could negatively impact long - range strike capabilities .

therefore , the conferees direct the secretary of the air force to reinvest a larger portion of savings realized from b – 1 aircraft retirements , to the extent authorized by law , in the sustainment and modernization of the b – 1 fleet .

fy2012 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

112-81 ) title i – procurement subtitle d – air force programs sec .

132 .

limitations on use of funds to retire b – 1 bomber aircraft .

 ( a ) in general. — none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this act for fiscal year 2012 for the department of defense may be obligated or expended to retire any b – 1 bomber aircraft on or before the date on which the secretary of the air force submits to the congressional defense committees the plan described in subsection ( b ) .

 ( b ) plan described. — the plan described in this subsection is a plan for retiring b – 1 bomber aircraft that includes the following: ( 1 ) an identification of each b – 1 bomber aircraft that will be retired and the disposition plan for such aircraft .

 ( 2 ) an estimate of the savings that will result from the proposed retirement of b – 1 bomber aircraft in each calendar year through calendar year 2022 .

 ( 3 ) an estimate of the amount of the savings described in paragraph ( 2 ) that will be reinvested in the modernization of b – 1 bomber aircraft still in service in each calendar year through calendar year 2022 .

 ( 4 ) a modernization plan for sustaining the remaining b – 1 bomber aircraft through at least calendar year 2022 .

 ( 5 ) an estimate of the amount of funding required to fully fund the modernization plan described in paragraph ( 4 ) for each calendar year through calendar year 2022 .

 ( c ) post - plan b – 1 retirement. — ( 1 ) in general. — during the period described by paragraph ( 4 ) , the secretary of the air force shall maintain in a common capability configuration not less than 36 b – 1 aircraft as combat coded aircraft .

 ( 2 ) fy 2014 and thereafter. — after the period described in paragraph ( 4 ) , the secretary shall maintain not less than — ( a ) 35 b – 1 aircraft as combat - coded aircraft in a common capability configuration until september 30 , 2014 ; ( b ) 34 such aircraft as combat - coded aircraft in a common capability configuration until september 30 , 2015 ; and ( c ) 33 such aircraft as combat - coded aircraft in a common capability configuration until september 30 , 2016 .

 ( 3 ) total amount of retired b – 1 aircraft. — the secretary may not retire more than a total of six b – 1 aircraft , including the b – 1 aircraft retired in accordance with this subsection .

 ( 4 ) period described. — the period described in this paragraph is the period beginning on the date on which the plan described in subsection ( b ) is submitted to the congressional defense committees and ending on september 30 , 2013 .

 ( 5 ) combat - coded aircraft defined. — in this subsection , the term ''combat - coded aircraft'' means aircraft assigned to meet the primary aircraft authorization to a unit for the performance of its wartime mission .

sec .

134 .

availability of fiscal year 2011 funds for research and development relating to the b – 2 bomber aircraft .

of the unobligated balance of amounts appropriated for fiscal year 2011 for the air force and available for procurement of b – 2 bomber aircraft modifications , post - production support , and other charges , $20,000,000 may be available for fiscal year 2012 for research , development , test , and evaluation with respect to a conventional mixed load capability for the b – 2 bomber aircraft .

sec .

135 .

availability of fiscal year 2011 funds to support alternative options for extremely high frequency terminal increment 1 program of record .

 ( a ) in general. — of the unobligated balance of amounts appropriated for fiscal year 2011 for the air force and available for procurement of b – 2 bomber aircraft modifications , post - production support , and other charges , $15,000,000 may be available to support alternative options for the extremely high frequency terminal increment 1 program of record .

 ( b ) plan to secure protected communications. — not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the air force shall submit to the congressional defense committees a plan to provide an extremely high frequency terminal for secure protected communications for the b – 2 bomber aircraft and other aircraft .

title ii – research , development , test , and evaluation subtitle b – program requirements , restrictions , and limitations sec .

216 .

limitation on use of funds for increment 2 of b – 2 bomber aircraft extremely high frequency satellite communications program .

of the funds authorized to be appropriated by section 201 for research , development , test , and evaluation for the air force as specified in the funding table in section 4201 and available for increment 2 of the b – 2 bomber aircraft extremely high frequency satellite communications program , not more than 40 percent may be obligated or expended until the date that is 15 days after the date on which the secretary of the air force submits to the congressional defense committees the following: ( 1 ) the certification of the secretary that — ( a ) the united states government will own the data rights to any extremely high frequency active electronically steered array antenna developed for use as part of a system to support extremely high frequency protected satellite communications for the b – 2 bomber aircraft ; and , ( b ) the use of an extremely high frequency active electronically steered array antenna is the most cost effective and lowest risk option available to support extremely high frequency satellite communications for the b – 2 bomber aircraft .

 ( 2 ) a detailed plan setting forth the projected cost and schedule for research , development , and testing on the extremely high frequency active electronically steered array antenna .

fy2013 department of defense appropriations ( s.rept .

112-196 : to accompany h.r .

5856 ) note: as of this writing , this legislation has not been passed into law .

committee initiatives: b – 52 combat network communications technology [conect] .

 — the fiscal year 2013 budget request includes no funds in aircraft procurement , air force for the b – 52 conect program of record due to the air force's decision to terminate the program , and $34,700,000 in research , development , test and evaluation , air force for a restructured , descoped b – 52 conect program .

the committee understands that the air force is reviewing its decision to terminate the program of record in light of potential requirements of the global strike command .

the committee further understands that should the air force reverse its decision to terminate b – 52 conect during the fiscal year 2014 budget process , prior year funds would be available to reinstate the program following approval by the congressional defense committees .

the committee directs that no funds for b – 52 conect program of record post - milestone c activities or a b – 52 conect restructured program may be obligated or expended until 30 days after the congressional defense committees have been briefed on the air force's proposed way ahead , to include certification of full funding of the proposed program .

committee recommended adjustments: b – 52 strategic radar replacement [sr2]. — the committee is aware the air force conducted a lengthy analysis of alternatives in 2011 to address a strategic radar replacement [sr2] for the b – 52h .

the existing apq – 166 radar was produced in the 1960s , has a 20 to 30 hour mean - time between failure rate , and capability limitations .

the committee understands that the current apq – 166 radar is costly to operate and maintain .

therefore , the committee encourages the secretary of the air force to reconsider the decision to terminate the sr2 program .

fy2013 department of defense authorizations ( p.l .

112-239 ) title i – procurement subtitle d – air force programs sec .

142 .

retirement of b – 1 bomber aircraft .

 ( a ) in general. — section 8062 of title 10 , united states code , is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ( h ) ( 1 ) beginning october 1 , 2011 , the secretary of the air force may not retire more than six b – 1 aircraft .

 ( 2 ) the secretary shall maintain in a common capability configuration not less than 36 b – 1 aircraft as combat - coded aircraft .

 ( 3 ) in this subsection , the term 'combat - coded aircraft' means aircraft assigned to meet the primary aircraft authorization to a unit for the performance of its wartime mission.'' .

 ( b ) conforming amendment. — section 132 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( public law 112 – 81 ; 125 stat .

1320 ) is amended by striking subsection ( c ) .

in regards to the nuclear certification requirements of the next - generation bomber , sec .

211. states ; the secretary of the air force shall ensure that the next - generation long - range strike bomber is — capable of carrying strategic nuclear weapons as of the date on which such aircraft achieves initial operating capability ; and certified to use such weapons by not later than two years after such date .

title ii – research , development , test , and evaluation subtitle b – program requirements , restrictions , and limitations sec .

211 .

next - generation long - range strike bomber aircraft nuclear certification requirement .

the secretary of the air force shall ensure that the next generation long - range strike bomber is — ( 1 ) capable of carrying strategic nuclear weapons as of the date on which such aircraft achieves initial operating capability ; and ( 2 ) certified to use such weapons by not later than two years after such date .

