generally , the wpa provides protections for many federal employees who make disclosures evidencing illegal or improper government activities .

in order to trigger the protections of the wpa , a case must contain the following elements: a "personnel action" that was taken because of a "protected disclosure" made by a "covered employee. .

within 240 days of receipt of a complaint , the office of special counsel ( osc ) must make a determination as to whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that a prohibited personnel practice has occurred , exists , or is to be taken .

if a positive determination is made and the information was sent to the special counsel by an employee , former employee , applicant for employment , or an employee who obtained the information acting within the scope of employment , the special counsel must transmit the information to the appropriate agency head and require that the agency head conduct an investigation and submit a written report .

the identity of the complaining employee may not be disclosed without such individual's consent , unless the special counsel determines that disclosure is necessary to avoid imminent danger to health and safety or an imminent criminal violation .

the special counsel then reviews the reports as to their completeness and the reasonableness of the findings and submits the reports to congress , the president , the comptroller general , and the complainant .

if the special counsel does not make a positive determination , however , he or she may only transmit the information to the agency head with the consent of the individual .

further , if the special counsel receives the information from some source other than the ones described above , he or she may transmit the information to the appropriate agency head , who shall inform the special counsel of any action taken .

in any case where the subject of the whistleblowing disclosure evidences a criminal violation , however , all information is referred to the attorney general and no report is transmitted to the complainant .

at least every 60 days throughout its investigation , the osc must give notice of the status of the investigation to the individual who brought the allegation .

in addition , no later than 10 days before the termination of an investigation , a written status report including the proposed findings and legal conclusions must be made to the individual who made the allegation of wrongdoing .

yes .

the wpa provides that an employee , former employee , or applicant for employment has the independent right to seek review of whistleblower reprisal cases by the mspb no more than 60 days after notification is provided to such employee that the investigation was closed or 120 days after filing a complaint with the osc .

if in any investigation the special counsel determines that there are "reasonable grounds to believe" a prohibited personnel practice exists or has occurred , the special counsel must report findings and recommendations , and may include recommendations for corrective action , to the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) , the agency involved , the office of personnel management ( opm ) and , optionally , to the president .

if the agency does not act to correct the prohibited personnel practice , the special counsel may petition the mspb for corrective action .

the mspb , before rendering its decision , is required to provide an opportunity for oral or written comments by the special counsel , the agency involved , and the opm , and for written comments by any individual who alleges to be the victim of the prohibited personnel practices .

proceedings for disciplinary action against an officer or employee who commits a prohibited personnel practice may be instituted by the special counsel by filing a written complaint with the mspb .

after proceedings before the mspb or an administrative law judge , if violations are found , the mspb may impose ( i ) disciplinary action consisting of removal , reduction in grade , debarment from federal employment for a period not to exceed five years , suspension , or reprimand ; ( ii ) an assessment of a civil penalty not to exceed $ 1,000 ; or ( iii ) any combination of disciplinary actions described under clause ( i ) and an assessment described under clause ( ii ) .

in addition , the agency where the prevailing party was employed or had applied for employment may be held responsible for reasonable attorney's fees .

in the case of presidentially appointed and senate confirmed employees in "confidential , policy - making , policy - determining , or policy - advocating" positions , the complaint and the statement of facts , along with any response from the employee , are to be presented to the president for disposition in lieu of the presentation to the board .

adopted 1989 .

amended 1994 , 2012 .

see p.l .

112-199 , §§ 101 ( a ) , ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) , ( 2 ) ( b ) , ( c ) , 102-104 ( b ) ( 1 ) , 105 , 112 , 126 stat .

1465 ( 2012 ) .

sponsor: senator daniel k. akaka cosponsors: 14 house: on passage passed without objection senate: resolving differences - senate agreed to house amendment to the bill ( s. 743 ) by unanimous consent .

