the recent fiscal crisis and recession have accentuated debt collection issues , prompted federal regulatory and enforcement activities regarding the debt collection industry , and motivated assessments of the effectiveness of the fair debt collection practices act ( fdcpa ) .

the consumer financial protection bureau ( bureau or cfpb ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the two main agencies charged with regulating and / or enforcing the fdcpa , have identified debt buying , the use of litigation as a collection strategy , and the impact of current technology on the debt collection industry as three major developments that did not exist when the fdcpa was enacted in 1977 .

they have conducted analyses of consumer complaints about fdcpa violations , studies on and workshops to evaluate the debt buying industry , and the impact of technological developments such as social media , email , and mobile phones on how debt collectors communicate with consumers and find information about consumer debts .

at present , about 30 million americans , nearly 10% of the population , are subject to debt collection for amounts averaging $1,500 per person , according to the cfpb .

the fdcpa was signed into law on september 29 , 1977 , as an amendment to the consumer credit protection act .

the purpose of the fdcpa is to "eliminate abusive debt collection practices by debt collectors. .

debt collectors are prohibited from threatening or harassing debtors , and their contacts with debtors are restricted .

the fdcpa commonly only applies to third - party debt collectors .

a "debt collector" is generally defined as "any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or the mails in any business the principal purpose of which is the collection of any debts , or who regularly collects or attempts to collect , directly or indirectly , debts owed or due or asserted to be owed or due another. .

the fdcpa does not apply to creditors who are collecting their own debts , unless in the process of collecting debts , the creditor uses a name other than his own which would indicate that a third person is attempting to collect the debt on his behalf .

the fdcpa defines certain other exceptions to "debt collector," such as a person collecting debt for a creditor related by common ownership or corporate control as long as the person only collects debts for such related creditors and is not principally engaged in the debt collection business ; federal or state government employees collecting debts as part of their official duties ; a person serving legal process in judicial enforcement of a debt ; a bona - fide , non - profit credit counseling organization that assists consumers by receiving and disbursing their debt payments to creditors ; and private entities that administer certain pretrial diversion programs for bad check offenders under a contract with a state or district attorney .

the cfpb is a relatively new agency .

establishing the cfpb pursuant to the consumer financial protection act of 2010 , which is part of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , congress transferred administrative functions , including rulemaking and reporting on debt collection activities , as well as certain enforcement functions , from other federal agencies such as the ftc and the federal reserve board , to the bureau .

the ftc and other agencies , however , retain and share enforcement authority with the cfpb and the cfpb and ftc coordinate their enforcement activities .

for more information on the functions of the new cfpb , see crs report r41338 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act: title x , the consumer financial protection bureau , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report r42572 , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) : a legal analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

in addition to the problems noted in the cfpb report and the exclusion of first - party debt collectors from fdcpa coverage , several issues have arisen regarding the fdcpa , its implementation and enforcement , and activities beyond the scope of federal consumer protection .

consumer advocates have identified problems such as inadequate verification of debt and arbitration clauses that limit consumer ability to litigate potentially illegal debt collection practices .

in addition , consumer advocates have criticized arrests of debtors for failure to comply with default judgments affirming debts and ordering payment , as being tantamount to a revival of "debtor's prison. .

other commentators have criticized fdcpa debt collector treatment such as judicial fdcpa interpretations limiting bona - fide errors as defense to fdcpa violations and limits on voicemail / autodialing to contact consumers regarding debt collection .

in recent years , some of the issues discussed above have been addressed in proposed legislation although none advanced beyond introduction .

as of the date of this report , one bill to revise the fdcpa has been introduced in the 113 th congress .

s. 508 would define child support as a debt and is similar to s. 1383 in the 112 th congress .

among the various bills introduced in the 112 th congress to address consumer debt collection , h.r .

2361 would have prohibited a debt collector from bringing or threatening to bring a lawsuit against a consumer to collect a time - barred debt and required a debt collector to disclose to a consumer that ( 1 ) a time - barred debt has been sold to the debt collector by the creditor ; ( 2 ) the collector may not sue the consumer for payment of the debt because the statute of limitations has expired ; and ( 3 ) any payment by the consumer on the debt may restart the clock on the statute of limitations .

s. 3350 would have , among other things , prohibited a debt collector from requesting a court or agency to issue a warrant for the arrest of a debtor ; reduced inadequate information about a debt by requiring a debt collector to disclose certain debt information to a consumer ; reduced inadequate verification of a debt by requiring a debt collector to conduct a thorough investigation of a disputed debt and give a timely response to the consumer with specific information and verification of the debt ; and prohibited threatening to withhold medical treatment to induce payment of delinquent medical debt .

h.r .

1783 / s. 824 would have amended the fdcpa to cover a securitized residential mortgage and its servicer , and expanded civil liability to cover a debt collector who violates the fdcpa with regard to a debt secured by a consumer's residence .

to address debt collector problems , h.r .

4101 / h.r .

5794 would have limited debt collector liability for conduct that the debt collector in good faith believed complied or conformed to regulations or official interpretations of the cfpb that were later amended , rescinded , or determined to be invalid by a judicial or other authority .

it also would have permitted a debt collector to leave messages for a consumer relating to debt collection on a telephone answering machine , voicemail system , or similar device , including an initial communication , as long as the message complies with regulations to ensure consumer privacy , including restrictions on third - party communications .

finally , h.r .

4101 / h.r .

5794 would have prohibited use of arbitration to resolve a debt collection dispute unless the consumer has agreed to arbitration in writing after debt collection activities have begun and a lawsuit or dispute has arisen .

