a health insurance exchange has been established in every state , as required by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

each exchange has two parts , a marketplace where individuals can shop for and enroll in health insurance coverage , and a small business health options program ( shop ) exchange for small employers .

some individuals are eligible to receive financial assistance for their coverage obtained through an exchange , and some small employers can obtain tax credits toward coverage purchased through a shop .

exchanges are not intended to supplant the private market outside of exchanges , and the aca does not require that individuals and small businesses obtain coverage through an exchange .

a state can choose to establish its own state - based exchange ( sbe ) .

if a state opts not to , or if the department of health and human services ( hhs ) determines that the state is not in a position to administer its own exchange , then hhs will establish and administer the exchange in the state as a federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) .

fourteen states and dc established sbes in 2014 , while the remaining 36 states have ffes .

there are varying levels of state involvement in ffes .

in some cases , a state has partnered with hhs to establish and administer the exchange , and in other cases hhs is administering the individual exchange while the state administers the shop exchange .

in many states with ffes , the exchange is wholly operated and administered by hhs .

to fund the establishment of exchanges , the aca authorizes the hhs secretary to award grants to states through 2014 .

each exchange is expected to generate its own funds to sustain its operations beginning january 1 , 2015 .

this report provides a state - by - state breakdown of the grants awarded to date .

it then briefly describes the requirement for exchanges to be self - sustaining , and concludes with a discussion of the sources and amounts of funding that hhs has used and plans to use to support ffe operations .

section 1311 of the aca appropriated indefinite ( i.e. , unspecified ) amounts for planning and establishment grants for health insurance exchanges .

for each fiscal year , the hhs secretary is to determine the total amount that will be made available to each state for exchange grants .

any state that intends to do exchange establishment work can apply for and receive a section 1311 grant ; for instance , a state that is not establishing an sbe may receive a grant provided the state uses the funds for activities related to exchange establishment and implementation .

states have had multiple opportunities to apply for section 1311 grants .

one deadline remains for submitting an application this year ( i.e. , november 14 ) .

no grants will be awarded after december 31 , 2014 .

hhs has awarded three different types of exchange grants , which are described below .

figure 1 shows the total amount of funding each state has received from the grants as well as the type of exchange ( sbe or ffe ) each state has in 2014 .

table 1 shows the amount each state has received from the various types of grants .

beginning january 1 , 2015 , the aca requires that each exchange is self - sustaining .

the aca provides that an exchange may charge an assessment or user fee to participating issuers , but also allows an exchange to find other ways to generate funds to sustain its operations .

a description of how each sbe intends to generate funding is currently beyond the scope of this report ; however , hhs has described how it intends to generate funding for the 36 ffes it administers .

beginning in 2014 , hhs will charge a monthly user fee to all issuers that sell plans through an ffe .

the fee for an issuer is equal to the product of the billable members enrolled in the plan through an ffe and a monthly user fee rate .

for benefit years 2014 and 2015 , the monthly user fee rate is 3.5% of the plan's monthly premium .

cms is incurring significant administrative costs supporting exchange operations .

cms operates a number of it systems that control various ffe functions including eligibility and appeals , certification and oversight of qualified health plans , and payment and financial management .

it also operates the data services hub , which routes information about exchange applicants to and from trusted data sources at other federal agencies ( eg , internal revenue service ) in order to verify eligibility .

in addition , cms provides consumer assistance through a call center and website for the ffes , and it funds navigators who offer in - person support .

finally , cms provides technical assistance to states operating sbes .

table 2 summarizes the sources and amounts of administrative funding for exchange operations to date .

this information was included in cms's fy2015 budget submission .

during the period fy2010 through fy2012 , a total of $456 million was used to support exchange operations .

of that amount , $331 million came from annual discretionary appropriations that cover the routine costs of running federal agencies , including salaries and expenses: $307 million from cms's program management account , and an additional $24 million from the hhs departmental management account .

the remaining $125 million came from the health insurance reform and implementation fund ( hirif ) , a $1 billion fund within hhs that was established and funded to help pay for the administrative costs of aca implementation .

cms's administrative costs to support exchange operations totaled $1,545 million in fy2013 .

in the fy2013 budget , cms requested an increase of $1,001 million for its program management account for aca implementation and other activities .

however , congress did not provide any additional discretionary funds for aca implementation in fy2013 .

cms instead used funds from other sources to help pay for ongoing administrative costs associated with exchange operations .

those funds included ( 1 ) discretionary funds transferred from other hhs accounts under the secretary's transfer authority ; ( 2 ) expired discretionary funds from the nonrecurring expenses fund ( nef ) ; ( 3 ) mandatory funds from the hirif ; and ( 4 ) mandatory funds from the prevention and public health fund ( see table 2 ) .

cms estimated that its fy2014 administrative costs for exchange operations would total $1,390 million .

the agency requested an increase of $1,397 million for its program management account in the fy2014 budget for aca implementation and other activities .

but , as in fy2013 , congress chose not to give cms any additional funding .

once again , the agency relied on transferred departmental funds as well as nef and hirif funding to help support exchange operations in fy2014 .

in addition , cms projected that it would collect an estimated $200 million in ffe user fees in fy2014 ( see table 2 ) .

the president's fy2015 budget includes a total of $1,788 for exchange operations .

of that amount , $629 million is from cms's program management account , and the remaining $1,159 million is projected to come from ffe user fees .

the fy2015 budget does not identify any other sources of funding to support exchange operations ( see table 2 ) .

cms has requested an increase of $227 million for its program management account in fy2015 for aca implementation and other activities .

the center for consumer information and insurance oversight ( cciio ) at cms is responsible for implementing aca's private health insurance reforms and administering the grant programs discussed above .

detailed information on the grants , including funding opportunity announcements , guidance , news releases , and amounts awarded , is available on cciio's website .

