the president and some leading members of congress have indicated that income tax reform is a major policy objective .

the house budget resolution ( h.con.res .

25 ) supports a revenue - neutral reform that would broaden the individual income tax base and lower statutory income tax rates , while the senate budget resolution ( s.con.res .

8 ) proposes revenue raising through base - broadening .

the president has proposed substantive tax policy changes in his budget outlines .

further , both tax - writing committees have held hearings and have working groups on tax reform .

most tax provisions that might be considered for base - broadening are contained in a list of tax expenditures .

itemized deductions are a group of tax expenditures likely to be considered as important candidates for reform .

the major itemized deductions are for mortgage interest , state and local taxes , charitable contributions , and medical costs .

the ways and means committee has recently held hearings on provisions affecting state and local governments , charitable contributions , and housing tax provisions ( including the home mortgage interest deduction ) .

itemized deductions account for about one - fifth of all tax expenditures , and may be easy targets of reform , based on their visibility and some policy grounds .

in particular , itemized deductions are already listed on the 1040 income tax form and are easily measured .

eliminating some of them might contribute to tax simplification ( unlike revisions such as including employee fringe benefits in income ) .

at the same time , itemized deductions have broad support , and are claimed by roughly one - third of tax filers .

arguments can be made to justify some of these deductions and some of them are among the longest - standing provisions of the federal income tax code ( see appendix a for a brief history of itemized deductions ) .

reducing incentives and subsidies that alter taxpayers' choices is one potential objective of tax reform .

in addition , as suggested by the differing budget resolutions , some proponents of reform see broadening the tax base as a means of raising revenue without raising tax rates , while others see it as a way to pay for reduced tax rates .

for a given revenue target , tax reform can involve a trade - off between a broader base and lower rates .

in addition , as outlined in this report , base - broadening could have unintended side effects , such as effects on savings incentives or the labor supply .

a variety of proposals for limiting itemized deductions , either as an overall proposition or through specific revisions to certain deductions , have been advanced by policy makers , economists , and tax experts .

this report discusses the proposals that have been advanced , their potential revenue gain , their consequences for taxpayer behavior and economic efficiency , their distributional implications , and administrative and transition issues that may arise .

although this report provides some background material , it assumes some familiarity with itemized tax deductions , and the debate surrounding their reform .

for an introduction to tax deductions , see crs report r42872 , tax deductions for individuals: a summary , by [author name scrubbed] .

for general tax data analysis on itemized tax deductions , see crs report r43012 , itemized tax deductions for individuals: data analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

individual income tax filers have the option to claim either a standard deduction or the sum of their itemized deductions on the federal income tax form 1040 .

the standard deduction is a fixed amount , based on filing status , available to all taxpayers .

alternatively , tax filers may claim itemized deductions .

taxpayers that itemize must list each item separately on their tax return .

whichever deduction a tax filer claims — standard or itemized — the deduction amount is subtracted from adjusted gross income ( agi ) in the process of determining taxable income .

agi is the basic measure of income under the federal income tax and is the income measurement before itemized or standard deductions and personal exemptions are taken into account .

generally , only individuals with aggregate itemized deductions greater than the standard deduction find it worthwhile to itemize .

the tax benefit of choosing to itemize is the amount that their itemized deductions exceed the standard deduction , multiplied by their top marginal income tax rate .

about one - third of taxpayers , largely in the middle and upper income parts of the income distribution , itemize deductions .

at incomes of more than $200,000 , 95% or more of taxpayers itemized , although two - thirds of itemizers had incomes below $100,000 .

therefore while the benefits of itemizing are more concentrated in higher incomes , many middle - class taxpayers itemize deductions .

a range of options could reform or restrict itemized deductions .

the options for revisions generally fall into two basic types: overall limits on the size or value of itemized deductions in general through caps , floors , or limits on tax benefit and specific revisions to particular itemized deductions .

these restrictions could be justified in several different ways , including to increase federal revenue ; to allow a reduction in statutory tax rates , while holding revenue constant ; to reduce economic distortions , where individuals pursue economic behaviors that they would not otherwise do , absent the influences of tax policy ( also referred to as inefficiencies ) ; to increase the progressivity of the federal income tax ( an issue of vertical equity ) ; to reduce discrepancies in the taxation of individuals with similar abilities to pay taxes ( also referred to as horizontal equity ) ; or to simplify the tax code .

this section provides a brief overview of these issues .

the subsequent analysis explains the various options and provides more detailed analysis of them considering the issues of revenue , efficiency , distribution , and simplicity .

many of the proposals recently advanced would address itemized deductions ( or other tax expenditures ) in the aggregate .

some of these options include dollar or percentage of income limits on deductions , limits on the value of tax deductions , or elimination of a percentage of , or all of , deductions .

rather than an across - the - board limit on itemized deductions , each individual provision could be considered .

specific tax expenditures might be eliminated , or limited .

the following subsections discuss some options that have been discussed in past tax reform debates for the three major categories of itemized deductions: mortgage interest , state and local taxes ( including real estate property taxes ) , and charitable contributions .

these categories represent three of the four general categories of itemized deductions that are considered tax expenditures .

the floor for the fourth category , the deduction for extraordinary medical expenses , was increased recently .

thus , this remaining provision has not generally been the target of additional , specific reforms .

this section of the report presents revenue estimates for proposals to restrict itemized deductions , where available .

to provide a better idea of how these changes might contribute to any base - broadening goals for tax reform , revenue gains from each proposal are converted into equivalent across - the board rate reductions that would retain revenue neutrality , as well as the potential percentage point reduction in the highest and lowest rates .

consider first the effects of eliminating some or all of the itemized deductions .

table 3 shows the tax policy center's ( tpc's ) revenue estimates for eliminating itemized deductions in 2015 based on estimated benefits .

for example , eliminating all itemized deductions is estimated to increase revenue by $190.1 billion in 2015 .

if this revenue increase were used to offset revenue losses associated with a reduction in statutory tax rates , then the elimination of all itemized deductions could lead to a 10.6% across - the - board reduction in statutory tax rates ( if distributed evenly across all of the marginal tax brackets ) .

in other words , the top , statutory marginal tax bracket could be lowered by 4.2 percentage points from 39.6% to 35.4% and the lowest , statutory marginal tax bracket could be lowered by 1.1 percentage points from 10% to 8.9% .

table 4 shows the jct estimates for the revenue loss in 2015 for each itemized deduction classified as a tax expenditure , including the deduction for medical expenses .

jct also separates real estate taxes from others itemized deductions , leaving a tax expenditure estimate for the remaining state taxes ; as noted below , about 98% of that provision is for income taxes , and the remainder of the tax expenditure estimate is for personal property taxes ( sales tax deductions would have expired at that point , under current law ) .

table 5 provides revenue estimates for 2015 , largely drawn from the tpc , for a variety of across - the - board limits to itemized deductions , including dollar ceilings , limiting the value to 2% of adjusted gross income ( ffm ) , and limiting the value at which the deductions can be taken to 15% and 28% ( i.e. , similar to the president's budget proposal for fy2014 ) .

because some view charitable deductions as provisions that should be protected , some options exclude restricting them .

table 6 provides estimated revenue effects in 2015 for a number of specific options that were discussed earlier for the three major itemized deductions: mortgage interest , charitable contributions , and state and local taxes .

as the estimates indicate , some minor proposals would yield modest amounts of revenue .

on the other hand , some options could result in significant increases in revenue , such as ceilings on the mortgage interest deduction and the floors on the charitable deduction .

as noted earlier , the increasing attention towards analysis of across - the - board proposals for itemized deductions and , in some cases , other tax expenditures , suggests that the primary focus of base - broadening for some could be the goal of lowering tax rates ( or preventing them from rising due to revenue needs ) rather than reducing subsidies for undesirable or inefficient activities .

however , restricting tax provisions causes effective marginal rates to rise and could defeat the purpose of base - broadening to lower tax rates .

this section discusses this issue for several types of revisions .

the effective marginal rate is affected by tax - free uses of income , many of which are embodied in itemized deductions and affect the marginal rate on all types of income ( eg , wage , investment , self - employment ) .

in the illustrations in this section , the calculations do not take into account the reductions in effective marginal rates for all tax expenditures that might have marginal effects or the lower tax rates on capital gains .

therefore , they should be seen as an illustration of what would occur for a taxpayer whose only tax benefits are itemized deductions .

not all itemized deductions have a marginal effect at every point along the income distribution .

some insight can be gained by looking at the pattern of deductions across income classes .

if a deduction rises as income rises , it is likely that the deduction is not only marginal ( affecting the last dollar of income ) across all incomes , but is also higher at the margin than on average .

as shown in table 7 and in the earlier table 2 , of the four major itemized deductions , the share of returns and agi for two deductions tends to rise with income at almost every class over an agi of $200,000: state income taxes and charitable gifts .

if deductions rise as a share of income , the implication is that the deduction out of each marginal dollar is growing , and thus the elimination of deductions would increase effective taxation at the margin even in a revenue neutral tradeoff for lower statutory rates .

if this share is falling , the deduction at the margin is smaller than the average deduction and could be zero .

the mortgage interest deduction tends to decline with income at very high income levels ( eg , $10 million ) , which is not surprising as higher - income tax filers generally do not need to borrow as much ( as a share of their income ) to purchase their homes .

in addition , homes may be a smaller part of these tax filers' budgets , which is also reflected in the declining value of property tax deduction claims as a share of agi .

in general , itemized deductions are a smaller percentage of itemizers' agi as income rises .

outside of itemized deductions other provisions may involve tax - exempt income because of exclusions from income .

for example , employer - provided benefits such as health insurance and pensions ( or similar benefits for the self - employed ) reduce the effective marginal tax rate on earnings from wages or self - employment .

however , some of these benefits , for example , tax exclusions for health insurance , are unlikely to increase with income on average , especially when income grows to very high levels .

pension benefits are more likely to be marginal because pensions are related to income .

other benefits , such as tax - exempt state and local bonds , are more likely to rise with income and be marginal in some cases because these bonds are more attractive to taxpayers with higher tax rates .

table 7 also shows another potential issue with base - broadening through restricting itemized deductions: the "costs" of base - broadening might be concentrated among middle - income itemizers whereas the tax benefits of statutory rate reductions could spread across all tax filers .

in all cases , a large share of these itemized deductions is on tax returns that have an agi less than $200,000 .

thus , if the policy goal is to protect middle - income itemizers from increased tax burdens through high ceilings , potential revenue gains are limited .

for high - income taxpayers , who retain an average , but not a marginal , benefit from itemized deductions , the statutory rate reductions to keep their burden fixed would be too small to offset the rise in effective marginal tax rates from the loss of deductions at the margin .

if ceilings are lowered to increase revenue and permit higher top statutory rate reductions , the burden on middle class taxpayers would increase .

to avoid that effect , intermediate rates would have to be reduced , leaving less revenue for reducing the top rate ( or rates ) .

this section of the report turns to the more traditional arguments for base broadening , namely the specific merits of particular tax provisions .

presumably , a provision would be eliminated or revised for efficiency reasons if the behavior is undesirable , or if the subsidy to a desirable behavior is too large .

this discussion does not address the itemized deductions not classified as tax expenditures or the medical expense deduction , because the primary purpose of many of these provisions is to enhance vertical equity in the federal income tax code , as discussed above .

in each of the other cases , both the merits of providing an incentive and the effectiveness of doing so are addressed .

this section provides summaries .

more detailed information and supporting references can be found in other crs reports .

economists generally approach distributional issues of tax policy through terms of vertical equity ( how the tax change is distributed across income classes ) and horizontal equity ( the extent to which itemized deductions and changes in them might decrease or increase fairness across taxpayers similarly situated ) .

the following section of the report analyzes various options to restrict itemized deductions from these two standards of economic equity .

reforms vary in the degree to which they will simplify tax administration by the government and compliance among tax filers .

an outright repeal of itemized deductions , or a repeal of particular deductions , would tend to simplify both tax filing and compliance by reducing record - keeping and auditing for those deductions and reducing the general determination of whether a tax filer should choose to itemize their deductions or claim the standard deduction .

some particular reforms might also simplify tax compliance and administration .

for example , applying a floor to charitable deductions could eliminate the need for record - keeping for small donations that might also be less likely to be documented .

limits on contributions of property , such as household goods and clothing , could also reduce administrative costs because these items are hard to value and monitor .

limiting the deduction for appreciated assets to basis could improve the valuation of assets by encouraging taxpayers to sell assets and donate the proceeds .

on the other hand , some approaches could add complications to tax compliance , by requiring additional computations .

the proposal to limit the value of deductions , such as the president's proposal or ffm , could be particularly complicated for some tax filers as it could require computing tax liabilities under multiple additional scenarios , and perhaps re - computing the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , depending on what or if modifications are made to that provision .

current rules , for example , may require three tax calculations for high - income taxpayers , the basic , an adjustment for dividends and capital gains , and for the amt .

the ffm proposal would require a separate computation to compare tax liability income , with and without deductions , to determine the limit on tax benefits , and these might also have to be coordinated with capital gains and dividends calculations , as well as the amt .

in addition , calculations compared with the standard deduction would have to be made , because it is less obvious which is better .

one question that could be asked is whether producing a tax code in which tax liability may need to be calculated as many as eight different ways a desirable step in tax reform ? .

although these tax computation problems could be minor with the use of tax preparation software , they still could complicate choices for individuals who prepare their own returns without software .

moreover , any type of aggregate ceiling or floor would complicate year - to - year decisions about charitable contributions , which are the most easily adjusted in the short run .

other complications may arise relating to charitable contributions .

for example , in the case of revisions to the treatment of donated property , individuals wishing to donate property may now need to sell that property .

these additional transactions may add complexity for them , although it may relieve the charities of that burden .

floors and ceilings could lead to shifting charitable contributions across tax years to minimize effects .

in addition to administrative issues , there are also transitional issues .

these issues are probably the most serious in the case of mortgage interest deductions , in which taxpayers entered into mortgages under the assumption of tax deductibility .

especially in the case of middle - income taxpayers , the presence and size of a mortgage is quite variable and may not be offset for many taxpayers with a rate reduction if mortgages are entirely eliminated .

that is , since both itemizers and non - itemizers will face the same rates , tax burdens for current itemizers will rise even if the tax reform is distributionally neutral .

two solutions to these issues are to grandfather existing mortgages and only disallow the deduction of interest on new mortgages or to slowly lower the cap on mortgages over time .

a second transitional issue , relating to owner occupied housing , is the potential short - run effect on an already troubled housing market .

the solution might be slowly phasing down the caps .

on february 26 , 2014 , house ways and means committee chairman camp ( mi ) released a discussion draft for comprehensive tax reform legislation .

relative to current law , several substantial changes to individual itemized deductions have been proposed .

some of the major changes to itemized deductions include the following: home mortgage interest deduction : the cap on deductions for interest on the first $1 million in home mortgage value would be reduced to $500,000 in increments over three years .

also , deductions for interest on home equity loans would be repealed .

charitable contributions deduction : would generally be subject to a 2% of agi floor .

gifts of property would generally be valued at their cost rather than fair market value .

state and local tax deductions : would be repealed ( eg , property taxes , income taxes ) , except for state and local taxes accrued in a trade or business .

casualty loss deduction : would be repealed for personal casualty losses ( i.e. , losses not connected with a trade or business or entered into profit ) .

medical expenses deduction : would be repealed .

miscellaneous itemized deductions : several miscellaneous itemized deductions would be repealed , including deductions for tax preparation expenses .

the 2% floor for miscellaneous deductions would also be repealed .

pease : would be repealed .

the house ways and means proposal intends to reduce the rate of tax filers who itemize from roughly one - third now to 5% , post - reform , through a combination of ( 1 ) increasing the standard deduction ( from $12,400 , married filing jointly in 2014 to $22,000 , post - reform ) , and ( 2 ) eliminating or reforming the largest itemized deductions .

if successful , then reductions in the rate of itemizers would increase the effective marginal tax rates ( emtrs ) of tax filers , absent other changes , for the reasons explained in the " effects of base - broadening on marginal tax rates , labor supply , and saving " and the " effects of base - broadening on effective marginal tax rates " sections of this report .

if these effects were taken into account in the macroeconomic analysis of the ways and means draft , then it is likely that the estimated , stimulative effect of tax reform would have been less than current estimates ( and possibly negative ) under dynamic scoring .

as explained in the section on reforming " charitable deductions ," the ways and means draft would increase the economic efficiency of the tax code with the 2% of agi floor .

also , as discussed in that section , valuing property gifts at basis ( generally their cost of acquisition ) would eliminate the ability to avoid capital gains and receive a tax deduction .

the executive summary for the legislation claims that the entire legislation would increase charitable giving by $2.2 billion per year by improving the health of the economy .

this claim is suspect , however , because ( 1 ) the draft would reduce the number of tax filers itemizing , and reduce incentives to giving for middle - and upper - middle - income tax filers ( whose aggregate deduction amounts are shown in table a - 2 ) ; and ( 2 ) the macroeconomic effect of tax reform is uncertain due to possible effects of increasing emtrs on growth .

the lower $500,000 cap on amount of mortgage debt available for the home mortgage interest deduction contributes to progressivity of the draft tax reform plan .

repeal of the deduction for interest paid on home equity indebtedness would increase economic efficiency by reducing the incentive for consumers to open equity lines of credit .

the repeal of the long - standing deductions for medical expenses and casualty loss would make the tax code less equitable , as these provisions are designed to better measure income and reflect a tax filer's inability to pay taxes due to catastrophic events .

appendix a .

history of and detailed data on itemized deductions a concise history of itemized deductions itemized deductions have existed in some form since the creation of the first , permanent , u.s. income tax code in 1913 .

tax filers have been able to itemize their deductions since the revenue act of 1913 ( p.l .

63-16 ) , which created the first permanent federal income tax .

deductions for interest paid or unexpected casualty losses were early provisions in the federal income tax code because many businesses were sole proprietorships ( i.e. , pass - through entities ) in which the owner was personally liable for the costs of doing business .

tax deductions expanded during the post - world war ii period between 1947 and the end of the 1970s .

itemized deductions were created for state and local taxes , certain forms of interest , charitable contributions , extraordinary health expenses , and miscellaneous expenses .

as a share of personal income , these deductions grew from approximately 3.7% in 1947 to 10% in 1969 , and then leveled off slightly to 9% in 1979 .

some say that the growth of these itemized deductions was dampened , in part , due to increases in the standard deduction amount .

the standard deduction , which was formerly based on a share of income instead of a set amount adjusted for inflation , grew from a postwar low of 2.4% of income in 1969 to 6.5% of income by 1979 .

this growth in the standard deduction reduced incentives for tax filers to itemize , because the value of the standard deduction exceeded the sum of their itemized deductions .

the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ) represented one of the most comprehensive tax code changes since the creation of the modern tax code in 1913 .

among its main objectives , tra86 sought to "broaden the base" of the individual income tax system , or expand the tax base without raising statutory tax rates , in a way that would provide an equitable distribution of tax reductions among individuals .

with regard to the individual income tax code , tra86 included reductions in marginal tax rates , reductions in the number of tax brackets , increase in the standard deduction , and the elimination or reformation of a variety of itemized deductions .

within this policy framework , tra86 eliminated some tax deductions and reformed other deductions that were left in the tax code .

deductions for state and local sales taxes were eliminated and numerous other deductions ( eg , employee business expenses , travel , and entertainment , and unreimbursed medical expenses ) were limited either through higher thresholds or partial disallowance .

for example , tra86 applied restrictions on the dollar amount of the home mortgage that was eligible for interest deduction ( $1 million for married filing jointly / $500,000 for married filing separately ) , and limited the deduction only to a primary or secondary residence .

following tra86 , itemized deductions claims decreased in value by about one - quarter , dropping from 11.4% of personal income in 1985 to 9.2% by 1988 .

however , this decline in itemized deductions was partially offset in the tax base by a rise in the amount of tax filers claiming the standard deduction , whose value increased with the enactment of the tra86 .

since tra86 , congress has authorized new itemized deductions .

these individual provisions have been regularly reauthorized as part of a package of temporary "tax extenders" and are still in - effect under current law .

for example , an option to deduct state and local sales taxes in lieu of state income taxes was enacted in 2004 .

in addition , qualified home mortgage insurance premiums became eligible for itemized deduction in 2007 .

detailed data on the types of itemized deductions this section of the report presents data tables of how many tax filers claimed specific itemized deductions on their tax returns , and what amount they claimed for each itemized deduction .

these data come from the internal revenue service's ( irs's ) statistics of income for 2010 .

in the aggregate , more than 46.6 million tax filers itemized their tax deductions ( rather than claim the standard deduction ) for a total of more than $1.2 trillion in claim amounts .

table a - 1 and table a - 2 disaggregate the number of tax returns and the claim amounts , respectively , for itemized deductions that are classified as tax expenditures .

table a - 3 and table a - 4 disaggregate the number of tax returns and the claim amounts , respectively , for itemized deductions that are not classified as tax expenditures .

