during the preceding two decades , congress played an active and at times leading role in setting u.s. policy towards burma .

since burma's ruling military junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) , transferred power to a quasi - civilian government in march 2011 , congress has been largely deferential to the decisions of the white house , the department of state , and the department of the treasury on the conduct of u.s. policy towards burma .

with a few important exceptions , adjustments in u.s. policy towards burma over the last two years have been done using executive authority granted by the u.s. constitution or existing legislation .

the obama administration has consulted regularly with the congressional committees with jurisdiction , as well as with key members of congress , as it made changes in bilateral relations .

however , the obama administration has used much of its discretionary authority and may require direct congressional action to implement additional changes in u.s. policy towards burma .

in addition , congress may determine it is time to reassess the situation in burma and to resume its more active role in the determination of u.s. policy towards this politically dynamic country .

the obama administration has ushered in a new approach to u.s. relations with burma ( myanmar ) .

on september 28 , 2009 , the state department announced a change in u.s. policy towards burma after seven months of review , discussion , and consultation .

the existing sanctions regime would remain in place , but new elements of u.s. policy were added .

first , the administration announced its willingness to engage in direct dialogue with burma's ruling military junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) , on how to promote democracy and human rights in burma .

second , it sought to cooperate to a greater extent with the spdc on international security issues , such as nuclear nonproliferation and counternarcotics efforts .

the obama policy would also continue to pursue the same goals of the two preceding administrations — namely , to support "a unified , peaceful , prosperous , and democratic burma that respects the human rights of its citizens. .

in order to achieve these goals , the obama administration would press burma's military leaders to release all its political prisoners , end all its conflicts with ethnic minorities , cease its human rights violations , and initiate "a credible internal political dialogue with the democratic opposition and ethnic minority leaders on elements of reconciliation and reform. .

it would also call for burma to sever its political and military ties to north korea and abandon its alleged nuclear weapons program .

in addition , the obama administration would continue to communicate with other nations and coordinate their respective policies towards burma .

the months following the announcement of a new u.s. policy towards burma would see the nation undergo a dramatic political transformation .

the spdc called for and held parliamentary elections in november 2010 , the first such elections in 20 years .

a few days after the election , opposition leader aung san suu kyi was released from house arrest .

while the conduct of the elections was far from free and fair by international standards , the spdc abided by the results of those elections .

on march 30 , 2011 , the spdc transferred power to a quasi - civilian government ( most of the leaders are ex - generals and one - quarter of the members of the parliament are military officers ) under the provisions of a new constitution largely written by the spdc and purportedly approved by a public plebiscite in 2008 .

since assuming power , burma's quasi - civilian government , led by president thein sein — ex - general in the burmese military and the spdc's last prime minister — has undertaken a number of political and economic reforms that many see as encouraging signs .

hundreds of political prisoners have been released from detention and a few of burma's more oppressive laws have been repealed or amended by burma's union parliament .

in april 2012 , burma held parliamentary by - elections in which nobel peace prize recipient aung san suu kyi and her political party , the national league for democracy ( nld ) , won 43 of the 46 seats .

while the conduct of the by - elections was still flawed , the acceptance of the results by the thein sein administration and the burmese military was generally seen as a positive political development .

over the last two years , the obama administration has responded to such promising developments in burma by enhancing and increasing high - level meetings with the thein sein government and selectively easing many of the existing sanctions on burma .

since adopting the new burma policy , the first u.s. ambassador to burma in 20 years has been appointed , hillary clinton became the first secretary of state in over 50 years to visit burma , and president obama subsequently became the first u.s. president to visit burma while in office .

many of the specific sanctions on burma — including the general ban on importing burmese goods , the ban on new investments in burma , and the restrictions on the provision of financial services to burma — have been waived using presidential authority provided by the laws imposing sanctions on burma .

plans are underway to increase u.s. assistance to burma , including the reopening of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) mission in burma after a 23-year hiatus .

even with the various changes that have taken place in burma since the quasi - civilian government took power , the political and economic situation in the country remains serious , and the reforms are generally viewed as fragile and reversible .

despite ongoing negotiations and the signing of 12 preliminary ceasefire agreements , fighting between the burmese military , or tatmadaw , and various ethnic - based militias continues across the country .

fighting is particularly serious in the kachin state , with regular reports of the tatmadaw committing serious human rights violations against civilians in conflict areas .

rioting in rakhine state in western burma has uncovered festering ethnic tensions in the country .

while the union parliament has passed some laws providing better protection of civil liberties , many of the country's more oppressive laws ( including a few dating back to british colonial rule ) remain on the books .

the nld was able to register and compete in the april 2012 by - elections , but several other political parties have not been allowed to register or refuse to register because some of their members remain in detention for political reasons .

in spite of multiple prisoner releases since may 2011 , over 200 political prisoners are being held in burma's prisons .

the 113 th congress may choose to consider a number of different issues raised by the obama administration's burma policy , as well as burma's political and economic development , including: is president thein sein's government committed to democracy and the protection of human rights in burma , and does it have the ability to continue to implement reforms ? .

will it be able to work with the union parliament and the burmese military to promote political and economic reform ? .

is u.s. policy too closely tied to president thein sein's government , opposition leader aung san suu kyi , and the nld to the neglect of developing relations with burma's ethnic minorities and their representative organizations ? .

what can the united states do to encourage progress in the ongoing negotiations between the burmese government and the various ethnic - based organizations ? .

has the obama administration moved too quickly or too slowly in its easing of sanctions ? .

what would have to occur in burma in order for the sanctions to be removed or the waivers reversed ? .

are the current sanctions on burma being fully and properly enforced in accordance with the law ? .

what types of aid or assistance should the united states provide to support burma ? .

how does u.s. policy towards burma fit with the obama administration's rebalancing to the asia - pacific region and its objectives in southeast asia ? .

what role does burma play in the geopolitical dynamic between china and india and relations within southeast asia ? .

many observers trace the origins of the obama administration's burma policy to a 2007 article in foreign affairs , co - authored by michael green and derek mitchell .

in their article , green and mitchell stated that u.s. policy towards burma at the time was "stuck," and wrote that a change in approach was necessary to press burma's ruling military junta to undertake political and economic reforms .

the changes recommended by green and mitchell in their article are very similar to those announced by the state department in september 2009 — direct engagement with the country's military regime and the continuation of sanctions .

while the conceptual basis of obama's burma policy may have been set , the obama administration's attitude and approach towards burma has seemingly evolved over time .

initially , the white house and the key figures in handling u.s. relations with burma expressed some skepticism and reservations about the quasi - civilian union government , its leadership , and the prospects for significant political and economic reform .

the obama administration also appeared to keep president thein sein's administration at arm's length , and made efforts to balance relations with the new government with contact with aung san suu kyi , other opposition parties , and representatives of ethnic groups .

over time , and in response to various actions by the burmese government , the obama administration's assessment of president thein sein and his government became more optimistic , and ties between the two governments became closer — possibly , in the view of some experts , at the expense of relations with burma's opposition parties and ethnic groups .

after the nld agreed to participate in parliamentary by - elections in april 2012 , u.s. policy shifted to a focus on promoting perceived progressive forces within the thein sein government and isolating individuals and organizations considered anti - reform .

u.s. officials now speak of a partnership with president thein sein's government .

for example , following his meeting with president thein sein in rangoon , president obama said , "we will continue to work with [you] as the partner with the united states. .

as a consequence , u.s. relations with the traditional opposition parties and ethnic organizations may have suffered .

in addition to the apparent closer realignment of the united states towards president thein sein and the union government , the obama administration also switched from an approach of responding to positive developments in burma with graduated relaxation of sanctions — often referred to as an "action for action" approach — to one that attempts to foster or promote further reforms .

whereas in the past senior u.s. officials spoke of the need for burma to demonstrate that conditions have improved enough to warrant the waving of sanctions , more recent statements from the obama administration have focused on creating an environment in burma where more reforms can occur .

these two shifts in the obama administration's burma policy — reliance on the thein sein government and trying to get out in front of burma's reforms — have become a matter of some debate among burma experts and various interest groups .

some observers are concerned that the obama administration has moved too fast and too far in rewarding comparatively modest progress towards the attainment of u.s. goals in burma .

other observers think that the white house has been too slow and too cautious in its actions , and worry that the sanctions that remain in effect are hindering reforms in burma , placing the united states at a disadvantage in influencing political and economic developments there .

much has happened — both positive and negative — since burma's quasi - civilian government took power .

the obama administration may understandably take some credit — and responsibility — for changes that have occurred in burma since announcing its new policy towards burma .

however , the political situation in burma remains fragile and complex , raising a number of important issues about the prospects for political reforms in the future .

what follows is a brief examination of some of the more critical issues .

the 113 th congress may decide to take a more active role in the formulation of u.s. policy towards burma during this time of potential political transition .

some critics of the obama administration's handling of burma relations maintain that it has moved too fast and too far in relaxing sanctions and has become too close to president thein sein and the union government .

other critics say that the obama administration has moved too slowly and cautiously , and that the united states is losing what little influence it may have over the political dynamics and economic development of burma .

congress may choose to make its own assessment of the recent conduct of u.s. policy towards burma , and act as it deems appropriate based on that assessment .

the 112 th congress passed five laws , introduced 28 separate bills , and held six hearings related to burma .

except for p.l .

112-192 , the five laws either extended or reiterated sanctions imposed on burma in previous laws .

most of the 28 bills introduced were reported to their respective committees of jurisdiction and saw no further action .

the six hearings included ambassadorial nomination hearings by the senate committee on foreign relations .

two of the six hearings were focused exclusively on u.s. policy in burma , one by the senate committee on foreign relations and another by the house committee on foreign affairs .

three of the five new laws — p.l .

112-33 , p.l .

112-36 , and p.l .

112-163 — extended the general import ban contained in section 3 of the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-61 ) which is subject to annual renewal .

the two other laws , p.l .

112-74 and p.l .

112-192 , pertained to the use of appropriated funds and international financial institutions ( ifis ) providing assistance to burma , respectively .

section 8128 of division a of p.l .

112-74 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , prohibited the use of any funds appropriated for international military education and training ( imet ) , foreign military financing , excess defense articles , assistance under section 1206 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) , issuance for direct commercial sales of military equipment , or peacekeeping operations in burma ( as well as other selected countries ) if the funds "may be used to support any military training or operations that include child soldiers. .

section 7014 of division i of p.l .

112-74 banned the use fund appropriated for international assistance to burma , and section 7044 ( b ) requires the secretary of the treasury to "instruct the united states executive directors of the appropriate international financial institutions to vote against any loan , agreement , or other financial support for burma. .

p.l .

112-192 granted the secretary of the treasury the option of instructing the u.s. executive director at any international financial institution to "vote in favor of the provision of assistance for burma by the institution , notwithstanding any other provision of law" if the president has determined to do so is in the national interest of the united states .

written notice of such a determination is to be provided to "the committees on foreign relations , banking , housing , and urban affairs , and appropriations of the senate , and the committees on financial services , foreign affairs , and appropriations of the house of representatives. .

in addition , prior to the president making such a determination , "the secretary of state and the secretary of the treasury each shall consult with the appropriate congressional committees on assistance to be provided to burma by an international financial institution , and the national interests served by such assistance. .

in addition to the five bills that became law , the 112 th congress introduced over 20 bills pertaining to burma to varying degrees .

most did not see further action after referral to the committees with jurisdiction .

h.con.res .

135 was approved by both the house and the senate , authorizing the use of the capitol's rotunda for the presentation of the congressional gold medal to aung san suu kyi on september 19 , 2012 .

the six congressional hearings on burma held during the 112 th congress were equally divided between the house committee on foreign affairs ( hfac ) and the senate committee on foreign relations ( sfrc ) .

hfac held a full committee hearing entitled , "religious freedom , democracy , human rights in asia: status of implementation of the tibetan policy act , block burmese jade act , and north korean human rights act," on june 2 , 2011 .

its subcommittee on asia and the pacific held a hearing , "piercing burma's veil of secrecy: the truth behind the sham election and the difficult road ahead," on june 22 , 2011 .

the same subcommittee held a hearing entitled , "oversight of u.s. policy toward burma," on april 25 , 2012 .

two of the three senate hearings related to burma were nomination hearings , both for the same person , derek j. mitchell .

sfrc held a hearing on mitchell's nomination to serve as the first special representative and policy coordinator for burma on june 29 , 2011 , and a hearing for mitchell's nomination as ambassador to burma on june 27 , 2012 .

the third sfrc hearing was held by the subcommittee on east asia and pacific affairs on april 26 , 2012 , with the title of "u.s. policy on burma. .

the 113 th congress has several different aspects of u.s. policy towards burma that it may choose to consider .

in its oversight capacity , congress may decide to investigate and assess the obama administration's general approach to relations with burma , as well as consider the degree to which the administration is fully and faithfully implementing the existing laws that delineate u.s. policy towards burma .

congress may also take up legislation — either of its own volition or at the request of the obama administration — to adjust u.s. policy in light of the changing circumstances in burma .

in addition , congress will have the opportunity to examine administration requests for funding various assistance programs and initiatives in burma , and appropriate what congress determines is a suitable amount .

congressional oversight of the executive branch's administration and implementation of federal laws is long - standing authority implicit in the u.s. constitution .

the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations utilized their oversight authority to request the testimony of senior administration officials for separate hearings on u.s. policy towards burma in april 2012 ( see above ) .

the 113 th congress may choose to hold similar hearings or request information by other means and mechanisms given the developments in burma since these two hearings were held .

such oversight activities may examine the obama administration's general approach to relations with burma and / or the implementation of existing laws that specify details in u.s. policy towards burma .

the 113 th congress may consider examining the reasoning behind the shift in the administration's approach to burma described in this report , and , if it chooses , convey its assessment of the conduct of u.s. policy in burma .

among the key aspects of current u.s. policy congress may decide to consider are: to what extent has the political situation in burma changed over the last two years , and to what extent might it change over the next two years ? .

has the obama administration moved too quickly or too slowly in easing sanctions on burma ? .

is the obama administration overly focused on president thein sein and other burmese officials in the union government damaging relations with the union parliament , opposition political parties , and ethnic organizations ? .

does the obama administration formally accept the union government and the union parliament as the legitimate government in burma ? .

does it accept the legitimacy of the 2008 constitution ? .

should the u.s. government return to a reactive , "action for action" approach to burma , or should it continue to be more proactive , and take steps to try to foster further reforms , as the obama administration appears to have done since april 2012 ? .

what is the obama administration's assessment of the attitudes of the burmese military to political reform in burma , and what does it consider the best approach to dealing with the burmese military in the future ? .

under what circumstances should the u.s. government consider reestablishing military - to - military relations ? .

how does the obama administration view the various ethnic groups , and their associated militias ? .

should the u.s. government establish closer and open relations with the ethnic organizations ? .

beyond the possibility of examining the general framework of u.s. policy towards burma , congress may also contemplate pursuing a number of specific issues related to u.s. policy , including the obama administration's implementation of the existing laws specifying aspects of u.s. policy .

one issue is the administration's intentions with respect to the special representative and policy coordinator for burma .

another issue is the administration of the lists maintained by the secretaries of state and the treasury of burmese nationals subject to political and economic sanctions .

a third issue is the timely submission of legally required reports to congress , and the accuracy and comprehensiveness of those reports .

section 7 of the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 , or 2008 jade act , requires that the president appoint a special representative and policy coordinator for burma , "by and with the advice and consent of the senate. .

it further stipulates that the special representative "shall have the rank of ambassador," and: except for the position of united states ambassador to the association of southeast asian nations [asean] , the special representative and policy coordinator may not simultaneously hold a separate position within the executive branch , including the assistant secretary of state , the deputy assistant secretary of state , the united states ambassador to burma , or the charge d'affairs to burma .

ambassador derek j. mitchell was confirmed by the senate as special representative and policy coordinator for burma on august 2 , 2011 , but stood down from the position after his confirmation as u.s .

ambassador to burma on june 29 , 2012 .

deputy special representative and policy coordinator for burma w. patrick murphy was appointed as acting special representative and policy coordinator for burma on july 23 , 2012 , according to the state department's webpage .

the federal vacancies act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-277 ) allows for temporary appointments for positions requiring the advice and consent of the senate no more than 210 days in most circumstances .

the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending in the senate .

given the date posted by the state department , murphy's temporary appointment has exceeded the 210 day limit .

congress may consider asking the obama administration about its intentions with respect to nominating someone to serve as special representative and policy coordinator for burma .

another aspect of implementation that has drawn criticism is the compilation of lists of burmese persons — people and legal entities — subject to sanctions as required by existing laws .

three laws — section 570 of the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 1997 ( section 570 ) ( p.l .

104-208 ) ; the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 ( 2003 bfda ) ( p.l .

108-61 ) ; and the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( tom lantos block burmese jade act ) ( p.l .

110-286 ) — prohibit the issuance of a entry visa to a variety of burmese nationals based on differing criteria , unless the president determines that providing a visa is in the national interest of the united states .

in addition , various presidential determinations and executive orders ( eos ) ( including eo 13169 , issued by president obama on jul 11 , 2012 ) include provisions blocking the issuance of visas to selected burmese nationals .

the department of state has the responsibility to compile and maintain the list of burmese nationals prohibited from receiving entry visas .

in addition , the 2003 bfda and the tom lantos block burmese jade act freeze the assets of certain burmese persons held by a u.s. person or that enters the united states , and the tom lantos block burmese jade act bans the provision of financial services to individuals subject to a visa ban under this law .

both financial sanctions are to be administered by the secretary of the treasury , in accordance with the relevant laws and presidential eos .

section 5 ( d ) ( 4 ) of the tom lantos block burmese jade act requires the secretaries of state and the treasury to "devote sufficient resources to the identification of information concerning potential persons to be sanctions to carry out the purposes described in this act. .

a number of human rights and burmese solidarity organizations have criticized the departments of state and the treasury for failing to enforce the visa ban and financial sanctions to the full extent of the law .

the state department has not revealed publicly the names on its visa ban list , making it difficult to determine if it is fully compliant with the law .

during the last two years , a number of burmese government officials have visited the united states , including persons that would appear to be subject to the sanctions in section 570 , the 2003 bfda , and / or the tom lantos block burmese jade act .

it is not known if the required written presidential determination to congress that the visit of these people was in the national interest of the united states was provided .

the treasury department has delegated the responsibility of maintaining the list of burmese persons subject to financial sanctions to its office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) , which posts the designated burmese persons as part of its specially designated nationals ( sdn ) list , which is a compilation of all individuals , groups , companies , or entities identified as being subject to sanctions administered by the department of the treasury .

according to the human rights and burmese solidarity organizations , the current sdn list does not include dozens of burmese nationals and companies that meet the conditions specified in the relevant laws .

a third aspect of implementation that has drawn some criticism is related to the delivery and quality of congressionally mandated reports to be provided by the executive branch to congress or designated congressional committees .

appendix c presents in tabular form a list of required reports to congress contained in burmese sanction laws .

not all of the required reports have been delivered to congress by the stipulated deadline .

in some cases — particularly the reports on global sources of military assistance and intelligence to burma , and a report on "all countries and foreign banking institutions that hold assets on behalf of senior burmese officials" — the information provided to congress reportedly was less than comprehensive and lacking in detail .

with one important exception , the existing sanctions on burma remain in effect either until certain conditions have been met or congress acts to terminate or remove the sanctions .

the general import ban specified in section 3 ( a ) of the 2003 bfda is subject to annual renewal by congress .

to date , president obama has used existing authority to waive or ease some of the sanctions on burma , but the underlying authority to impose the sanctions remains in effect .

as such , the imposition of the waived sanctions can be resumed at any time if the president decides to remove the waiver .

the current extension of the general import ban in section 3 ( a ) of the 2003 bfda ends on july 25 , 2013 .

on november 15 , 2012 , the state department released a determination that a waiver of the section 3 ( a ) import ban was in the national interest of the united states .

the 113 th congress may consider if it should extend the section 3 ( a ) import ban , given the current presidential waiver .

in addition , either in response to a request from the white house or based on its own assessment , the 113 th congress may consider legislation to alter or amend current u.s. policy towards burma , including imposing or re - imposing existing sanctions on burma ( for example , by superseding a presidential waiver ) , or revoking or removing one of the sanctions .

congress may also contemplate altering , modifying , and / or clarifying the necessary conditions for the president to determine that selected sanctions can be terminated .

in addition , congress may choose to provide guidance or instruction over the manner in which to conduct u.s. policy towards burma .

besides the possibility of taking up policy - related legislation , the 113 th congress will have an opportunity to consider funding levels for the various assistance programs and other activities in burma proposed by the obama administration .

both president obama and then secretary of state clinton made a number of commitments to the union government to provide assistance in several different areas , including aid to landmine victims , funding for english language training and academic exchange programs , and programs to foster democracy and better governance .

the obama administration also decided to reopen the usaid mission in rangoon , and has plans to expand its staffing and operations .

these activities will require additional federal funding to be carried out .

the amount of funding available for the programs in burma is likely to be affected by sequestration and other budget constraints .

the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , as amended by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) , requires an across - the - board reduction of about 5% of the annualized funding in the fy2013 continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-175 ) , according to the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

after congress passes fy2013 funding legislation for the remainder of the fiscal year , omb will re - calculate the across - the - board cuts .

sequestration does allow the department of state and usaid the authority to reprogram funds , subject to regular notification procedures .

given uncertainty over the country allocations that would be used as the baseline to calculate the sequestration , it is not possible to calculate post - sequestration funding levels for burma .

a possible rough estimate , however , might be determined by reducing fy2012 estimates by 5% .

once congress passes final fy2013 funding legislation , the department of state can then determine the country and program allocations including reprogramming in order to calculate sequestration at the country level .

if the past two years are a reliable indicator , burma will continue to undergo significant political and economic changes over the next three years leading up to its 2015 parliamentary elections .

while domestic forces are most likely to be the major factors determining the path of burma's future , u.s. policy may play a role in influencing the choices made by burma's leaders and its people .

the 113 th congress may , if it so decides , take an active role in the determination and conduct of u.s. policy towards burma during this potentially critical period in the nation's possible transition to a civilian democratic government based on the rule of law and the protection of basic human rights .

appendix a. map of burma ( including regions , states , and major cities ) appendix b .

chronology of major events in burma and developments in u.s. policy the table below provides a chronological summary of the major events in burma , as well as developments in u.s. policy towards burma , since the obama administration announced a new approach to relations with burma .

appendix c. required reports to congress on burma various laws require or request the executive branch to submit reports to congress or designated congressional committees on different topics related to burma .

the following table provides a list of these reports , the relevant law , which agency or agencies is / are responsible for submitting the report , to whom they are to be submitted , the frequency of the reporting requirement , the deadline for submission , and the mode of delivery .

