on october 14 , 2011 , the house passed the coal residuals reuse and management act ( h.r .

2273 ) .

on august 2 , 2012 , the coal ash recycling and oversight act of 2012 ( s. 3512 ) was introduced in the senate .

each bill would have amended the solid waste disposal act — more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 ( rcra ; 42 u.s.c .

§6901 et seq. ) .

the house subsequently incorporated the provisions of the senate bill in title iv of h.r .

3409 , the stop the war on coal act , passed in the house on september 12 , 2012 .

the bills would have created a framework that states could use to create permit programs for the "management and disposal" of coal combustion residuals ( ccrs , also referred to generally as "coal ash" ) .

in states that did not create a program that met program specifications included in the proposed amendment , or in other specified circumstances , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) would have been required to implement a program .

each bill would have added to subtitle d of rcra a new section 4011 , management and disposal of coal combustion residuals .

compared to h.r .

2273 , the senate - introduced bill ( s. 3512 and title iv of h.r .

3409 ) included more detailed provisions applicable to the program .

however , the approach to creating state permit programs was largely the same in each bill .

that approach is unique within rcra .

as a result , state permit programs implementing regulations applicable to ccr disposal , created in accordance with statutory permit program specifications , would differ from other permit programs created in rcra .

legislation addressing ccrs may be considered in the 113 th congress .

analysis of selected elements of the legislation considered during the 112 th congress is provided in this report as background for future legislation that may take a similar approach .

that approach , proposed in the 112 th congress , was to create state programs to regulate a particular type of waste ( ccrs ) using as its framework existing federal - state programs to regulate municipal solid waste ( msw ) landfills .

for that existing program , pursuant to directives in subtitle d of rcra , epa promulgated federal regulatory criteria applicable to owners and operators of msw landfills ; states adopted those federal criteria and implemented them using a permit program ; and epa approved each state permit program , based on epa's determination of whether each program was adequate to ensure facility compliance with baseline federal regulatory criteria .

further , as explicitly required by congress , the federal criteria promulgated by epa , applicable to msw landfills , were required to be those necessary to "protect human health and the environment. .

the approach used in the 112 th congress bills would not have provided an explicit mandate that epa or the states promulgate regulations applicable to ccr disposal facilities .

instead , the proposed section 4011 would itself list permit program specifications that individual states would be required to apply to "ccr structures. .

using this approach to creating largely state - based programs , it is difficult to determine in advance how such statutory specifications may be interpreted by each state .

the proposed amendment would also have provided no explicit authority for epa to directly enforce regulatory criteria applicable to ccr disposal units ( short of epa running a ccr permit program for a state ) .

such authority provided to epa in other parts of rcra ( and in some other pollution control laws ) has generally served as an incentive to states to adopt and implement federal regulatory criteria .

the absence of such authority makes it difficult to anticipate the degree to which epa may encourage states to adopt and implement a program to regulate ccrs that would comply with the permit program specifications and other relevant provisions in the proposed section 4011 .

the bills considered in the 112 th congress were proposed in the wake of a june 2010 proposal by epa to regulate ccrs .

this report provides background and selected information regarding that epa proposal , including epa's determination that ccrs should be regulated according to national waste management standards , rather than standards determined by individual states — as they are regulated currently .

the report also describes selected elements of rcra subtitles c and d , relevant to both epa's proposal to regulate ccrs and the legislative proposals to create state programs to regulate ccrs .

this report looks primarily at how state programs to regulate ccrs may be developed and implemented by a state according to directives in the bills proposed in the 112 th congress ; it does not attempt to identify detailed requirements that may be applied by a state regulatory program .

accordingly , the report does not compare provisions in house and senate bills proposed in the 112 th congress or provide detailed analysis of provisions in those bills , except to the extent that individual provisions may be relevant to the regulatory program a state may develop and implement to regulate ccrs .

federal criteria applicable to msw landfills were promulgated in 1991 .

state efforts to adopt the federal criteria and implement them according to an epa - approved permit program have been largely complete for more than 15 years .

in comparing the proposed approach to regulate ccrs to the now - mature and already epa - approved state programs to regulate msw landfills , where relevant , this report provides information regarding those existing programs as they have been implemented ( eg , with regard to enforcement authorities that epa could have exercised , but did not ) .

also , to simplify the discussion in this report , potential programs to regulate ccrs are discussed in the present tense ( eg , references to programs that "may be" or "could be" created and implemented by states refer to programs that may or could have been created pursuant to bills proposed in the 112 th congress ) .

since the most recent bill passed by the house adopted provisions in the senate bill , unless otherwise noted , any reference to "the bills," "the proposed amendment to rcra," or "section 4011" refers to s. 3512 / title iv of h.r .

3409 , proposed in the 112 th congress .

provisions included throughout the bills use the term "ccr permit program" to refer to state programs to regulate ccrs .

the proposed amendments to rcra would not create a "permit program," per se ( see discussion in " provisions relevant to potential state ccr permit programs " ) .

instead , selected provisions in the bills would form a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate ccr management ( i.e. , its use or disposal ) .

to distinguish between "permit programs" as they have been previously created in rcra and programs that could be created pursuant to the approach taken in the proposed bills , use of the phrase "ccr permit program" will mean a program that could be developed , adopted , or implemented by or for a state according to provisions in proposed section 4011 .

further , since the bills were designed to result in a state - based regulatory program , discussion of ccr permit programs focuses primarily on the programs that may be created by states , as opposed to a program to regulate ccrs that could potentially be implemented by epa for a state .

a ccr permit program , created pursuant to the proposed bills , would draw from certain existing federal regulations and requirements , and proposed federal standards .

in particular , required elements of a ccr permit program would draw from existing federal regulatory criteria applicable to owners and operators of msw landfills ( at 40 c.f.r .

part 258 ) ; selected epa requirements for state permit programs implementing the msw landfill criteria ( at 40 c.f.r .

part 229 ) ; and selected standards applicable to ccr landfills and surface impoundments included in epa's june 2010 proposal to regulate ccrs , under its subtitle d option .

to determine the degree to which a ccr permit program created under section 4011 may resemble state programs to regulate msw landfills , it is helpful to outline how those state programs to regulate msw landfills were created and implemented and to recognize the purpose of selected details of those regulations .

as noted , the house and senate bills considered in the 112 th congress would add to subtitle d of rcra a new section 4011 , "management and disposal of coal combustion residuals. .

the bills would encourage states to create permit programs according to statutory standards included in the amendment .

section 4011 would provide a framework for states to create permit programs to regulate ccr management .

generally , the term "permit program" refers to the body of requirements that a permitting authority ( generally a state agency ) uses to implement and enforce regulations .

the proposed section 4011 would not create a permit program , per se .

instead , it would provide the framework that states may be expected to use to create a permit program ( i.e. , regulations applicable to ccr disposal units and the program to implement and enforce those regulations ) .

section 4011 would provide the program specifications a state would use to create its permit program , allowing states a certain degree of flexibility to determine details regarding how the program would be implemented and to whom it would apply .

provisions of the proposed bills discussed below are those likely to have the most impact on the development and implementation of individual state ccr permit programs , and epa's potential role in oversight and implementation of those programs .

the ccr bills in the 112 th congress did not explicitly state that state - implemented ccr permit programs would be intended to emulate ( in their broad objectives or in specific program details ) federal - state programs to regulate msw landfills .

statements in the legislative history , however , asserted that the bills intended to facilitate the recovery and beneficial use of ccrs by creating a "state - based permit program that utilizes the framework and requirements of the existing municipal solid waste landfill permit program as an enforceable minimum federal standard for the regulation of coal ash. .

the degree to which states would create , implement , and enforce programs to regulate ccrs that are similar to programs to implement and enforce regulations applicable to msw landfills depends on various factors that cannot be determined in advance .

however , certain similarities and differences can be identified .

the similarities between the existing program to regulate msw landfills and the proposed ccr program lie primarily in the requirement that a ccr permit program would apply selected msw landfill criteria to owners and operators of ccr structures .

proposed ccr permit program elements likely to have the most impact on state program implementation that are different from existing programs to regulate msw landfills pertain to the following ( each of which is discussed in more detail below ) : the potential flexibility in state program development and implementation — in the absence of provisions comparable to general regulatory standards , applicable either to regulations that would be implemented by the permit program or to the permit program itself , it would appear that each state could determine key elements related to program implementation ( eg , program applicability ) and facility compliance , at least to the degree that such state determinations did not undercut a viable state program .

a state - determined standard of protection — permit programs were created previously under rcra when congress wanted to ensure that certain solid waste disposal facilities would be subject to regulatory criteria that achieved a minimum national standard of protection and that a permit program would be implemented to assure facility compliance with that standard .

the proposed statutory criteria included among the permit program specifications are not comparable , in scope or in detail , to those identified by epa as those necessary to protect human health from risks specific to ccr disposal and use ( in the june 2010 epa proposal ) .

absent directives that regulations promulgated and applied to ccr structures achieve a federal standard of protection , states might promulgate and implement regulations according to a state - established standard of protection , which might vary from state to state .

epa's role in program creation and implementation — epa would have no formal role in program development and a limited role in program implementation .

within the limited conditions and authorities specified , it is difficult to determine whether the potential for epa to implement a ccr permit program for a state would serve as an incentive to states to implement a program according to the requirements specified in section 4011 .

pursuant to rcra subtitle d , epa has been required to promulgate regulations specific to certain types of waste disposal facilities .

epa and state agency roles in implementing and enforcing those regulations were largely established in rcra's comprehensive amendments to the solid waste disposal act in 1976 and the hazardous and solid waste amendments of 1984 .

one set of regulations promulgated by epa , the criteria applicable to msw landfills , is in 40 c.f.r .

part 258 .

epa's involvement in the creation of state programs to adopt , implement , and enforce those criteria evolved during the 1990s , but largely ended in the early 2000s , when state programs deemed adequate by epa were in place in all u.s. states and territories .

these now - mature state msw programs reflect a variety of state approaches , but share common elements .

for example , those programs have similarities with regard to the following: regulations — the federal msw landfill criteria at 40 c.f.r .

part 258 are those epa determined ( as part of a public rulemaking process ) are necessary to protect human health and the environment from risks specific to the management of msw in landfills ; baseline federal criteria were applied to owners and operators of regulated units within two years of epa promulgating the regulations , regardless of when states adopted the regulations or created a permit program to implement them ; many states used the federal regulatory criteria as a model for their own regulations , in most cases modifying existing programs to meet the federal criteria ; individual state regulations applicable to msw landfills could vary , as long as facility compliance with those regulations would meet the baseline federal level of protection .

permit programs — state permit programs were intended to ensure facility compliance with regulations applicable to owners and operators of msw landfills ; state programs were approved by epa based on its determination that they were adequate to ensure facility compliance ( according to requirements specified in 40 c.f.r .

part 239 ) ; all states are currently implementing permit programs approved by epa .

enforcement — epa could directly enforce the federal msw landfill criteria in any state that epa determined did not have an adequate permit program ; epa has never exercised its authority to directly enforce the federal criteria , but concern over the possibility that epa could do so likely served as an incentive to states to adopt and implement permit programs that would be deemed adequate by epa ; epa could potentially withdraw its approval of a state program , if epa were to receive information indicating that the program is not being implemented as originally described by a state , but epa has not done so .

the bills considered in the 112 th congress would use a fundamentally different framework to create state programs to regulate ccrs .

the bills did not explicitly require epa to set uniform national standards of protection or promulgate regulations applicable to ccr structures .

in taking this unique approach , several questions are raised that cannot be answered until states begin to develop and implement their programs and epa interprets its role as it would be described in the proposed bills: how would states interpret minimum program requirements and the msw landfill criteria listed in the bills to promulgate regulations applicable to owners and operators of ccr structures ? .

given the flexibility the bills would have provided states to define what constitutes a ccr "landfill," "surface impoundment," or "other land - based unit," to what specific "ccr structures" would state permit program conditions be applied ? .

would epa issue guidance to clarify what it would consider a ccr "structure" ? .

if so , how much would epa's guidance influence states ? .

to what extent would the bills result in states developing or revising requirements for ccr management that would go beyond current waste management requirements ? .

when would owners and operators of ccr structures be subject to any new regulations ? .

if a state were to promulgate new regulations , how would that state determine the level of protection that ccr structures would be required to meet ? .

how would epa interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies ? .

would epa identify a program as having a deficiency if epa determined it was not adequate to ensure facility compliance with requirements necessary to protect human health ? .

for example , would epa identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "ccr landfill" that epa determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of ccrs that constitute disposal on land are regulated ? .

when and how often would epa identify program deficiencies ? .

would epa review a program for adequacy immediately after a state certified that it had a program in place , or would it wait until years after ? .

would epa make such determinations on an ongoing basis ? .

would epa establish requirements ( similar to 40 c.f.r .

part 239 ) or issue guidance to allow states to determine what epa may identify as a program deficiency ? .

under a range of circumstances specified in the proposed bills , epa would be required to implement a ccr permit program for a state .

given that directive , would epa promulgate regulations applicable to ccr structures that it would then implement under those circumstances ? .

if so , how much influence would epa regulations have on a state's development of its own regulations ? .

if epa implemented a permit program for a state , what regulations would epa implement — its own or a state's ? .

if epa uses its own rules , how would the agency interpret permit program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to interpret ( eg , what constitutes a ccr structure or deadlines that existing ccr structures would be required to meet ) ? .

how would epa use its existing general authorities under rcra and the latitude provided in the bills to interpret section 4011 in a way that it views as necessary to ensure the viability of the state programs ? .

some in congress who have expressed concern that epa has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates have supported legislation that would limit epa's role in regulating ccr disposal while encouraging states to create programs to regulate the material according to conditions established in federal law ( i.e. , by creating a ccr permit program pursuant to proposed section 4011 ) .

supporters of this approach have suggested , given the unique conditions in each state , that such programs to regulate ccrs could be at least as effective as federal requirements that may be established by epa under either regulatory option proposed in june 2010 .

others counter that , given the potential gaps in existing state programs to regulate ccrs , a program that would continue to allow states flexibility to regulate ccr disposal as they deem necessary would not necessarily fill those gaps — potentially allowing waste management practices identified by epa as those posing a risk to human health to continue .

in light of epa's june 2010 proposal and uncertainty regarding the agency's future regulatory plans , it is likely that ccr legislation will be considered in the 113 th congress .

congressional consideration of such legislation will occur in the context of ongoing concern about the impacts of current ccr facilities , changing economics for coal - fired electricity , and a range of perspectives about the appropriate role of states and epa .

appendix a .

selected authorities and directives in rcra relevant to ccr management any waste deemed nonhazardous or explicitly excluded from the subtitle c requirements ( such as ccrs ) is subject to rcra subtitle d. in contrast to the directive and authorities provided to epa to promulgate and enforce standards applicable to hazardous waste , subtitle d established state and local governments as the primary regulating and implementing entities for the management of solid waste ( i.e. , household garbage and nonhazardous industrial solid waste ) .

under subtitle d , states have the primary authority to implement and enforce standards applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste .

epa's role in regulating the management of nonhazardous solid wastes is , with certain exceptions , limited to promulgating criteria applicable to rcra's prohibition on open dumping .

that prohibition is enforceable by states or by citizens , pursuant to rcra's citizen suit provisions .

epa's role regarding the open dumping prohibition was to promulgate regulations that contained criteria to distinguish between facilities that would be classified as "sanitary landfills" or "open dumps. .

at a minimum , a facility would be deemed a sanitary landfill if solid waste disposal at such a facility posed no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment .

disposal facilities that did not meet the criteria for sanitary landfills would be considered open dumps , prohibited under subtitle d. epa's june 2010 subtitle d option to promulgate standards applicable to owners and operators of landfills and surface impoundments that receive ccrs would be done pursuant to its existing authority under subtitle d to promulgate criteria applicable to open dumping .

specifically , if finalized , the subtitle d option would be implemented pursuant to epa's authority under rcra section 4004 to identify criteria necessary to determining whether a facility should be classified as a "sanitary landfill" or an "open dump. .

in 1984 , the hazardous and solid waste amendments of 1984 ( hswa ; p.l .

98-616 ) amended rcra subtitle d to — add section 4010 "adequacy of certain guidelines and criteria" ( 42 u.s.c .

§6949a ) ; and amend the existing section 4005 , "upgrading of open dumps," to include section 4005 ( c ) , "control of hazardous disposal" ( 42 u.s.c .

§6945 ( c ) ) .

pursuant to provisions in these sections , epa promulgated the msw landfill criteria ( at 40 c.f.r .

part 258 ) and requirements necessary to determine the adequacy of state permit programs that implement those criteria ( at 40 c.f.r .

part 239 ) .

the manner in which the federal msw landfill criteria were adopted , implemented , and enforced by states illustrates the limitations to epa's authority under subtitle d to require states to adopt , implement , and enforce federal criteria applicable to owner / operators of facilities that receive waste other than msw .

beyond its limited authority to directly enforce the msw landfill criteria in states without an epa - approved permit program , epa is not authorized to regulate any other type of nonhazardous solid waste ( such as ccrs ) .

instead , epa may only expand upon the landfill criteria relevant to the state - enforced prohibition of open dumping .

further , epa has no authority to require or approve / disapprove of state solid waste permit programs applicable to facilities receiving any other type of solid waste regulated under subtitle d. provisions in rcra that prescribe epa and state authorities to promulgate , implement , and / or enforce requirements broadly applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste are identified and summarized in table a - 1 .

determining criteria necessary to "protect human health and the environment" under rcra under rcra , when congress has required epa to promulgate regulations applicable to solid waste disposal facilities and required those regulation to be implemented using a permit program , at a minimum , those standards have been explicitly required to be those necessary to protect human health and the environment from threats specific to a particular type of waste disposal facility or units that may receive a particular type of waste .

regulatory criteria that meet that directive have been identified in the more than 30 years that epa has gone through the public rulemaking process .

with regard to waste management , necessary protections involve the identification of various factors , including , but not limited to common methods of managing the waste — such as in a landfill or surface impoundment pond ; analysis of toxic constituents — this step involves waste characterizations to identify constituents likely in the waste that may cause harm to humans , such as heavy metals ; potential pathways of human exposure — the presence of toxic constituents alone is not relevant if they cannot reach humans ( or the environment ) ; pathways of exposure may include potential release to air or to water from precipitation run - on / runoff across the disposal site , or contaminant leaching to surface water or groundwater at levels that could lead to drinking water exceeding maximum contaminant levels ( mcls ) established under the safe drinking water act ; potential protective measures — waste management practices identified as those that may minimize human exposure to toxins below a standard specified according to federal law ; such practices have included a requirement that composite liners be used at the site of deposition .

in gathering this information , epa must rely on data provided by states and the potentially regulated industry .

much of what epa knows now about what constitutes waste management criteria necessary to protect human health has been gleaned from the process to determine criteria applicable to hazardous waste treatment , storage and disposal facilities ( tsdfs ) and for msw landfills .

final regulations represent the "minimum national standard" applicable to waste disposal facilities that , when implemented , would be expected to would achieve the standard of protection set in statute .

epa considers risk to be the chance of harmful effects to human health or to ecological systems resulting from exposure to an environmental stressor .

a stressor is any physical , chemical , or biological entity that can induce an adverse response .

stressors may adversely affect specific natural resources or entire ecosystems , including plants and animals , as well as the environment with which they interact .

epa uses risk assessments to characterize the nature and magnitude of health risks to humans ( eg , residents , workers , recreational visitors ) and ecological receptors ( eg , birds , fish , wildlife ) from chemical contaminants and other stressors that may be present in the environment .

waste management criteria that meet a federal performance standard pursuant to a directive from congress , the federal regulatory criteria applicable to msw landfills were designed to "protect human health and the environment" from risks specific to the management of municipal solid waste in a landfill ( see information included under "rcra section 4010a ; 42 u.s.c .

§6949a , adequacy of certain guidelines and criteria," listed in table a - 1 ) .

promulgated in 1991 , those federal criteria ( in 40 c.f.r .

part 258 ) have since been adopted and implemented by individual states .

in its june 2010 proposal to regulate ccrs , standards included in epa's subtitle d option were designed to meet the standard of protection established by congress for sanitary landfills ( requirements included under 40 c.f.r .

part 257 ) .

to meet that standard of protection , epa's proposed standards applicable to ccr landfills and surface impoundments were designed to be those that would pose "no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment from disposal of solid waste at such facility" ( see information included under "§6944 ( a ) , criteria for sanitary landfills," listed in table a - 1 ) .

in establishing that subtitle d option , epa drew largely from the existing msw landfill criteria .

however , those existing criteria would not address all risks specific to the management of ccrs in landfills and surface impoundments .

to recognize the differences between the existing msw landfill criteria and epa's proposed standards for ccr disposal units , table a - 2 compares each set of criteria .

listed under each column are individual requirements specifying general compliance standards ( statements of purpose and scope , facility compliance deadlines , and program definitions ) and regulatory criteria detailing location restrictions , operating criteria , design criteria , groundwater monitoring and corrective action , closure and post - closure care , and financial assurance .

when individual requirements are largely similar , only the regulatory heading is included .

when there is a significant difference between two requirements , additional information is provided to clarify that difference .

those descriptions are not intended to summarize the full range of detail in each requirement .

the most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surface impoundments .

for example , requirements that would provide protections specific to the disposal of liquids are not included in part 258 because bulk disposal of liquids is prohibited in msw landfills .

in comparison , epa's june 2010 subtitle d proposal includes various requirements intended to address issues unique to the management of ccrs , particularly the accumulation of liquids in surface impoundments and with regard to both the higher potential risk of a catastrophic release associated with a structural failure and contaminant leaching from those units .

for an example of the level of detail included in regulatory criteria , as well as an example of a requirement that epa determined was necessary ensure that management of ccrs in surface impoundment would pose no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment , table a - 3 lists epa's proposed "design criteria for new ccr surface impoundments and lateral expansions" at 40 c.f.r .

§257.72 .

as an example of the level of detail provided in regulatory criteria , table a - 3 lists epa's "design criteria for new ccr surface impoundments and lateral expansions" at proposed 40 c.f.r .

§257.72 .

as discussed in the section " proposed epa standards to address risks specific to ccr management ," in epa's assessment , the ccr damage cases and epa's quantitative groundwater risk assessment show the need for effective liners — namely composite liners — to significantly reduce the probability of adverse effects .

the proposed subtitle d design standards would require that new landfills and all surface impoundments that have not completed closure prior to the effective date of the rule , can only continue to operate if composite liners and leachate collection and removal systems have been installed .

units would be required to be retrofitted with a liner or closed within five years of the effective date of the final rule .

that is the same time frame epa proposed under its subtitle c alternative .

epa also proposed to require the same liner and leachate collection and removal systems as part of the subtitle d criteria as those being proposed under its subtitle c option .

epa noted that the technical justification for the requirements is equally applicable to the wastes and surface impoundment , irrespective of the statutory authority under which the requirement is proposed .

appendix b .

requirements in 40 c.f.r .

part 239 and comparable program elements in the amendment to rcra proposed in the 112 th congress the state implementation rule ( sir ) , or requirements for state permit program determination of adequacy at 40 c.f.r .

part 239 , specify the requirements that state permit programs were required have to be deemed adequate by the epa .

an adequate program was one that epa determined could ensure regulated facility compliance with the msw landfill criteria .

the requirements list the detailed information that states were required to provide to epa , as well as the authorities , activities , and procedures a state would have to demonstrate that they had in place , before epa would approve a state program as adequate to enforce the federal msw landfill criteria .

listed below are provisions included in the bills proposed in the 112 th congress that appear to be drawn from the requirements included in 40 c.f.r .

part 239 .

potential differences in program implementation can be seen when statutory requirements that would apply to a ccr permit program are compared to the regulatory requirements applicable to the permit program to implement the msw landfill criteria at 40 c.f.r .

part 239 ( listed in table b - 1 ) .

those subsections are primarily the following: 4011 ( b ) state actions .

provisions pertaining to program certification include selected elements from section 239.3 , components of program application and section 239.4 , narrative description of state permit program .

4011 ( c ) permit program specifications .

included under the "minimum requirements" in this section are five provisions ( pertaining to permits , state notification , agency requirements , agency authority , and state authority ) that are drawn , in part , from selected individual criteria included among the requirements for adequate permit programs in subpart c of part 239 .

4011 ( d ) written notice and opportunity to remedy and 4011 ( e ) implementation by administrator .

both sections include provisions drawn , in part , from selected elements in 40 c.f.r .

§239.13 , criteria and procedures for withdrawal of determination of adequacy .

4011 ( k ) definitions .

proposed definitions comparable to those in 40 c.f.r .

part 239 are those for "coal combustion residuals permit program" and "permit. .

the applicability of a ccr permit program would also depend on the definition of a "structure" ( at proposed section 4011 ( k ) ( 6 ) ) , which would mean a landfill , surface impoundment , or other land - based unit which may receive ccrs , but would not include any land - based unit that receives only de minimis quantities of ccrs .

appendix c. rcra provisions and epa responses related to directives in the "bevill amendment" as required under subtitle c , epa first proposed hazardous waste management regulations in 1978 .

in these proposed regulations , epa identified six categories of wastes it deemed "special wastes" that would be deferred from hazardous waste management requirements until further study and assessment could be completed to determine their risk to human health and the environment .

these special wastes were identified because they typically were generated in large volumes and , at the time , were believed to pose less risk to human health and the environment than the wastes being identified for regulation as hazardous waste .

in the months before the hazardous waste regulations were finalized in 1980 , congress was debating rcra reauthorization .

in february 1980 , representative tom bevill introduced an amendment to the pending legislation that would require epa to defer the imposition of hazardous waste regulatory requirements for fossil fuel combustion waste until data regarding its potential hazard to human health or the environment could be determined .

representative bevill stated that epa's intent to regulate such waste as hazardous would discourage the use of coal and constitute an unnecessary burden on the utility industry .

in anticipation of the enactment of this legislation , according to epa , the agency excluded the regulation of fossil fuel combustion waste from its final hazardous waste regulations .

ultimately , the solid waste disposal act amendments of 1980 ( p.l .

96-482 ) included provisions commonly referred to as the "bevill amendment" or the "bevill exclusion. .

under those provisions congress specifically excluded ccrs from regulation under rcra subtitle c , pending epa's completion of a report to congress and regulatory determination on whether hazardous waste regulations were warranted .

pursuant to that directive , epa was required to conduct a comprehensive study and submit to congress a report on the adverse effects on human health and the environment related to the disposal and utilization of wastes and other byproduct materials generated primarily from the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels , including an analysis of the source and volumes of such material generated per year ; present disposal and utilization practices ; potential danger , if any , to human health and the environment from the disposal and reuse of such materials ; documented cases in which danger to human health or the environment from surface runoff or leachate has been proved ; alternatives to current disposal methods ; the costs of such alternatives ; the impact of those alternatives on the use of coal and other natural resources ; and the current and potential utilization of such materials .

further , as it deemed appropriate , epa was required to review studies and other actions of other federal and state agencies regarding the material and invite participation by other concerned parties , including industry , with a view toward avoiding duplication of effort .

both legislative and administrative actions regarding the potential regulation of ccrs , particularly epa action taken in response to the bevill directive and more recent action taken in the wake of the kingston release , are summarized in table c - 1 .

in march 2000 , epa submitted its "regulatory determination on wastes from fossil fuel combustion" to the white house office of management and budget , for review .

in this march draft , epa determined that ccrs warranted regulation under subtitle c when land disposed ( eg , managed in landfills or surface impoundments ) .

further , epa stated that it was considering developing national management standards that would include a contingent hazardous waste listing of ccrs under subtitle c. that is , when the waste was managed in accordance with epa standards , they would not be classified as hazardous waste .

when improperly managed ( eg , disposed of in an unlined surface impoundment ) the wastes would become a listed hazardous waste subject to tailored subtitle c standards .

epa recognized that its march 2000 proposal was a departure from previous opinions regarding the management of ccrs .

epa's determination that ccrs warranted regulation as hazardous waste was based , in part , on data from damage cases that showed the potential threat to human health and the environment when the waste was managed in a way that lacked basic environmental control ( eg , disposal in units with no liner or groundwater monitoring ) .

additionally , epa cited new data that identified significant risks for the waste to leach arsenic , including risk to human health associated with agricultural uses of coal ash a substitute for lime .

in may 2000 , after review by omb , epa issued a revised regulatory determination that stated its intent to leave the bevill exclusion in place .

however , epa stated that it was convinced that national regulations under subtitle d were warranted for ccr disposal in landfills and surface impoundments because 1. the composition of the waste had the potential to present danger to human health and the environment in certain circumstances ; 2 .

epa had identified proven cases of damages to human health and the environment through improper waste management ; 3. while industry management practices had improved measurably , there was sufficient evidence the wastes were being managed in a significant number of landfills and surface impoundments without proper controls in place , particularly in the area of groundwater monitoring ; and 4. while there had been substantive improvements in state regulatory programs , epa identified significant gaps either in states' regulatory authorities or in their exercise of existing authorities .

further , citing its concern regarding the potential mismanagement and inconsistent state regulation of ccrs , epa stated that it would revise its determination if it found that a need for regulation under subtitle c was warranted .

epa's june 2010 proposal reflects the agency's revised determination .

