late in the 113 th congress , former house ways and means committee chairman dave camp introduced a comprehensive tax reform bill , the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) .

while no action was taken on h.r .

1 in the 113 th congress , tax reform remained a key issue of interest early in the 114 th congress .

in january 2015 , the senate finance committee established five bipartisan working groups to evaluate tax reform options .

the working groups' reports were released in july 2015 .

both the senate finance committee and the house ways and means committee have continued to hold hearings on tax reform in the 114 th congress .

there are various policy options for achieving comprehensive tax reform .

one option is to enact a base - broadening reform , maintaining the current system with reduced tax rates , in the spirit of the tax reform act of 2014 .

a second option is to substantially revise or eliminate the current tax system , instead relying on an alternative tax base for revenues ( eg , taxing consumption rather than income ) .

tax reform legislation introduced early in the 114 th congress has tended to take the latter approach , proposing a retail sales tax at the federal level or a flat tax .

either option can be designed to be revenue - neutral or change the revenue outlook , depending on the exact provisions of the reform .

as an alternative to comprehensive tax reform , congress may choose to consider reforms to certain parts of the code .

for example , congress may choose to consider international tax reform options , or evaluate business - only options .

toward the end of 2015 , as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , certain temporary provisions for individuals and businesses were made permanent .

the 114 th congress may consider other targeted tax changes to the taxation of individuals or businesses , absent comprehensive tax reform .

tax systems are often evaluated using the criteria of efficiency , equity , and simplicity .

one goal of tax reform is to enhance economic efficiency , removing provisions in the code that adversely affect decisionmaking and economic output .

changes in tax policy also have equity implications , with respect to "fairness" of the tax code .

the current tax code is widely seen as being overly complex .

thus , tax reform provides the opportunity to simplify the u.s. tax system .

balancing these three objectives often involves trade - offs .

balancing the trade - offs in these objectives is one of the challenges policymakers face in implementing tax reform .

fundamental or comprehensive tax reform may be achieved either by modifying the existing income tax system or by changing the source of tax revenue ( eg , replacing the current tax system ) .

in modifying the existing tax system , base - broadening could raise additional tax revenues .

the additional revenues could either be used to reduce tax rates or for deficit reduction .

similarly , revenues from a new tax ( eg , a consumption tax ) could be used to offset reductions in current taxes , or to reduce the deficit .

much of the recent debate has centered around a revenue - neutral tax reform , with lower rates on individual and corporate income .

either base - broadening or an alternative revenue source could be used to pay for lower rates in a revenue - neutral tax reform .

how revenue - neutrality is evaluated might also be an issue to be considered , with some suggesting that dynamic scoring be used to evaluate tax reform proposals .

in evaluating any change in tax policy , the prevailing economic framework is to analyze the tax policy for equity , efficiency , and simplicity .

tradeoffs may exist between these three objectives .

for example , if greater income equality is desired , this may conflict with the goal of economic efficiency .

tax reform options continue to be actively debated in the 114 th congress .

while there has been sustained congressional interest in tax reform , it is not clear what form reform might take .

comprehensive tax reform , similar to what was proposed in the tax reform act of 2014 , remains an option .

it is also possible that tax reform efforts proceed but target a specific sector of the economy , through a business - only tax reform or a reform of international tax law .

several major tax reform proposals were put forward by members in the 113 th congress .

while comprehensive tax reform was not enacted , proposals introduced in the 113 th congress may continue to inform the debate .

tax reform continues to be of interest in the 114 th congress .

one open question is whether congress will choose to pursue comprehensive tax reform that simultaneously addresses the individual and corporate income tax systems , including multinational corporations .

an alternative may be to look at international or business - only reforms .

the extent to which such reforms are feasible and would achieve the policy objectives of tax reform remains an open question .

another open question is whether the federal tax system should continue to rely on taxing income as the primary source of revenue .

several tax reform proposals introduced in the 114 th congress would tend to shift the tax system away from taxing income , taxing consumption instead .

