in 2008 , the u.s. supreme court decided district of columbia v. heller , in which the court held that the second amendment to the u.s. constitution protects an individual right to possess a firearm , unconnected with service in a militia , and the use of that firearm for traditionally lawful purposes , such as self - defense within the home .

shortly afterward in mcdonald v. city of chicago , the supreme court held that the second amendment also applies to the states , but it did not further explore the scope of the second amendment .

although heller did not constitute "an exhaustive historical analysis ... of the full scope of the second amendment," the court noted that its decision "does not imperil every law regulating firearms," and "[does] not cast doubt [] on longstanding regulatory measures [such] as 'prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill,' 'laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings , or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms.' .

since heller and mcdonald , both federal and state firearms laws have been regularly challenged under the second amendment .

this report first discusses the standard of judicial review that the lower courts generally have fashioned to determine if a firearm law is in violation of the second amendment .

next , the report examines select categories of firearms laws that have been challenged under the second amendment .

these include ( 1 ) prohibitions on certain persons based on age and on criminal history ; ( 2 ) state concealed carry laws ; and ( 3 ) state and local assault weapons bans .

an examination of these categories could provide some insight as to how courts might assess future firearms legislation on second amendment grounds .

in the 113 th congress , several gun control proposals have been introduced .

these include , among others , measures that would ban certain assault weapons and prohibit possession of large capacity magazines ( eg , s. 150 / h.r .

437 / s. 33 ) ; and measures that would require background checks on private transfers of firearms or ammunition ( eg , s. 22 / s. 174 / s. 374 / h.r .

141 ) .

a significant question left open by the court in heller centers on the standard of scrutiny that should be applied to laws regulating the possession and use of firearms .

generally , there are three levels of judicial scrutiny .

first , strict scrutiny , the most rigorous , requires a statute to be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest .

second , intermediate scrutiny , requires a statute to further a government interest in a way that is substantially related to that interest .

third , the rational basis standard merely requires the statute to be rationally related to a legitimate government function .

the court in heller rejected the rational basis test and also explicitly rejected justice breyer's "interest - balancing" inquiry , distinguishing this "judge - empowering" approach from the "traditionally expressed levels" of scrutiny .

however , the court did not establish or clearly apply any judicial standard , declaring instead that the challenged firearms provisions were unconstitutional "[u]nder any of the standards of scrutiny that [the court has] applied to enumerated constitutional rights. .

both federal and state laws have long prohibited certain categories of individuals from possessing firearms .

congress enacted the gun control act of 1968 ( gca or act ) to "keep firearms out of the hands of those not legally entitled to possess them because of age , criminal background , or incompetency , and to assist law enforcement authorities in the states and their subdivisions in combating the increasing prevalence of crime in the united states. .

the gca establishes a comprehensive statutory scheme that regulates the manufacture , sale , transfer , and possession of firearms and ammunition .

for instance , the gca prohibits federal firearms licensees ( or licensed dealers ) from selling handguns to any person under the age of 21 and long guns ( i.e. , rifles and shotguns ) to any person under the age of 18 .

licensed dealers are also subject to several requirements designed to ensure that a firearm is not transferred to an individual disqualified from possession under the act .

under federal law there are nine categories of persons who prohibited from possessing , receiving , or transferring a firearm .

the individuals targeted by this provision include ( 1 ) persons convicted of a crime punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ; ( 2 ) fugitives from justice ; ( 3 ) individuals who are unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance ; ( 4 ) persons legally determined to be mentally defective , or who have been committed to a mental institution ; ( 5 ) aliens illegally or unlawfully in the united states , as well as those who have been admitted pursuant to a nonimmigrant visa ; ( 6 ) individuals who have been discharged dishonorably from the armed forces ; ( 7 ) persons who have renounced united states citizenship ; ( 8 ) individuals subject to a pertinent court order ; and , finally , ( 9 ) persons who have been convicted of a misdemeanor domestic violence offense .

the following section reviews judicial decisions that have evaluated the constitutionality of the federal age requirement to purchase firearms , as well as the federal prohibition on misdemeanants of domestic violence from possessing firearms .

while these and other categorical restrictions on certain individuals can be likened to the long - standing , presumptively lawful regulatory measures identified in heller , reviewing courts have generally employed the two - step inquiry fashioned in marzzarella .

traditionally , states have regulated concealed carrying of firearms and generally , they are categorized as either "shall - issue" or "may - issue" states .

among these states , some issue permits only to residents , while others issue permits to both residents and non - residents .

in "shall - issue" jurisdictions , the issuing authority is required to grant the applicant a concealed carry permit ( ccp ) if he or she meets the statutory requirements .

in "may - issue" jurisdictions , the issuing authority generally has the discretion to grant or deny a ccp based on a variety of statutory factors .

furthermore , each state decides which out - of - state permits to recognize .

since heller , several states' concealed carry laws have been challenged under the second amendment .

for the most part , challenged concealed carry laws have been those in may - issue states that require an applicant to show good or proper cause in order to be eligible for a ccp .

both heller and mcdonald emphasized that the right to keep and bear arms is not "a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose. .

heller also indicated that mere regulation of a right would not sufficiently infringe upon , or burden , the second amendment right , when it pointed out that certain colonial - era ordinances did not "remotely burden the right of self - defense as much as an absolute ban on handguns. .

in other words , it appears that to be burdensome , a regulation must also substantially infringe on the self - defensive right .

notably , heller declared that the pre - ratified second amendment right was "understood to be an individual right protecting against both public and private violence," perhaps suggesting that the second amendment right extends beyond the home .

yet the court listed measures that forbid the carrying of firearms in sensitive places as presumptively lawful , perhaps suggesting that these are the types of regulatory measures excepted from the second amendment .

therefore , with respect to concealed carry laws , courts have been confronted with determining whether the second amendment's protections extend beyond the home and , if so , whether concealed carry laws substantially burden the right of self - defense .

not surprisingly , courts have evaluated the challenged provisions differently , given the nuances of each state's concealed carry provisions .

the following decisions indicate how reviewing courts have evaluated the constitutionality of concealed carry laws , and thus , how courts may assess future challenges to these laws .

for example , in peruta v. county of san diego , the u.s. district court for the southern district of california turned to the text and structure of heller to determine whether california's concealed carry laws burden the second amendment .

the court determined that the law , which requires an applicant for a ccp to be a resident and demonstrate "good cause," does not violate the second amendment .

although the court raised the issue whether the second amendment right as delineated in heller extends to the right to carry a loaded handgun in public , either openly or concealed , the court concluded it did not need to decide the issue .

it found california's ccp scheme similar to the 19 th century cases cited in heller that upheld state prohibitions on carrying concealed weapons because alternative forms of carrying arms were available .

to the extent that california's concealed carry scheme burdened the second amendment , the court declared this burden mitigated by california's open carry provisions , which , although generally restrictive , permit the open carry of a loaded firearm under certain circumstances for immediate self - defense .

the court also concluded that california's concealed carry measure passes muster under intermediate scrutiny .

similarly , in williams v. maryland , the maryland court of appeals upheld the state provision which prohibits the wearing , carrying , or transporting of a handgun openly or concealed without a permit .

the court reached this conclusion on the basis that the general ban on carrying a firearm includes an exception for home possession of a handgun without obtaining a permit .

according to the court , the exception for the home "takes the statutory scheme outside the scope of the second amendment , as articulated in heller and mcdonald . .

this reading is "wholly consistent with heller's proviso that handguns are 'the most preferred firearm in the nation to keep and use for protection of one's home and family.' .

on the other hand , the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit ( tenth circuit ) used a two - step inquiry to analyze colorado's concealed carry provision .

the court , in peterson v. martinez , held that the carrying of concealed firearms is not protected by the second amendment .

the challenger , a resident from the state of washington , sought review of colorado's concealed carry law , which only issues ccps for handguns to residents of the state .

after reviewing both early 19 th century decisions and regulations on concealed carry cases , the court concluded that restrictions on concealed carry qualify as long - standing , and therefore fit within the supreme court's "presumptively lawful regulatory measures. .

moreover , because "the law harmonizes with the historical traditions associated with the second amendment guarantee," the challenger's claim "fail[ed] at step one" of the two - step analysis .

as such , the tenth circuit did not engage in a means - end analysis of the provision .

other decisions have proceeded to the second prong of the two - step inquiry and have reached opposite conclusions after applying an intermediate scrutiny analysis on substantially similar concealed carry regulations that require an applicant to show proper cause .

for instance , the u.s. district court for the district of maryland in woollard v. sheridan analyzed the requirement in the state of maryland's statute that an applicant demonstrate "good and substantial reason" in order to obtain a ccp .

although the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit ( fourth circuit ) has since reversed the judgment of the court , this report proceeds to review the district court's decision as it could be an approach that other courts may follow .

in woollard i , the district court was mindful of an earlier fourth circuit decision that had refrained from concluding whether the scope of the second amendment as recognized in heller applies outside the home .

however , the district court in woollard i found it necessary to conduct this analysis so as to determine if maryland's restriction on handgun possession burdens any second amendment right .

the district court concluded that heller itself suggests the second amendment applies beyond the home , when it declared the right applicable to the home where the need "for defense of self , family , and property is most acute. .

this particular language "suggests that the right also applies in some form 'where that need is not 'most acute.' .

the district court also reasoned that the second amendment must extend beyond the home because it protects lawful purposes such as hunting and militia training , neither of which are household activities .

having determined that the regulation burdens conduct protected by the second amendment , the district court in woollard i applied intermediate scrutiny and held that the "good and substantial reason" requirement infringes upon the second amendment because it is not reasonably adapted to a substantial government interest .

although public safety and crime prevention are considered substantial and compelling governmental interests , the district court found the state's good cause requirement overly broad and that it did nothing to advance the interests of public safety .

in contrast , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit ( second circuit ) in kachalsky v. county of westchester upheld the state of new york's law which provides that a license to carry a concealed handgun shall only be issued when "proper cause exists. .

the second circuit also determined that the second amendment " must have some application in the very different context of public possession of firearms. .

because the regulation places "substantial limits on the ability of law - abiding citizens to possess firearms for self - defense in public," some form of heightened scrutiny is appropriate .

the court declared that it made "eminent sense" to apply intermediate scrutiny because the regulation does not touch upon the "core" protection of self - defense in the home .

unlike the maryland regulation in woollard i , the second circuit decided that the new york proper cause requirement passes muster under intermediate scrutiny .

deferring to the state legislature's policy judgments , the court concluded that rather than forbidding anyone from carrying a handgun in public , new york took "a more moderate approach to fulfilling its important objective and reasonably concluded that only individuals having a bona fide reason to possess handguns should be allowed to introduce them into the public sphere. .

courts have employed a mixed approach when evaluating whether the second amendment protects certain types of weapons .

unlike other laws that have been scrutinized before the courts , the supreme court in heller briefly addressed whether certain types of weapons would fall outside the protection of the second amendment .

it declared that the second amendment "does not protect those weapons not typically possessed by law - abiding citizens for lawful purposes , such as short - barreled shotguns. .

the court found that its prior 1939 decision in united states v. miller supported this conclusion .

relying on miller , the court acknowledged that this limitation is supported by the "historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of 'dangerous and unusual weapons'" and that the "sorts of weapons protected were those 'in common use at the time'" because those capable of service in the militia at the time of ratification would have brought "the sorts of lawful weapons that they possessed at home to militia duty. .

since heller , cases that have evaluated the constitutionality of state assault weapons bans have generally found them to be valid under the second amendment .

these courts have relied on either , or both , the "common use" language found in heller and the two - step inquiry set forth in marzzarella to evaluate bans on assault weapons .

although many firearms laws have been upheld as constitutional , the differences in how courts interpret the text of heller , insofar as providing some guidance on the scope of the second amendment , as well as how they apply the two - step inquiry may impact the burden upon the government to prove its case .

for instance , courts have reached different conclusions on how to interpret the language on presumptively lawful restrictions .

as noted above , it could be that these presumptively lawful measures are "so ingrained in our understanding of the second amendment that there is little doubt that they withstand the applicable level of scrutiny .

alternatively , the right itself can be seen as failing to extend into areas where , historically , limitations were commonplace and well accepted. .

while the court in woollard believed the former reading was correct , the third circuit in marzzarella believed the latter was the correct interpretation for how to treat measures identified as presumptively lawful by the court in heller .

in each case , the court went on to apply intermediate scrutiny ; however , the potential impact in selecting the latter interpretation — i.e. , exceptions to the second amendment — may mean that as long as a challenged regulation was included among , or analogous to , the provisions noted in heller , there would be no burden imposed on the government to submit evidence demonstrating that the firearms regulation is a narrow fit to meet a substantial government interest .

as such , this interpretation arguably would favor the government , and there could be a greater chance that a firearms regulation would be upheld .

in contrast , the alternative interpretation is arguably not as favorable to the government , and a reviewing court could be less likely to uphold the constitutionality of a provision , unless the government is able to provide "meaningful evidence," as some courts have required .

moreover , the interpretation of the presumptively lawful language likely affects how lower courts define the nature of the right conferred by the second amendment and thus the level of scrutiny , if any , that should be applied .

firearms laws , both existing and new , will undoubtedly continue to be challenged under the second amendment .

the supreme court's decision in heller appears to have provided limited guidance on how to analyze firearms regulations under the second amendment .

yet lower courts have fashioned and primarily applied a two - step inquiry , which asks whether the regulated conduct burdens the second amendment right , and if so , whether it passes muster under means - end scrutiny .

although several firearms provisions have been upheld , it remains difficult to discern if there is a better understanding of the scope of the second amendment outside the "core" right identified in heller , as courts have evaluated firearms provisions differently under the two - part test .

as the post - heller challenges to firearms provisions continue to percolate through the lower courts , it remains to be seen if any begin to use other analytical frameworks proposed , such as the "history , text , and tradition" test from the heller ii dissent or the prior restraints analysis suggested by parties challenging regulations under the second amendment .

