federal law requires the president to submit an annual budget to congress no later than the first monday in february .

the budget informs congress of the president's overall federal fiscal policy based on proposed spending levels , revenues , and deficit ( or surplus ) levels .

the budget request lays out the president's relative priorities for federal programs , such as how much should be spent on defense , education , health , and other federal programs .

the president's budget may also include legislative proposals for spending and tax policy changes .

while the president is not required to propose legislative changes for those parts of the budget that are governed by permanent law ( i.e. , mandatory spending ) , such changes are generally included in the budget .

president obama submitted his fy2014 budget to congress on april 10 , 2013 .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is the division of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that is responsible for administering medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

in january 2011 , cms became responsible for much of the implementation of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) when the center for consumer information and insurance oversight ( cciio ) was established within cms .

cms is the largest purchaser of health care in the united states with medicare and federal medicaid expenditures accounting for 29.7% of the total national health expenditures in 2011 .

in 2010 , cms provided health insurance to 114 million individuals through medicare , medicaid and chip , which is roughly one in three americans .

this report summarizes the president's budget estimates for each section of the cms budget .

then , for each legislative proposal included in the president's budget , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

the explanations of the president's legislative proposals are grouped by the following program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , private health insurance , and program management .

at the end of each of these sections , there is a table summarizing the estimated costs or savings for each legislative proposal .

the cms budget includes a mixture of both mandatory and discretionary spending .

however , a vast majority of the cms budget is mandatory spending , such as medicare benefits and grants to states for medicaid .

the president's budget estimates that under current law cms mandatory and discretionary net outlays would amount to $845.5 billion in fy2014 .

this is an increase of $51.2 billion , or 6.4% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2013 .

the president's fy2014 budget increases the baseline for medicare spending by assuming that congress will block a proposed reduction in physician payments .

the president's budget estimates this adjustment will increase cms's net outlays by $15.4 billion in fy2014 .

with this adjustment , cms's total net outlays are estimated to be $860.9 billion in fy2014 .

the president's fy2014 budget proposes to make a number of legislative changes to medicare , medicaid , program integrity , private health insurance , and program management .

the president's budget estimates that if these legislative proposals were implemented , cms's total net outlays would increase by $0.3 billion in fy2013 and decrease by $5.8 billion in fy2014 .

with the medicare physician payment adjustment , the estimated impact of the legislative proposals , and the estimated savings net of the program integrity and health care fraud and abuse control ( hcfac ) investments ( $0.4 billion ) , the president's budget estimates cms's net outlays will be $854.3 billion in fy2014 , which is an increase of $60.2 billion , or 7.6% , over the net outlays for fy2013 .

for budgetary purposes , cms is divided into the following sections: medicare , medicaid , chip , program integrity , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance , the center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) , and program management .

the president's budget estimates for each of these budget sections are summarized below .

the president's fy2014 budget contains a number of proposals that would impact the cms budget .

some are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending .

for each proposal , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

this report groups these legislative proposals by program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , private health insurance , and program management .

at the end of each of these sections , there is a table summarizing the costs or savings for each legislative proposal , and the tables classify each proposal as new , modified from the president's fy2013 budget , or repeated from the president's fy2013 budget .

usually , the president's budget request is the first step in the federal budget process .

however , this year , both the house and the senate agreed to budget resolutions prior to the president submitting his budget request .

as shown in figure 1 , the president's budget for function 550 ( which includes medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchanges among a number of other health care programs and activities ) varies from both the house and senate budget resolutions , but as shown in figure 2 , the president's budget for function 570 ( which consists of the medicare program ) is similar to funding levels in the house and senate budget resolutions .

the following provides a brief description of the policies included in the house budget resolution and the senate budget resolution , as compared with the president's fy2014 budget .

on march 12 , 2013 , house budget committee chairman paul ryan released the chairman's mark of the fy2014 house budget resolution together with his report entitled the path to prosperity: a responsible balanced budget , which outlines his budgetary objectives .

the house budget committee considered and amended the chairman's mark on march 13 , 2013 , and voted to report the budget resolution to the full house .

h.con.res .

25 was introduced in the house on march 15 , 2013 and was accompanied by the committee report ( h.rept .

113-17 ) .

h.con.res .

25 was agreed to by the house on march 21 , 2013 by a vote of 221 to 207 .

chairman ryan's budget proposal , as outlined in his report and in the committee report , suggests short - term and long - term changes to federal health care programs including medicare , medicaid , and the health insurance exchanges established by the aca .

within the 10-year budget window ( fy2014-fy2023 ) , the house budget resolution assumes that certain aca provisions would be repealed , including those that expand medicaid coverage to the non - elderly with incomes up to 133% of fpl , and those provisions that establish health insurance exchanges .

the budget proposal also suggests restructuring medicaid from an individual entitlement program to a block grant program .

additionally , the house resolution assumes a fix to the sustainable growth formula ( sgr ) used to establish medicare physician rates , and a repeal of the ipab .

according to the house budget committee estimates , the house resolution would reduce health care spending by $2.7 trillion over the 10-year budget window in comparison to current policies .

beyond the 10-year budget window , beginning in fy2024 , the budget proposal assumes an increase in the age of eligibility for medicare and the conversion of medicare to a fixed federal contribution program .

on march 13 , 2013 , senate budget committee chairman patty murray released a report outlining the fy2014 senate budget resolution entitled foundation for growth: restoring the promise of american opportunity .

the senate budget committee considered and passed the budget resolution on march 14 , 2013 .

s.con.res .

8 was introduced in the senate on march 15 , 2013 and was accompanied by the committee print ( s. prt .

113-12 ) .

the senate passed s.con.res .

8 on march 23 , 2013 with a vote of 50-49 .

in contrast to the house budget resolution , the senate budget resolution maintains all the changes included in the aca , including the aca medicaid expansion and the health insurance exchanges .

according to senate budget committee estimates , the senate resolution includes $275 billion in health care savings , which are derived from encouraging health care delivery system reforms ( i.e. , bundled payments or value - based reimbursement programs ) and reducing fraud and abuse .

in addition , the senate budget resolution assumes the costs of a permanent fix to the sgr physician payment system and eliminates the medicare sequestration cuts .

figure 1 and figure 2 compares the outlays provided for function 550 and function 570 in the president's budget , the house resolution , and the senate resolution .

function 550 includes most direct health care services programs , most notably medicaid .

other health programs in this function fund anti - bioterrorism activities , national biomedical research , activities to protect the health of the general population and workers in their places of employment , health services for under - served populations , and training for the health care workforce .

some of the hhs agencies in this function include the national institutes of health , centers for disease control and prevention , health resources and services administration , and the food and drug administration .

the major mandatory programs in this function are medicaid , chip , federal and retirees' health benefits , and health care for medicare - eligible military retirees .

a vast majority of the spending in function 550 is attributable to medicaid .

in fy2012 , medicaid accounted for 72.3% of the function 550 expenditures .

as shown in figure 1 , over the next 10 years , the funding for function 550 varies by budget plan with the house resolution providing significantly less funding for function 550 when compared to the president's budget and the senate resolution .

this difference is largely attributable to the house resolution including reductions to medicaid in the amount of $1.4 trillion over the 10-year budget window , which includes $636 billion in savings from repealing the aca medicaid expansion .

the senate resolution did not specify any medicaid legislative proposals , while the president's budget includes a number of legislative proposals impacting the medicaid program ( see the " medicaid legislative proposals " and " program integrity legislative proposals " sections of this report ) .

function 570 consists of the medicare program , which pays for covered health care services for individuals age 65 or older and certain persons with disabilities .

nearly 99% of spending in this function is mandatory , and almost all of the mandatory spending consists of payments for medicare benefits .

congress provides an annual appropriation for the costs of administering and monitoring the medicare program .

figure 2 shows estimated outlays for medicare , from fy2014 through fy2023 , under the president's budget , the house resolution , and the senate resolution .

the figure shows relatively little difference between the budgets and the funding for medicare , with the senate resolution providing slightly more funding than the others , particularly in the later years .

both the president's budget and the senate resolution assume that the sgr physician payment system would be fixed , and that the 2% reduction in medicare benefit spending under sequestration would not take place ; these assumptions were incorporated into their respective medicare spending baselines .

the president's budget also includes a number of specific legislative proposals ( see the " medicare legislative proposals " and " medicaid legislative proposals " sections of this report ) that the administration estimates will save a net of $371 billion compared to the baseline over the next ten years .

the senate resolution did not include specific cost - reduction proposals , but the senate resolution includes savings of $265 billion over the next ten years through delivery system changes , increased efforts to reduce fraud and abuse , and greater engagement across the health care system .

the house budget resolution assumes a fix to the sgr physician payment system plus a repeal of the ipab , however the resolution did not indicate how the cost increases associated with these two proposals were reflected in their medicare spending baseline estimates .

while the house resolution assumes a slight decrease in medicare spending ( $129 billion ) over the next ten years compared to current cbo baseline projections ( which is based on current law and assumes future reductions in physician payments and continuation of the 2% medicare spending reductions under sequestration ) , the resolution did not provide specifics on how spending would be reduced to these lower levels , nor whether the 2% benefit reductions under sequestration would continue .

