shooting incidents such as the one at sandy hook elementary school in december 2012 and the one at an aurora , co , movie theater in july 2012 have focused attention on federal policy issues in the law enforcement , public health , and education arenas , among others .

the congressional research service ( crs ) has identified 78 public mass shootings that have occurred in the united states since 1983 .

these shootings have claimed almost 550 lives according to crs estimates .

how does the death toll tied to public mass shootings compare with figures related to the preeminent threat that federal law enforcement has confronted in the last decade ? .

crs estimates that since the terrible events of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , al - qaeda - inspired homegrown terrorists have killed 14 people in two incidents in the united states .

since 9 / 11 , according to crs estimates , 281 people have died in 38 public mass shootings .

arguably , the comparatively low death toll associated with al qaeda - inspired incidents at least partly results from a large - scale federal focus on homeland security and counterterrorism efforts .

it is important to caution the reader that , while tragic and shocking , public mass shootings account for few of the murders related to firearms that occur annually in the united states .

according to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi , the bureau ) , in 2011 , firearms were used to murder 8,583 people .

to provide further context , over the last two decades , the nation has experienced a general decline in violent crime .

in 1992 , 1.9 million violent crimes were reported , while 2011 saw 1.2 million .

in the same period , the national murder rate dropped from 9.3 to 4.7 per 100,000 inhabitants .

as a starting point , this report delves into public mass shootings over the last three decades , exploring the nature of this threat .

in its broader discussion of related federal public health and safety issues , the report covers selected policy implications in three areas: law enforcement , public health , and education .

while mass shootings may occur in a number of public settings , the education realm is one that has generated concern from policy makers , officials , and the public alike — at least since the 1999 shooting at columbine high school in littleton , co .

the tragedy at sandy hook elementary has renewed such concerns for many .

in this report , discussion of each of these is further broken down into efforts geared toward prevention — actions intended to reduce the likelihood of shootings .

preparedness — planning how to cope with potential shootings .

response — structured efforts employed to react to an actual shooting .

policy measures that deal with recovery are also discussed within the context of education and public health initiatives .

recovery entails helping institutions , communities , and individuals cope with the aftermath of a shooting .

this report is not intended as an exhaustive review of specific federal programs in these areas .

also , this report does not focus on gun violence or writ large , nor does it discuss gun control policies .

this report attempts to refine the relatively broad concept of mass shooting ( which could potentially involve a wide variety of actors targeting victims for any number of reasons ) into a narrower formulation: public mass shootings .

this has been done to focus discussion around a number of violent incidents that lie outside of specific crime issues such as terrorism , drug trafficking , gang activity , and domestic violence that have federal policies , law enforcement structures , and laws tailored in many instances to specifically address them .

for many years , mass shootings have been of interest and concern to a variety of experts — including psychologists , sociologists , criminologists , public health experts , policy makers , and students of popular culture — who have written much on the topic .

journalists have tracked such killings for a long time as well .

for example , a case involving gunman howard b. unruh in september 1949 received national attention .

there were over 50 news articles in more than a dozen major newspapers in the united states in the month after the shooting occurred .

in what was reported at the time as the largest mass murder in u.s. history , unruh killed 13 people in a 20-minute - long incident in camden , nj .

he shot people he knew as well as strangers .

his victims included three children .

all of this interest in such shootings has produced a wide variety of terms and concepts that address an assortment of issues .

categorizing types of murder — and mass shootings , more narrowly — can be tricky .

in many cases , individual incidents involving assailants who kill one , two , or three people are described as single , double , or triple murder .

however , when the number of victims rises or the case involves complicating circumstances such as the killer assailing individuals in different locations or a string of murders committed over a period of days , months , or years , efforts to define and understand murder can grow much more difficult .

when considering law enforcement's role in coping with public mass shootings , policy makers and the public likely are most aware of how police forces react when they learn of an incident .

public mass shootings typically trigger a rapid police response , followed by an investigation and , potentially , prosecutions and sentencing .

also , while a shooting incident may spur an immediate law enforcement response , the potential for such a scenario impacts law enforcement prevention and preparedness measures .

police are not typically involved in recovery efforts .

from a law enforcement perspective , mass shootings tend to be single - jurisdiction issues involving a particular community .

as such , while the federal government may not play a direct role in formulating specific state and local practices , it may influence these practices through the availability of grants .

for example , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) offers funding via its homeland security grant program to "fund a range of preparedness activities , including planning , organization , equipment purchase , training , exercises , and management and administration. .

although department of justice ( doj ) grants are not necessarily framed in terms of prevention , preparedness , or response , they can certainly address these issues regarding mass shootings .

one foundational question is what , if anything , does the federal government want to influence in the states via grant funding related to law enforcement ? .

should the federal government enhance interagency information sharing and coordination on procedures to evaluate and deal with shooting threats ? .

should it increase law - enforcement - related grant funding to bolster school resource officer training or the number of metal detectors in academic settings ? .

in this area , the obama administration's january 16 , 2013 , report , now is the time: the president's plan to protect our children and our communities by reducing gun violence ( the president's plan ) , included a commitment to using the community oriented policing services ( cops ) program to incentivize police departments to hire more school resource officers .

the plan also indicates that doj will develop a model — including best practices — for using school resource officers .

of course , such issues potentially involve a variety of specialists — not only police officials but also public health experts and educators , among others .

grants impacting preparedness may shape first responder training , and grants influencing response could affect the development of law enforcement protocols for responding to mass shootings .

some policy makers may wish to incentivize the establishment and training of tactical emergency medical services ( ems ) teams to support law enforcement during instances of mass shootings or related events .

these teams could provide medical threat assessments , deliver medical care , and promote law enforcement safety , among other things .

little research has evaluated the effectiveness of such tactical ems teams in the civilian domain , and policy makers may wish to request additional research in this arena .

congress may debate which elements of law enforcement prevention , preparedness , and response — if any — the federal government could try to influence in the states and localities .

in addition to providing financial assistance and incentives for certain law enforcement activities , the federal government may provide assistance in the form of manpower .

policy makers may debate whether federal law enforcement has sufficient authority and resources to assist state and local entities — if requested and if appropriate — in preparing for and responding to mass shootings and related incidents .

for example , the president's plan calls for additional funding for the federal government to train law enforcement , school officials , and others to respond to scenarios involving shooters .

from a public health policy perspective , public mass shootings are mass casualty incidents ( mci ) that cause both injury and death .

although public mass shootings are infrequent , the health sector has considerable related experience to bring to bear on preparing for and responding to these events .

the health sector addresses mass shootings as it does any other health threat , through ( 1 ) prevention , ( 2 ) preparedness , ( 3 ) response , and ( 4 ) recovery over the long term .

prevention focuses on the perpetrators of mass shooting .

the other three components of the health sector approach concentrate on the victims of such incidents .

public health options to thwart mass shootings are likely limited .

of these four components , the effectiveness of preventive efforts may be most unclear .

fundamentally , this area likely lacks strong evidence regarding what might successfully stop potential shooters from becoming actual shooters .

this evidence could come from evaluation of new or existing policies .

such efforts could help fill a gap in knowledge about what is effective .

in terms of preparedness , response , and recovery , proven approaches exist .

however , policy makers may wish to consider how existing capacities ( or policies to increase capacity ) vary across geographic areas and populations .

also , the ability to rapidly evaluate the effectiveness of existing programs and / or deploy resources may hinge on the flexibility of funding structures .

schools are unique institutions .

they have a mission of great importance to our nation — they are responsible for keeping our children safe while educating them and helping prepare them to be responsible and productive citizens .

all levels of government are involved to some extent in this mission .

as mentioned earlier in this report , 12 of the 78 public mass shootings identified by crs occurred in academic settings .

eight of these happened at primary or secondary education facilities .

one incident , the december 14 , 2012 , shooting deaths of 20 children and 6 adults at sandy hook elementary school in newtown , ct , has heightened congressional interest in school security .

policy makers are examining whether school security can be further enhanced , and if so , how best to accomplish that goal .

four of the 12 public mass shootings in education settings involved high school or middle school students as assailants .

the federal government has supported efforts to preempt students from engaging in gun violence at school .

more broadly , it has promoted policies to curb violence in schools , such as anti - bullying programs , which may or may not stem public mass shootings by student perpetrators .

this section of the report focuses on those federal programs and initiatives administered by the department of education that may be relevant in the event of a public mass shooting in a school setting .

the president's plan was released following the newtown tragedy — it includes several provisions specifically related to schools .

however , funding for these provisions may not be sufficient to provide meaningful assistance to all schools that could potentially benefit .

difficult decisions confront policy makers .

they must consider how to make the greatest possible improvements in student safety while likely being faced with limited federal resources to devote to safety initiatives .

policy makers may have to decide whether funds should be spread across many activities so that each activity gets some additional funding , or whether funding should be concentrated in fewer programs believed to be most cost effective .

this decision is made even more difficult because research on effectiveness is limited for many school security programs .

this may lead to consideration of whether more funding should be provided for research into program effectiveness , and if so , whether it would restrict funding for existing school security programs .

policy makers must also consider the importance of continuity of funds for local program success .

it can be difficult for local school districts to plan , develop , and implement programs if they cannot be certain of a reliable funding stream .

in recent years much of the dedicated funding for school safety programs provided by the department of education has been cut .

some programs were cut because they were perceived as too small to make a difference .

others were cut because they failed to demonstrate their effectiveness .

for example , funding for the safe and drug free schools and communities act ( sdfsca ) program , the federal government's primary program aimed at preventing drug abuse and violence in and around public schools , has declined from $435 million in fy2009 to $65 million in fy2012 .

department of education guidance has divided the crisis management process for schools into four phases .

those four phases , in sequential order , are prevention , preparedness , response , and recovery .

because emergency planning at institutions of higher education occurs in a significantly different environment and context , this report focuses on emergency planning at the elementary and secondary school level .

when addressing public mass shootings , many of the policymaking challenges may boil down to two interrelated concerns: ( 1 ) a need to determine the effectiveness of existing programs — particularly preventive efforts — and ( 2 ) figuring out where to disburse limited resources .

the law enforcement and public health fields have lengthy histories of applying preventive approaches to their work .

however , the utility of widely employed preventive measures in these areas to fight public mass shootings is far from clear .

for example , it appears that intelligence - led policing fails to address this threat .

likewise , preventive public health approaches reliant on research drawn from large data sets , covering broad populations , and examining general trends may not adequately address relatively rare — though devastating — public mass shootings .

given this , policy makers may be interested in supporting the development of useful preventive schemes in the law enforcement and public health arenas .

in the area of education , preventive efforts may be more effective .

fostering a positive school climate can be seen as a key element in preventing shootings .

additionally , the use of school resource officers as a preventive measure is popular among americans .

yet , there are those who question the impact of such officers on the learning environment .

policy makers confront the task of disbursing resources among a wide assortment of programs to tackle public mass shootings .

which efforts are more important than others ? .

for example , should prevention trump response in most cases ? .

should programs that have multiple uses be favored over others that may be seen as more focused ( or vice versa ) ? .

for example , which should receive more support related to dealing with mass shootings: ems or efforts to cultivate positive school climate ? .

which untested programs or approaches should be evaluated thoroughly ? .

who should evaluate them ? .

how long should funding exist to tackle the threat of mass shootings ? .

all of this hints at an overarching difficulty confronting experts interested in crafting policy to address mass shootings .

essentially , baseline metrics gauging the effectiveness of policies to thwart public mass shootings are often unclear or unavailable .

this lack of clarity starts with identifying the number of shootings , themselves , since no broadly agreed - to definition exists .

several questions flow from this issue .

how many people have such incidents victimized ? .

how much does prevention of , preparedness for , and response to such incidents cost the federal government ? .

what measurements can be used to determine the effectiveness of such efforts ? .

in other words , and most importantly , how will we measure our successes or determine our failures in fighting this problem ? .

