the deregulation of the airline industry in the united states in 1978 eliminated governmental control over most business practices of airlines .

however , the federal government continues to regulate certain practices for the protection of the airlines' customers , in addition to its long - standing role in overseeing air safety .

congressional interest in the rights of airline passengers became intense between 2007 and 2009 , when a series of delays stranded passengers aboard airplanes at u.s. airports for 10 hours or longer .

since then , congress has strengthened passengers' rights under federal law , and many members of congress have continued to follow aviation consumer issues closely .

this report examines aviation consumer protections in the post - deregulation era .

it explains the roles of congress and the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) in protecting airline consumers , and discusses some major passenger rights issues and related laws and regulations .

the rights of domestic airline passengers are set forth at three different levels: in federal laws , in regulations , and in the airlines' own policies .

congress , under its constitutional power to "regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states," has authority over airline passengers' rights .

state and local governments are generally preempted by law from regulating "price , route , or service of an air carrier. .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) , signed into law on july 15 , 2016 , included a few provisions relating to passenger rights .

some of the passenger - rights provisions put forth during the debate over faa reauthorization were not included in the final bill , as similar protections had meanwhile been implemented through the dot rulemaking process .

relevant passenger - rights provisions of p.l .

114-190 are summarized below .

despite the fact that the 15 largest u.s. airlines' on - time arrival rate was nearly 80% in calendar year 2015 , flight delays and cancellations continue to be a prevalent passenger complaint to dot .

in 2015 , there were about 6,433 such complaints in total , accounting for nearly 32% of all complaints .

mishandled baggage , problems with reservations , ticketing , and boarding , customer service , and refunds are also among the most frequent complaints ( see figure 1 ) .

while dot continues to receive many complaints about mishandled baggage , improved tracking systems have helped u.s. air carriers reduce the proportion of bags that are lost or sent to the wrong destinations .

in 2015 , the u.s. carriers reported 4.04 mishandled bags per 1,000 passengers , which was among the lowest annual rates of mishandled baggage since dot first collected data on the subject in 1987 .

airline flight delays and cancellations were addressed in a final rule issued in december 2009 by dot , "enhancing airline passenger protections. .

the rule expanded on previous regulations to address tarmac delays and chronically delayed flights and to require greater information disclosure to consumers .

while language in the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) alters how tarmac delays are measured , the rest of the tarmac delay rule is unaffected by the statutory change .

the existing rule requires large u.s. carriers to provide assurance that they will not permit an aircraft to remain on the tarmac for more than three hours without providing passengers an opportunity to deplane .

an air carrier's failure to comply subjects the carrier to civil penalties of up to $32,140 per passenger .

this final rule contains the following mandates: each air carrier is required to develop and implement a contingency plan for lengthy tarmac delays .

each contingency plan must include an assurance that , for domestic flights , the air carrier will not allow a tarmac delay to exceed three hours unless the pilot - in - command determines there is a safety - related or security - related impediment to deplaning passengers , or unless air traffic control has advised the pilot - in - command that deplaning would significantly disrupt airport operations .

the plan must include assurance that adequate food and water will be provided within two hours after the aircraft leaves the gate , as well as assurance of operable lavatory facilities and adequate medical attention .

for international flights , air carriers must commit to a set number of on - tarmac hours to be determined by air carrier and set forth in its plan .

the tarmac delay rule took effect for domestic flights in april 2010 .

there has been a significant reduction in lengthy tarmac delays since the rule was published .

in 2014 , airlines reported the lowest number of tarmac delays longer than three hours on record — 30 domestic flights with tarmac delays longer than three hours and 9 international flights with tarmac delays longer than four hours at u.s. airports .

the rule issued in december 2009 also contained several other consumer protection provisions: air carriers must display flight delay information for each domestic flight they operate on their websites and designate employees to monitor the impacts of flight delays and cancellations , respond to consumer complaints , and tell consumers where and how to file complaints .

air carriers are prohibited from applying changes to their contracts of carriage retroactively .

under the rule , any chronically delayed flight scheduled by an air carrier is considered an unfair and deceptive practice and an unfair method of competition within the meaning of 40 u.s.c .

§41712 .

on april 25 , 2011 , dot issued a further rulemaking to strengthen the rights of air travelers in the event of oversales , flight cancellations , and delays ; to ensure consumers have accurate and adequate information when selecting flights ; and to improve responsiveness to customer complaints .

these rules , fully effective january 26 , 2012 , include the following: baggage fees must be reimbursed for lost bags ; additional fees must be prominently disclosed on airline websites ; and the ban on excessive tarmac delay is expanded to foreign airlines' operations at u.s. airports , with a four - hour limit on international flights .

over the past few decades , large u.s. carriers ( also known as mainline carriers ) have increasingly moved to joint marketing agreements , known as "code - share agreements. .

in domestic code - share agreements , mainline carriers , such as delta and american airlines , purchase seat capacity from regional airlines or contract for the services of regional carriers to fly passengers to their hub airports .

such agreements often allow a regional carrier to ( 1 ) use the mainline carrier's airline designator code to identify flights and fares in computer reservation systems ; ( 2 ) use the mainline carrier's brand — for example , logos and uniforms ; and ( 3 ) participate in joint promotion and advertising activities .

it is also common for major u.s. carriers to establish international alliances with foreign carriers , which almost always include a code - share component , although in international code - share agreements there is no distinctive large or mainline carrier .

the dot code - share disclosure rule ( 14 c.f.r .

§257 ) applies equally to domestic and international air transportation to and from the united states .

it requires that u.s. airlines and foreign air carriers that participate in code - share agreements or long - term "wet leases" tell consumers clearly when the air transportation involves such an agreement , and that they disclose the transporting carrier's identity .

dot does not review most domestic code - share agreements , but does require ticket sellers to disclose which airline is operating the flight prior to booking to ensure consumer transparency .

however , some confusion still appears to exist among passengers because airlines , travel agencies , and advertisers may disclose this information differently .

in some cases , the name of the operating carrier may not be displayed prominently .

also , some regional carriers have code - share agreements with multiple mainline carriers and use different "doing business as" names when operating on different domestic routes .

most airlines overbook their scheduled flights to a certain degree to compensate for "no - shows. .

such oversale or overbooking is not illegal .

when a flight is oversold , dot requires airlines to ask passengers to give up their seats voluntarily ( voluntary bumping ) , in exchange for compensation , before bumping anyone involuntarily .

a dot rule ( 14 c.f.r .

§250 ) requires airlines to properly inform and compensate passengers who are bumped involuntarily .

air carriers are required to establish and disclose boarding priority rules and criteria for determining which passengers shall be denied boarding on an oversold flight .

boarding priority criteria may include factors such as a passenger's time of check - in , the fare paid , and passenger's frequent flyer status .

in april 2011 , dot issued an amended final rule to address issues regarding denied boarding or involuntary bumping compensation , especially inadequate denied boarding compensation to passengers .

the amendment increased denied boarding compensation rates and dollar limits , with dollar limits subject to inflation - related adjustment every two years .

when a passenger is bumped involuntarily and the airline arranges substitute transportation that is scheduled to reach the passenger's final destination within one hour of the original arrival time , no compensation is required .

however , if the scheduled arrival time via substitute transportation is more than one hour later than the original arrival time , the following rules apply: if the substitute domestic transportation arranged by the airlines is scheduled to arrive between one and two hours later than the original arrival time , the airline must pay the passenger an amount equal to 200% of the one - way fare ( including all taxes and mandatory fees ) , with a $675 maximum , effective august 25 , 2015 .

on international flights departing the united states , this limit applies when a bumped passenger is delayed up to four hours .

if the substitute transportation is scheduled to arrive more than two hours later on domestic flights ( four hours on international flights ) , or if the airline does not make any substitute transportation arrangements for the passenger , the compensation doubles to 400% of the one - way fare , with a $1,350 maximum , effective august 25 , 2015 .

an air carrier must refund any unused ancillary fees for optional services paid by a passenger if he or she was denied boarding , voluntarily or involuntarily .

many u.s. air carriers have held down ticket prices by advertising cheap base airfares and adding separate optional fees for services that traditionally have been included in the price of a ticket .

these ancillary charges , including checked baggage fees , reservation cancellation or change fees , seat selection fees , priority boarding fees , and charges for in - flight meals , are generating considerable revenue .

in 2015 , the u.s. passenger airline industry collected more than $3.8 billion in baggage fees and over $3 billion in reservation cancellation / change fees .

in order to make it easier for consumers to know how much they will have to pay for airline transportation and to ensure that airlines' fee - related practices are fair and transparent , the dot rule issued in 2011 requires that an airline's most prominently advertised airfare must be the full cost of the ticket , with government taxes , mandatory fees , and optional surcharges included .

for both domestic and international markets , carriers must disclose the full price to be paid , including government taxes and fees and any carrier surcharges , in their advertising , on their websites , and on the passenger's e - ticket confirmation .

in addition , carriers must disclose all fees for optional services through a prominent link on their home pages , and must include information on e - ticket confirmations about the free baggage allowance and applicable fees for the first and second checked bags and carry - on bags .

airlines must refund charges for lost bags .

spirit airlines , allegiant air , and southwest airlines challenged in federal court that portion of dot's april 2011 rule that requires airlines and ticket agents to most prominently display the total cost of a ticket , including taxes , when advertising airfares .

in july 2012 , the u.s. court of appeals for the washington , dc , circuit rejected the airlines' contention that the rule violates their rights to engage in commercial and political speech and is an effort by the government to conceal taxes in airfares .

the airlines subsequently appealed to the u.s. supreme court , which , on april 1 , 2013 , refused to consider their challenge and left the rule intact .

on july 28 , 2014 , the house of representatives passed the transparent airfares act of 2014 ( h.r .

4156 , 113 th congress ) by a voice vote .

the bill would have allowed airlines' advertisements and websites to give greatest prominence to "base airfare," as long as they "clearly and separately" disclose government taxes and fees and the total cost of air transportation .

while the bill would have enabled airlines to call greater attention to the many government taxes and fees on passenger aviation , it could have made price comparisons more difficult , as some advertisements or websites might have displayed the "base airfare" most prominently while others might have advertised the after - tax price .

the senate did not act on the legislation .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) , signed into law on july 15 , 2016 , did not address disclosure of ancillary fees .

