communication between members of congress and their constituents has changed with the development of new online social networking services .

many members now use e - mail , official websites , blogs , youtube channels , twitter , and facebook pages to communicate with their constituents — technologies that were either non - existent or not widely available 20 years ago .

these technologies have arguably served to enhance the ability of members of congress to fulfill their representational duties by providing greater opportunities for communication between the member and individual constituents , supporting the fundamental democratic role of sharing information about public policy and government operations .

despite these advantages , electronic communications have raised some concerns .

existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media such as the franking privilege have proven difficult to adapt to the new electronic technologies .

this report examines member use of two electronic communication mediums: twitter and facebook .

after providing an overview and background of each medium , the report analyzes patterns of member use of twitter and facebook during a two - month period in 2011 .

this report is inherently a snapshot of a dynamic process .

as with any new technology , the number of members using twitter and facebook and the patterns of use may change rapidly .

thus , the conclusions drawn from these data cannot be easily generalized nor can these results be used to predict future behavior .

members of congress have more choices and options available to communicate with constituents than they did 20 years ago .

in addition to traditional modes of communication such as townhall meetings , telephone calls , and postal mail , members can now reach their constituents via e - mail , websites , tele - townhalls , online videos , social networking sites , and other electronic - based communication applications .

the rise of such electronic communication has altered the traditional patterns of communication between members and constituents .

although virtually all members continue to use traditional modes of constituent communication , use of new communications technology is increasing .

for example , prior to 1995 , there were virtually no e - mail exchanges between members and constituents .

in 2011 , over 243 million e - mails were received by the house of representatives .

the senate received 83 million emails in 2011 .

member official websites , blogs , youtube channels , and facebook pages — all non - existent 20 years ago — also receive significant traffic .

conversely , the amount of postal mail sent to congress has dropped by more than 50% during the same time period .

in addition , electronic technology has reduced the marginal cost of constituent communications ; unlike postal letters , members can reach large numbers of constituents for a fixed cost .

created in 2006 by developer jack dorsey as a tool to keep in touch with friends , twitter is a web - based social networking service that allows users to send and read short messages .

also considered a micro - blogging site , twitter users send "tweets" of up to 140 characters .

these tweets are displayed on an author's twitter home page and on the pages of people subscribed to his or her rss feed .

launched in february 2004 by mark zuckerberg and several of his classmates at harvard college , facebook is the world's largest social networking service and website .

facebook provides "profiles" and "pages" for users , both of which are personalized websites within facebook on which users can post pictures , videos , and messages , upon which other users may post comments .

users can limit the visibility of their profile posts to other users who they have personally approved ( "friends" ) .

a facebook user can become a fan of a page , however , simply by clicking "like" on the facebook page of interest ; owner approval is not required .

once a facebook user becomes a fan of a page , the activity of the "liked" page appears on the user's "newsfeed. .

a newsfeed contains activities by a user's friends , along with content generated by the pages of which the user is a fan .

thus , each facebook user's newsfeed is personalized .

newsfeed content can include links to news stories , personal updates , videos , comments , and photographs .

the profiles of individual facebook users also contain a "timeline," which chronologically captures all of the user's posts .

other users may also post to someone's timeline , if the two users are "friends," and if the user permits such a post .

this report analyzes the following questions related to member use of twitter and facebook: what proportion of members use twitter and facebook ? .

how often do members use twitter and facebook ? .

what are members tweeting and posting about ? .

the use of twitter and facebook by members of congress is an evolving phenomenon .

as members continue to embrace new technologies , their use of twitter , facebook , and other forms of social media may increase .

these mediums allow members to communicate directly with constituents ( and others ) in a potentially interactive way that is not possible through mail or e - mail .

for members and their staff , the ability to collect and transmit real time information to and from constituents could be influential for issue prioritization , policy decisions , or voting behavior .

further research on how the adoption and use of social media platforms — such as twitter and facebook — could provide insight into changing approaches to representation , messaging to constituents , communications outside a member's district or state , and potential regulation .

traditionally , members represent a geographic constituency .

social media , however , provides members with an "additional tool for contacting the geographic constituency , but ... also ... to reach groups outside of their official jurisdiction who share ideological goals and priorities. .

subsequently , while members represent a geographic district , social media could allow "surrogate representation" by members of other non - geographic constituent groups .

the consequences of such representation are not known , but could alter the representational strategies of individual members within congress .

as part of representation , members not only represent a geographic constituency , but they are also concerned with their personal message and how it impacts reelection efforts .

while official member communication cannot include campaign rhetoric , members know that what they say on official social media channels can be used in elections .

subsequently , how members use social media continues to evolve .

some reports have suggested that members are dedicating additional staff ( or hiring new staff ) to handle social media as part of their messaging and communications strategy .

in the current budget climate , how members allocate staff is crucial .

if members are spending more resources on social media , it is possible that the priorities of other representational functions may change .

electronic communications have also raised some concerns .

while a complete discussion of this is beyond the scope of this report , a few observations warrant mentioning .

first , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media such as the franking privilege have proven difficult to adapt to the new electronic technologies .

currently , house regulations treat social media communications similarly to solicited franked mail .

but several key differences between electronic communications and franked mail — most notably the lack of marginal cost , the inability to differentiate between constituents and non - constituents , and the ability of campaign challengers to adopt identical applications — raise questions about both the suitability and necessity of applying the franking model to social media communications .

second , the use of electronic communications is rapidly changing , sometimes over the course of just months .

just 10 years ago , facebook and twitter did not exist .

there is no way to predict whether they will continue to enjoy their current popularity 10 years from now , or what future communications tools and applications will exist .

policymakers thus may choose to seek general rather than specific structures when considering social media regulation , to avoid the need to revisit policies as new technologies are developed .

