concern among some members of congress and the public over the financial sustainability of the social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) program has grown .

under current law , the federal disability insurance ( di ) trust fund — which finances the benefits and administrative costs of the ssdi program — is projected to be exhausted by the fourth quarter of calendar year 2016 .

if depleted , the di trust fund would be able to pay about 80% of scheduled ssdi benefits .

the declining solvency of the di trust fund is the result of an increasing imbalance between ssdi's income and outlays .

between 1980 and 2013 , non - interest income to the di trust fund ( adjusted for inflation ) increased 181% , while spending on benefits grew 219% .

the increase in spending is due largely to the growth in the number of beneficiaries on ssdi .

over the same period , the number of disabled workers and their dependents more than doubled , rising from 4.7 million in 1980 to 11 million in 2013 .

because benefit payments account for nearly all program spending , the growth in the ssdi rolls has contributed heavily to the financial difficulties of the di trust fund .

to assist lawmakers in addressing the sustainability of the program , this report provides an overview of reform proposals to manage the long - term growth in the ssdi rolls .

the report is divided into four sections .

the first section provides a brief background on ssdi , including program eligibility criteria , benefits , and the initial determination and adjudication process .

the second section discusses the growth in the ssdi rolls since 1980 by examining historical entry and exit trends in the program .

the third section investigates some of the causes of growth in ssdi , including changes in the demographic characteristics of the working - age population , changes in opportunities for work and compensation , and changes in federal policy .

the fourth section examines various options to manage the growth in the ssdi rolls , namely , ( 1 ) stricter eligibility criteria , ( 2 ) improved administration of the program , ( 3 ) stronger return - to - work incentives , and ( 4 ) policies to encourage employers to help disabled workers continue to work .

many of the options discussed in this report could reduce spending by slowing or even reducing the growth of ssdi over the long term ; however , such options are unlikely to produce savings in time to prevent the projected exhaustion of the di trust fund in 2016 .

for information on financing options to extend the solvency of the di trust fund in the short term , see crs report r43318 , social security disability insurance ( di ) trust fund: background and solvency issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

enacted in 1956 under title ii of the social security act , ssdi is part of the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) .

oasdi is commonly called social security .

like old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) , ssdi is a form of social insurance that replaces a portion of a worker's earnings based on the individual's career - average earnings in jobs covered by social security .

specifically , ssdi provides benefits to insured workers under the full retirement age ( fra ) who meet the statutory test of disability and to their eligible dependents .

fra is the age at which unreduced social security retirement benefits are first payable ( currently 66 ) .

in november 2014 , 10.9 million individuals received ssdi benefits , including 9 million disabled workers , 150,000 spouses of disabled workers , and 1.8 million children of disabled workers .

ascribing shares of the growth in the ssdi program to specific factors has engendered disagreement among researchers , advocates , and some members of congress .

in general , people who support higher spending on ssdi focus on changes in the demographic characteristics of insured workers .

in contrast , individuals who want to limit program spending typically focus on the effect of changes in the economic incentives to apply for ssdi and legislative changes to the program's eligibility criteria .

as figure 5 highlights , some of increase can be explained by demographic factors such as the aging of the workforce ; however , the increase in the age - sex - adjusted rate means the growth in the ssdi rolls is also attributable to non - demographic factors , some of which are not well understood .

this section examines some of the more salient explanations for the growth in the program and discusses other potential factors .

this section examines options to manage the long - term growth in the ssdi program .

these options have been proposed by numerous sources , including researchers , advocacy organizations , federal agencies , and the social security advisory board ( ssab ) .

for an overview of options to reduce benefit levels or to increase program revenues , see cbo's 2012 report , policy options for the social security disability insurance program , available at https: / / www.cbo.gov / publication / 43421 .

as noted previously , while many of the proposals discussed in this report have the potential to slow or even reverse the prevalence of ssdi receipt and thus generate savings to the program over the longer term , such proposals are unlikely to produce savings in time to forestall the projected exhaustion of the di trust fund .

to avoid a 20% cut in benefits in 2016 , lawmakers would likely need to enact some kind of short - term financing , such as a reallocation of the social security payroll tax rate or interfund borrowing .

one policy option to reduce the growth in the ssdi rolls is to tighten the program's eligibility requirements .

in general , the aim of tightening eligibility criteria is to mitigate the number of marginally disabled individuals on the program while continuing to grant awards to the most severely disabled individuals .

because marginally disabled individuals have some remaining capacity to work , rejecting their applications would generally cause less harm to them than to more severely disabled individuals .

that said , there is no guarantee that all marginally disabled individuals can work .

although it is difficult to discern which type of claimants would be affected by more stringent eligibility requirements , a recent study found that marginal program entrants are more likely to be younger , suffer from mental impairments , and have low earnings histories .

henry aaron , chair of the social security advisory board , summarized that "the challenge for society is to choose a definition that best balances its willingness to award benefits to some people who do not 'deserve' them and to deny benefits to some who do. .

enacting stricter eligibility criteria would also affect other federal spending and tax programs .

on the one hand , tightening standards would not only directly reduce spending through a higher rejection rate ; it would also likely discourage some individuals from applying for ssdi in the first place .

additionally , stricter standards would likely encourage some prospective applicants to continue to work , which would increase tax receipts .

on the other hand , some people who could no longer qualify for ssdi would seek other federal support .

for example , individuals with sufficiently low income and assets could potentially qualify for ssi , increasing federal spending .

as noted earlier , workers between the ages of 62 and fra who apply for early social security retirement benefits are subject to a reduction in their monthly benefits .

in contrast , workers between the ages of 62 and fra who apply for ssdi benefits receive about the same benefit that they would have received had they applied for retirement benefits at their fra .

some members of congress have expressed concern that the differential between disability and early retirement may induce workers between the ages of 62 and fra to apply for ssdi as a means of increasing their total benefits .

in 2013 , 9% of the nearly 869,000 awards issued by ssa went to individuals between the ages of 62 and fra .

to reduce the growth in the ssdi rolls , policymakers could eliminate eligibility for ssdi benefits starting at age 62 .

instead , workers between the ages of 62 and fra would be eligible only for early retirement benefits .

under current law , the penalty for taking early retirement at age 62 is a 25% to 30% monthly reduction in cash benefits , depending on year of birth .

cbo recently estimated that preventing workers from applying for ssdi benefits after their 62 nd birthday or receiving ssdi benefits if they became eligible after that date starting in 2016 would reduce federal outlays by $10.6 billion between 2015 and 2024 , or 0.6% of scheduled outlays for ssdi .

one reason to eliminate eligibility starting at age 62 is that it could "encourage individuals that seek disability benefits as an early retirement program to remain in the work force. .

however , opponents point out that this option would adversely affect older workers with little or no capacity to work in the national economy , especially those workers near or below the poverty line .

to become insured under the social security program , workers must accrue work credits — known as quarters of coverage — based on their earnings in covered employment .

in 2015 , workers are credited with one quarter of coverage for each $1,220 in earnings , up to the maximum of four quarters of coverage per year .

to qualify for ssdi , workers must have earned a minimum number of quarters of coverage based on their age and generally must have earned at least 20 quarters of coverage during a 40-calendar quarter period ending with the quarter in which their disabilities began .

in other words , disability claimants must have worked for five of the past 10 years to be eligible for ssdi .

that "recency - of - work" requirement — sometimes known as the 20 / 40 rule — restricts the program to individuals who have worked of late and for a reasonable length of time in covered employment .

cbo recently estimated the impact of increasing the recency - of - work requirement on beneficiary enrollment .

according to the agency , requiring non - blind disability claimants to have worked four of the past six years ( instead of five of the past 10 ) starting in 2016 would reduce federal outlays by $32.4 billion between 2015 and 2024 , or 1.8% of scheduled outlays for ssdi .

the stricter recency - of - work requirement would likely affect individuals with intermittent work histories , specifically workers with prolonged and sustained bouts of absence from covered employment due to unemployment or withdrawal from the labor force .

one study found that while working - age men ( ages 25-54 ) report leaving the labor force primarily because of disability , working - age women typically report leaving the labor force to care for someone in their household .

consequently , the more stringent recency - of - work requirement may disproportionately affect women who drop out of the labor force to act as caregivers .

another option is to raise the age categories for "vocational factors. .

in addition to assessing an applicant's medical condition , dds examiners take into account the individual's ability to perform any past relevant work or other work that exists in the national economy .

vocational factors such as age , education , and work experience — in combination with the individual's residual functional capacity — help an examiner to determine whether an applicant's impairment precludes him or her from engaging in sga .

since vocational factors such as education and work experience typically become less stringent with age , ssa is more likely to award benefits to older insured workers .

currently , ssa categorizes older workers across four age ranges: 45-49 , 50-54 , 55-59 , and 60 and older .

cbo examined the effects of increasing the 45-49 and 50-54 age ranges by two years to 47-51 and 52-56 and making 57 to fra the new maximum range , thereby eliminating the 45 , 46 , and 60 and older categories .

according to cbo , if this option had been implemented in 2013 , it would have decreased the number of ssdi beneficiaries by 50,000 or 0.5% in 2022 , as well as reduced program expenditures by $1.0 billion in that year .

ssa explored raising the age categories in the past but ultimately decided against it .

in 2005 , ssa issued a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) to increase the age categories for older insured workers by two years .

however , after collecting feedback from the public , ssa withdrew the nprm in 2009 .

one option is to improve the way in which ssa administers the program so that fewer non - meritorious people receive benefits .

variation in the application of program rules can distort the disability determination and adjudication process , resulting in ssa granting awards to non - meritorious claimants or denying benefits to claimants with little or no capacity to work .

similarly , diminished program integrity — whether through waste , fraud , or abuse — may permit some beneficiaries to remain on ssdi even after their health improves .

this subsection outlines reforms to the administration of the program that could conceivably reduce the growth in the ssdi rolls .

in general , a claimant displeased with the decision at the reconsideration level of the appeals process may request a hearing before an alj , in writing , within 60 days upon receipt of the previous determination .

at the hearing level , a claimants may present additional evidence or arguments to support the case and appoint a representative to act on his or her behalf .

most claimants are represented by attorneys at alj hearings .

since ssa is not represented at the hearing , the proceeding is considered inquisitorial or non - adversarial .

under the inquisitorial process , an alj investigates the merit of an appeal by informally questioning the claimant and any scheduled witnesses ( eg , medical or vocational experts ) .

proponents of this process argue that the informal nature of the proceedings and lack of cross - examination by an opposing attorney encourages claimants to share more information with the alj .

moreover , supporters note that in richardson v. perales , the supreme court found that ssa hearings should be "understandable to the layman claimant , should not necessarily be stiff and comfortable only for the trained attorney , and should be liberal and not strict in tone and operation .

this is the obvious intent of congress so long as the procedures are fundamentally fair. .

opponents contend that inquisitorial process makes it harder for aljs to make informed decisions on a consistent basis , because they must remain impartial while simultaneously representing the interests of both claimants and ssa .

according to the association of administrative law judges ( aalj ) , having to wear all three "hats" during a hearing sometimes places an alj in an untenable situation , in which the judge must represent clients whose interests are at odds with one another .

the difficulty of maintaining impartiality while simultaneously representing the interests of both parties may cause an alj to overlook a key piece of evidence or argument , thereby affecting the outcome of the decision .

to improve the accuracy of aljs' decisions , the aalj , the ssab , and some members of congress have advocated switching from an inquisitorial to an adversarial process in which claimants and ssa are each afforded representation .

the aalj and ssab argue that the vigorous cross - examination of claimants by ssa representatives would provide aljs with additional information , resulting in better decisions .

according to ssab , under the inquisitorial process , some aljs may be reluctant to question claimants aggressively for fear of appearing to be biased .

ssab contends that switching to an adversarial process would allow aljs to investigate the history and extent of claimants' medical impairments more thoroughly , resulting in better - reasoned decisions and greater judicial consistency .

another potential advantage of the adversarial process is that government representation may reduce the number of cases that an alj would need to hear , which could further improve the quality of their decisions .

in 2013 , ssa deputy commissioner glenn sklar testified that the agency expects aljs to issue 500-700 decisions annually .

some researchers speculate that the pressure to adjudicate a high number of disability claims quickly has led to poorer alj decisions and consequently a higher allowance rate .

according to a 2013 senate report , this pressure stems from a 2007 plan by ssa to reduce its backlog of disability hearings .

one reason why the pressure to hear a large volume of cases may have increased the overall allowance rate is that issuing an award is generally not appealed by a claimant and is therefore subject to less scrutiny than a denial would be .

a 2014 story on ssa's disability backlog in the washington post noted that "judges complain that saying 'yes' is a lot easier — and faster — than saying 'no. .

a negative decision often requires a lengthier write - up , which goes through all the different ailments that might have rendered this person disabled .

that means 10 pages of text to prepare for a future appeal .

a 'yes' decision is rarely appealed .

so , they say , it takes less writing. .

the aalj contends that switching to an adversarial process would allow government attorneys to settle cases with a high probability of reversal before the hearing level , giving aljs more time to adjudicate complicated cases or ones with a lower likelihood of being reversed .

by allowing government representatives to decide which cases to defend , the adversarial process could reduce the pressure for aljs to decide a high number of claims , which , in turn , could improve the quality of their decisions .

at a hearing in november 2013 , ssa refuted the characterization that it is sacrificing quality by granting claims "too readily" and insisted that it is "making quicker , higher quality disability decisions. .

the agency also noted that between fy2007 and fy2013 , the share of aljs with allowance rates of 85% or greater fell from 20% to 3% .

successfully implementing an adversarial process at the hearing level poses several challenges for ssa .

first , it would require additional expenditures to hire attorneys and appropriate staff .

disability hearings are already quite costly for ssa .

in fy2011 , the unit cost of adjudicating a disability hearing was about $2,750 , compared with about $1,060 to process an initial disability claim .

those extra costs would offset any savings from reduced benefit outlays .

second , a federal judge issued an injunction against ssa's previous adversarial pilot program in 1986 , so an adversarial process might require new legislative authority .

in 1982 , ssa initiated the social security administration representation project ( ssarp ) in five hearing offices across the country to test "whether the participation of ssa representatives in disability cases at the administrative hearing level can contribute toward improving the quality and timeliness of hearing dispositions. .

under the ssarp , government representatives reviewed hearing requests , initiated case development , and represented the agency whenever a claimant had an appointed representative at a hearing .

the ssarp sparked concern among some members of congress and the public over the "fairness of ssa's disability adjudication process. .

one month into the pilot program , seven disability claimants challenged the ssarp in the western district of virginia seeking injunctive and declaratory relief .

in salling v. bowen , a district judge issued an injunction against the ssarp , finding that its procedures did not meet the standard for due process and were not "fundamentally fair. .

the judge also held that the pilot program violated the social security act and intruded on the independence of aljs .

although ssa appealed the court's decision , the agency ultimately discontinued the ssarp and revoked its regulations in 1987 .

according to the general accounting office ( gao ; now the government accountability office ) , the preliminary results of the pilot were never verified and a final report was never issued .

third , the effects of switching to an adversarial process are difficult to predict .

to determine the effectiveness of government representation , ssa would need to know: whether representation can improve the quality of alj decisions , and if so , whether higher - quality decisions reduce the overall allowance rate , and if so , whether the adversarial process can be done in a cost - effective manner .

during the disability determination process , dds examiners and medical and psychological consultants typically use medical evidence collected from the claimant's treating sources to determine the severity of the claimant's impairment .

to assess whether the impairment precludes the claimant from working , state disability examiners evaluate it against ssa's listing of impairments ( hereinafter "listings" ) .

the listings describe medical impairments that are considered severe enough to prevent an individual from performing any gainful activity for each of the 14 major adult body systems .

most of the impairments described in the listings are permanent or expected to result in death .

all other listings must show that the impairment has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year .

if the claimant's impairment meets ( or is of equal severity to ) the criteria in the listings , ssa considers the claimant disabled and therefore eligible for benefits .

claimants who do not meet the medical criteria in the listings proceed to a more individualized assessment that examines their remaining ability to work , taking into account certain vocational factors .

although the listings serve as a useful guide for dds examiners , the percentage of awards determined at the listings stage has decreased substantially over the years .

between fy1980 and fy2010 , the share of initial allowances based on claimants meeting the medical listings declined from 58% to 38% , while the portion based on claimants having an impairment equal in severity fell from 16% to 8% over the same period ( figure 13 ) .

ssab , gao , and ssa's oig all attribute this decline to the increasingly outdated nature of the listings .

in 2000 , the oig found that ssa had not updated certain listings in over 10 years ; moreover , ssa had not updated the listings for mental disorders in 15 years .

in 2003 , gao identified ssdi as a high - risk program because it relied on listings that did not reflect the impact of medical and technological advances on work - limiting impairments .

to improve the quality and accuracy of disability determinations , ssa initiated a two - tiered process for updating its medical listings beginning in 2003 .

under the new process , the agency is to first complete a comprehensive revision of each listing category , taking into account any medical disorder or disease that may inhibit an individual's ability to work .

once the comprehensive update is complete , ssa is to conduct periodic reviews of each listing category to ensure that the listings are current .

ssa has completed comprehensive revisions to nine of the 14 major adult body systems .

ssa has experienced delays in completing comprehensive updates to the remaining five major adult body systems .

for example , ssa has still not completed a final revision of the listing for mental disorders — ssdi's second most diagnosed impairment — which last received a comprehensive update in 1985 .

ssa officials attribute the delay to a shortage of qualified staff and to the enormous complexity of implementing and revising new medical listings .

updating the listings to take into account medical and technological advances , as well as changes in the labor market , could allow dds examiners to better identify individuals with severe work - limiting disabilities , while screening out non - meritorious claimants who could potentially engage in sga .

the impact of updated medical listings on the prevalence of benefit receipt remains unclear , because claimants denied at the medical listings stage of the determination process may still be awarded benefits based on vocational factors .

if a claimant fails to meet the eligibility criteria described in the medical listings , ssa is to proceed with a more individualized assessment that examines the claimant's ability to engage in sga .

to "minimize subjectivity and promote national consistency," ssa employs a system of medical and vocational rules designed to assist examiners in discerning whether a claimant can perform any past relevant work or other work that exists in the national economy .

ssa considers claimants who cannot perform such work to be disabled and therefore eligible for ssdi .

currently , ssa uses the department of labor's ( dol ) dictionary of occupational titles ( dot ) to determine the physical and mental demands of available work in the national economy .

because dot last received a major update in 1977 , its occupational information is considered largely outdated .

although dol replaced dot with the occupational information network ( o*net ) in 1998 , ssa concluded that o*net's occupational information was insufficient to meet its requirements .

a 2012 senate report expressed concern that dot's increasingly outdated information may result in awards to claimants who could work in unlisted occupations .

to improve program integrity , ssa in december 2008 established the occupational information development advisory panel to develop a new occupational information system ( ois ) for use in the vocational stages of the disability determination process .

in july 2012 , ssa signed an interagency agreement with the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) to test the viability of using bls's national compensation survey ( ncs ) to collect occupational data for the new ois .

in fy2013 , ssa and bls conducted a three - phase test to assess the ncs's accuracy and reliability in capturing occupational data that are relevant for disability determinations .

ssa expects to start developing the new ois in fy2015 and implement it by fy2016 .

in the future , ssa's updated ois may help to mitigate the growth in the ssdi rolls .

according to ssa , the occupational information in dot reflects an industrial economy , whereas today's economy has become more service oriented .

therefore , modern occupations that require less physical exertion may allow individuals with certain disabilities to remain in the labor force .

on the other hand , some individuals may be more likely to qualify for ssdi when evaluated using the updated ois .

for example , older individuals with disabilities may have difficulty adjusting to the intensity and pressure of many of today's employment opportunities , while individuals with less extensive education may be less suited to "cognitively demanding" work .

another complicating issue is that individuals with disabilities still tend to work in occupations that require physical labor .

for instance , one study found that individuals with cognitive or multiple disabilities are more likely to work in physically demanding , low - skilled jobs .

consequently , an updated ois may not reduce the number of individuals with certain chronic conditions from applying for benefits .

as noted earlier , medical cdrs are periodic reevaluations conducted to determine if beneficiaries are still disabled .

if ssa finds substantial evidence of medical improvement related to a beneficiary's ability to work , the agency typically considers the beneficiary no longer disabled .

by increasing the number of full medical cdrs conducted each year , ssa could increase the recovery rate of beneficiaries with work - related medical improvements , which would help to reduce the disability rolls .

according to ssa , periodic medical evaluations are one of the most cost - effective tools for improving program integrity .

of the more than 443,000 full medical cdrs conducted in fy2012 , ssa estimates that it will cease paying benefits to over 76,000 individuals and their eligible dependents after all appeals ( a cessation rate of 17% ) .

for every dollar spent on cdrs in fy2012 , the agency estimates approximately $14.60 in future savings to the federal government .

prior to that , the cdr process yielded an estimated savings - to - cost ratio of $10 to $1 .

 ( note that benefit savings from cdrs are not counted for congressional scorekeeping purposes. ) .

however , a loss of dedicated funding for program integrity activities between fy2003 and fy2008 left ssa with fewer resources with which to conduct disability reviews , resulting in a cdr backlog ( figure 14 ) .

in 2010 , the oig estimated that if ssa had conducted all full medical cdrs when they were originally scheduled between 2005 and 2010 , the agency would have removed an additional 90,000 to 180,000 ssdi and ssi beneficiaries from the rolls , thereby avoiding between $1.3 billion and $2.6 billion in benefit payments from 2005 to 2010 .

despite recent efforts to reduce the backlog , ssa estimated that there were 1.3 million pending medical cdrs at the end of fy2013 .

reducing the cdr backlog has posed a challenge for ssa , in part because of a reduction in dds staffing levels over the years .

in response to budget deficits following the last recession , some states instituted furloughs or hiring freezes of state employees , including dds examiners .

the reduced staffing at ddss limited ssa's ability to conduct periodic medical reviews and contributed to the backlog of cdrs .

to address the lower staffing levels , ssa transferred a portion of disability cases from furloughed dds offices in some states to non - furloughed dds offices in other states .

additionally , the agency received funding in fy2009 and fy2010 to increase the number of dds staff by more than 2,900 employees .

however , due to an agency - wide hiring freeze that began in fy2011 , ssa did only limited critical hiring between fy2011 and fy2013 .

the combination of attrition and hiring freezes during this period resulted in a net decline in dds staffing levels ( table 2 ) .

to address the mounting backlog of cdrs and enhance program integrity , advocacy organizations , researchers , and the obama administration have all expressed their support for increasing cdr funding .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , which places caps on discretionary spending , includes a provision to adjust the caps to permit additional appropriations to ssa for program integrity activities such as cdrs and ssi redeterminations .

ssi redeterminations are periodic reviews to ensure that beneficiaries meet ssi's financial eligibility requirements .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) appropriated a total of $1.197 billion for cdrs and ssi redeterminations , which was the maximum amount allowed under the bca for fy2014 .

with this level of funding , ssa completed nearly 526,000 full medical cdrs and 2.6 million ssi redeterminations ( see figure 3 ) .

the fy2014 appropriation also allowed the agency to hire about 2,600 dds employees , including both replacement staff and additional hires .

for fy2015 , the administration requested the full amount authorized for program integrity activities under the bca: $273 million in base funding and $1.123 billion in cap adjustment funding .

the administration estimates that the $1.396 billion in total program integrity funding would allow ssa to perform at least 888,000 full medical cdrs and 2.6 million ssi redeterminations in fy2015 .

congress appropriated the maximum amount for fy2015 in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

according to ssa , the agency would need $11.8 billion in program integrity funding during fy2014-2023 to eliminate the cdr backlog by fy2018 and prevent it from growing back again through fy2023 .

this level of funding would allow ssa to conduct an estimated 8.8 million full medical cdrs .

however , at the funding levels prescribed in the bca , ssa projects that it would be able to conduct only 7.8 million full medical cdrs at a cost of $10.3 billion .

for fy2016 , the administration proposes replacing the discretionary spending caps established under the bca with a dedicated source of mandatory funding to enable ssa to conduct more cdrs and ssi redeterminations on a consistent basis .

under this option , ssa estimates that it would conduct more than 8 million full medical cdrs at a cost of $10.7 billion during fy2014-fy2023 .

while additional funding and new hires would allow the agency to perform more full medical cdrs , the shortage of veteran examiners complicates the issue .

part of the problem stems from the fact that dds examiners experience high rates of turnover .

according to gao , over 20% of dds examiners hired between september 1998 and january 2006 left or were terminated within their first year .

of the examiners who remain , it takes about two years of experience before ssa considers them to be fully trained .

thus , even with additional hiring , it may take the agency years to reestablish a robust pool of highly experienced disability examiners .

additionally , because of diminishing returns , future marginal savings from additional cdrs would be less than the past average .

when ssa performs cdrs , it prioritizes the beneficiaries who are most likely to have substantial medical improvement related to their ability to work .

however , as the number of completed cdrs increases , the chance of benefit cessation declines for subsequent reviews .

the savings - to - cost ratio would also decrease if former ssdi beneficiaries who were terminated due to medical improvement reapply and return to the program .

according to one study , of those whose eligibility ceased after cdrs from 2003 to 2008 , an estimated 20% of former ssdi - only beneficiaries will come back onto the rolls within eight years .

it is important to note that program integrity activities alone would be unable to substantially improve the financial outlook of the ssdi program , because potential savings from cdrs take time to accumulate and apply to multiple programs .

for example , ssa projects that the full medical cdrs conducted in fy2012 will result in a present value of nearly $7 billion in lifetime savings to the federal government ; however , these savings are spread out over decades and are attributable not only to ssdi but also to oasi , ssi , medicare , and medicaid .

another policy option to combat the growth in the ssdi rolls is to provide stronger incentives for beneficiaries to return to work .

currently , ssa allows beneficiaries to test their ability to work by participating in a trial work period ( twp ) , during which participants may earn any amount for nine months within a rolling 60-month period without having their benefits reduced or their entitlement to ssdi terminated .

in addition , ssa provides employment and support services .

still , few beneficiaries leave the program .

in 2013 , ssa terminated the benefits of 0.4% of all disabled - worker recipients due to earnings above sga .

to address some of the barriers to employment faced by disabled workers , congress enacted the ticket to work and work incentives improvement act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-170 ) , which established the ticket to work and self - sufficiency program ( hereinafter "ticket to work" ) .

ticket to work assists beneficiaries between the ages of 18 and 64 in returning to the labor force by providing a voucher or ticket for employment , vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) , or other support services through public or private contractors known as employment networks ( en ) , as well as through traditional state vr agencies .

participation in the ticket to work program is voluntary , and ticket holders ( beneficiaries ) decide when and whether to assign a ticket to a particular state vr agency or en .

under the program , state vr agencies and ens receive payments from ssa for services provided to ticket holders based on specific work - related performances measures .

thus far , the ticket to work program has met with little success .

although program participants are more likely to be employed than other beneficiaries , only about 2.3% of all active tickets issued by ssa are in use ( i.e. , assigned to an en or state vr agency ) .

according to gao , en representatives partially attribute ticket to work's low beneficiary participation rate to "a lack of understanding and awareness of the program. .

meanwhile , some disability - advocacy organizations contend that the fear of losing benefits may deter beneficiaries from participating .

to improve the return - to - work rate of ssdi recipients , researchers bonnie o'day and david stapleton have proposed testing early intervention policies that provide beneficiaries with employment and other support services shortly after receipt of benefits .

the researchers argue that current programs have failed to increase the return - to - work rate , because many beneficiaries "have been separated from the labor force , often for years , before they are offered assistance. .

the researchers posit that beneficiaries may have a greater chance of returning to work if they receive services earlier during their stay on ssdi .

one early intervention option is to require all future beneficiaries to participate in work preparation counseling to educate them about available services .

beneficiaries may be more likely to participate in programs they understand .

although mandatory work preparation counseling would require new funding , the counseling might be cost - effective if it improves the return - to - work rate of ssdi recipients , especially if it targeted those with the best chance of success .

ssa oversees two voluntary grant programs aimed at increasing beneficiary awareness of return - to - work services .

in addition to the ticket to work program , p.l .

106-170 also established the work incentives planning and assistance ( wipa ) program and the protection and advocacy for beneficiaries of social security ( pabss ) .

wipa awards grants to community organizations that provide education and assistance for beneficiaries interested in returning to work , and pabss provides grants for legal assistance and advice on how to obtain vr , employment , or other services .

estimating the overall impact of mandatory counseling on the ssdi beneficiary return - to - work rate is difficult because the results of ssa's current employment - counseling initiatives are inconclusive .

according to one study , the use of wipa services possibly has a positive effect on the employment outcomes of ssdi and ssi beneficiaries .

however , it is difficult to discern whether beneficiaries who received wipa services would have enjoyed the same employment outcome in the absence of such services .

one reason why few workers leave the rolls due to substantial earnings is that some beneficiaries deliberately "park" their earnings from work below the sga threshold .

after completing the twp and a 36-month extended period of eligibility ( epe ) , beneficiaries who earn more than the sga limit have their benefits terminated .

one study found that between 0.2% and 0.4% of all ssdi beneficiaries parked their earnings below sga in a typical month from 2002 to 2006 in order to retain their benefits .

beneficiaries may park their earnings below sga ( sometimes called the "cash cliff" ) in part because their impairment prevents them from working consistently .

another study found that 59% of ticket to work participants reported working at a job for at least one month during 2003-2005 ; however , of those participants who later left work , the most cited reason was due to poor health .

parking one's earnings below sga may weaken a work - oriented beneficiary's attachment to the labor force , possibly resulting in an erosion of skills and thus a reduced likelihood of returning to work following a health - related withdrawal from the labor force .

to remedy the phenomenon of parked earnings , several disability - rights organizations have advocated eliminating the fixed cash cliff ( sga threshold ) and replacing it with a gradual benefit - offset model that allows beneficiaries to increase their earnings while remaining on ssdi .

the ssi program operates under a benefit - offset system , deducting $1 in benefits for every $2 in earnings over $65 .

advocates argue that a benefit - offset model would make ssdi beneficiaries "financially better off" by allowing them to maximize their total income and work potential .

a benefit - offset model could also improve the finances of the ssdi program by reducing the amount of cash benefits paid out to recipients .

additionally , adopting a benefit - offset model could increase beneficiaries' attachment to the labor force by making work more attractive .

on the other hand , benefit offset may induce only a small number of beneficiaries to increase their earnings ( i.e. , those beneficiaries who park their earnings ) .

although benefit outlays from the di trust fund would decrease under this scenario , such savings would have little impact on the solvency of the di trust fund .

additionally , by making it easier for recipients to maintain their eligibility for benefits , benefit offset could decrease the ssdi termination rate further , which , in turn , could increase the total number of beneficiaries on the rolls .

furthermore , benefit offset may increase the attractiveness of ssdi benefits , impelling more workers to apply to the program .

ssa is currently in the process of conducting a benefit offset national demonstration ( bond ) project , in which treatment participants lose $1 in benefits for every $2 in earnings exceeding a bond yearly amount ( bya ) equal to 12 times the monthly sga limit .

some bond participants are also eligible for enhanced work incentives counseling ( ewic ) , which is designed to address a range of issues related to returning to work , including access to medical treatment , employment services , and job training .

in implementing bond , ssa seeks to test whether benefit offset can increase earnings and reduce dependence on ssdi for work - oriented beneficiaries .

in preparation for bond , ssa implemented a four - state pilot program known as the benefit offset pilot demonstration ( bopd ) from 2005 to 2008 .

according to ssa , participation in the bopd had a positive effect on the earnings of individuals in the treatment group ; however , the pilot also increased average benefit payments because of partial payments made to beneficiaries whose benefits would have been suspended under normal program rules for earning above sga .

in august 2013 , ssab called for the early termination of bond .

the board cited the implementation problems associated with the pilot program and bond's low participation rate as evidence that bond would likely fail to increase beneficiary return - to - work rates in a cost effective manner .

ssab estimated that terminating bond would save approximately $17 million in fy2015 .

some researchers have suggested shifting the focus of ssdi reform away from terminating beneficiaries already on the rolls toward attenuating the inflow of new beneficiaries into the program .

advocates of this approach — sometimes referred to as supported work — argue that offering employment supports shortly after the onset of disability would allow more workers who experience disability to keep working .

most supported - work policies use financial incentives to encourage employers to provide preventive , accommodative , rehabilitative , and other return - to - work services .

although title i of the americans with disabilities act ( ada ; p.l .

101-336 , as amended ) requires employers to provide some level of reasonable accommodation for employees with disabilities in the workplace , some employers fail to comply with the provisions of the ada .

faced with few employment opportunities , individuals with disabilities who could conceivably work given appropriate accommodation may turn to ssdi as a last resort .

this subsection provides an overview of two supported - work policies that have the potential to reduce the incidence of benefit receipt .

experience rating is a process for determining insurance premiums based on the cost of an insurance pool's past claims .

in essence , an insurer calculates a firm's insurance premium based on the likelihood , or risk , of the firm submitting a future claim given its previous behavior .

many types of employer - sponsored insurance use experience rating to determine premiums , including state workers' compensation ( wc ) , unemployment insurance ( ui ) , and private disability insurance ( pdi ) .

because premiums are a function of past claims , firms' costs reflect their use of the insurance program , creating incentives for them to reduce the number of claims .

to reduce the incidence of ssdi receipt , several researchers have suggested that the federal government should experience rate the employer's portion of the payroll tax used to fund ssdi .

currently , employers pay the same payroll tax rate , regardless of the rate at which their employees enroll in the program .

however , an experience rated system would link payroll tax rates to the claim rate , which would give employers an additional incentive to support disabled workers .

proponents of experience rating often point to its use in the netherlands' disability insurance ( di ) system as evidence of its potential impact in the united states .

between 1998 and 2003 , the netherlands gradually incorporated experience rating into its di system .

according to one study , instituting experience - rated di premiums resulted in a 15% reduction in the dutch di incidence rate .

since the early 2000s , the netherlands has witnessed a marked decline in its di prevalence rate .

experience rating could be implemented relatively simply .

employers already report payroll tax data to the internal revenue service ( irs ) , which the agency shares with ssa .

moreover , most employers are accustomed to the concept of experience rating because of their experience paying state wc and ui premiums .

by compiling both payroll tax and beneficiary award data , ssa could experience rate the ssdi payroll tax "without imposing substantial new reporting requirements or administrative burdens on employers. .

opponents of experience rating argue that the policy would adversely affect some workers .

for example , experience rating could make employers hesitant to hire or retain workers "perceived to be a high risk for disability. .

employers may discriminate against older workers , people with chronic conditions such as diabetes , or individuals prone to risky behaviors .

to address this possibility , supporters of experience rating suggest implementing risk adjustments specific to factors such as age , occupation , and health status , as well as enforcing existing anti - discrimination laws .

critics also point out that experience rating could reduce the compensation of low - wage workers .

for instance , some employers subject to higher payroll tax rates could shift the additional cost onto workers in the form of reduced take - home pay or benefits .

employers unable to shift additional labor costs onto their employees may instead offset the higher payroll tax rate by hiring fewer workers in the future .

since low - wage individuals tend to work in professions with high rates of disability , they may be disproportionately affected by employer cost avoidance and therefore more likely to suffer financially .

opponents argue that workers harmed by employer cost avoidance could end up on ssdi , increasing the size of the program .

furthermore , some critics say that while the system changes employers' incentives , it fails to address the incentives for workers to apply for ssdi .

for example , some workers may apply in response to factors beyond the employers' control , such as low market wages .

another option to reduce the number of ssdi beneficiaries is for the federal government to promote employer - sponsored private disability insurance ( pdi ) .

pdi provides beneficiaries with a partial wage replacement and return - to - work services .

as of march 2014 , 40% of all workers in private industry had access to short - term disability ( std ) insurance , and 34% had access to long - term disability ( ltd ) insurance .

std insurance typically lasts a fixed number of weeks or months , while ltd insurance can last anywhere from a year to several decades .

pdi is less expensive than other forms of employer - sponsored insurance , such as health care .

in addition , employers can partially offset the cost of pdi by requiring employees to contribute to the insurance plans .

some researchers have advocated that the federal government should promote employer - sponsored pdi to reduce the growth in the ssdi rolls .

employer - sponsored pdi plans could reduce the incidence of ssdi benefit receipt , because they provide employment - support services soon after the onset of disability when the likelihood of recovery is highest .

by intervening with robust supported - work services early in the disability process , pdi may keep workers with disabilities attached to the labor force and therefore reduce the number who apply for ssdi .

offering employers financial incentives is one way to promote employer - sponsored pdi .

for example , ssa could lower the tax rate of employers who purchase pdi and whose insurance agents coordinate with ssa to manage disability cases in a cost - effective manner .

alternatively , the federal government could award subsidies or tax credits to firms that provide pdi .

a second way to promote pdi would be to require all employers to provide it .

companies that refuse to provide pdi would be subject to possible legal action , financial penalties , or both .

currently , new jersey , new york , hawaii , and puerto rico require employers to contribute toward some form of std insurance , generally known as temporary disability insurance ( tdi ) .

employer - mandated pdi has become increasingly popular in many european countries .

the netherlands , for example , requires employers to cover the cost of sick pay for two years following the onset of a disabling condition , while the u.k. requires employers to pay up to six months of statutory sick pay .

researchers david autor and mark duggan have proposed requiring all employers to provide short - term pdi , which would provide workers with rehabilitation services , workplace accommodation , and a partial wage replacement for two years .

under this proposal , plans would be purchased on the existing pdi market , and employers would be permitted to require employees to contribute up to 40% of the cost of their coverage .

following the exhaustion of employer - sponsored pdi , beneficiaries who are found to be disabled would qualify for ssdi .

workers with extremely severe or terminal disabilities would be exempt from the two - year pdi requirement and would qualify for ssdi immediately .

using the financial incentives approach would be relatively simple , because the federal government already encourages employers to hire workers with disabilities by offering tax credits to offset the cost of providing workplace accommodation .

having ssa work with employers and insurers under an experience - rating system would likely require significantly more resources than the tax credit proposal , but the system could be structured to limit federal costs .

in spite of these advantages , financial incentives might be ineffective .

as noted above , the federal government currently offers employers tax incentives to hire workers with disabilities ; however , the evidence that such incentives actually drive employers to hire such workers has been "limited and inconclusive. .

similarly , the lure of a lower payroll tax rate under an experience - rating model may not cause employers to purchase pdi , especially if the cost of providing pdi outweighs any savings from the reduced payroll tax rate .

a mandate , on the other hand , would likely have a larger effect .

the prospect of having to pay financial penalties due to noncompliance is typically a more powerful incentive for employers than tax credits .

although a government mandate does not guarantee universal compliance because some employers could simply pay the appropriate penalty , requiring employers to provide pdi might still have a marked effect on the inflow of beneficiaries into the ssdi program .

one of the biggest unknown factors of the mandate approach outlined by autor and duggan is whether the private insurance market can offer an economically feasible two - year pdi plan .

most insurers sell pdi plans as either short - term ( around 26 weeks ) or long - term ( anywhere from a year to several decades ) .

although both types of pdi cost employers about the same amount per hour worked , ltd insurance plans typically have stricter eligibility standards .

for instance , ltd plans may have more stringent definitions of disability or have a larger list of pre - existing medical conditions that make employees ineligible .

ltd plans are generally stricter because beneficiaries could receive benefits for years or even decades .

to offset some of the risk associated with ltd plans , insurers often require beneficiaries to apply for ssdi after the onset of disability and deduct any ssdi income from a beneficiary's ltd benefit .

however , because the autor and duggan proposal does not permit insurers to offset part of their costs by requiring beneficiaries to apply for ssdi , such two - year pdi plans may not be financially viable in the current insurance market .

autor and duggan contend that their proposal would be economically feasible for insurers because their pdi plan would be less generous that current ltd policies .

based on their conversations with private insurers , they believe that two - year policies would not substantially increase the costs associated with pdi .

additionally , private insurers could simply raise premiums to a level sufficient to make two - year pdi policies profitable .

the extent to which insurers could raise rates would depend on the structure of the federal mandate as well as on state insurance laws .

however , if insurers raised premiums too high and compliance penalties for employers were too low or not adequately enforced , then employers could choose not to provide pdi .

