congress has demonstrated an interest in mental health and mental illness , and knowing how many people have a mental illness may be helpful in addressing related policy issues .

determining how many people have a mental illness can be difficult , and prevalence estimates vary .

while numerous surveys include questions related to mental illness , few provide prevalence estimates of diagnosable mental illness , and fewer still provide national prevalence estimates of diagnosable mental illness .

this report briefly describes the methodology and selected findings of three large federally funded surveys that provide national prevalence estimates of diagnosable mental illness : the national comorbidity survey replication ( ncs - r ) , the national comorbidity survey replication adolescent supplement ( ncs - a ) , and the national survey on drug use and health ( nsduh ) .

this report presents prevalence estimates of any mental illness and serious mental illness based on each survey and ends with a brief discussion of how these prevalence estimates might inform policy discussions .

one data source may be preferred over another in specific situations .

for example , the ncs - r and the ncs - a are more than a decade old , so the nsduh ( which is conducted annually ) may be preferred for more recent prevalence estimates .

on the other hand , the ncs - r and the ncs - a provide prevalence estimates for specific disorders , which the nsduh does not provide .

in clinical practice , mental health professionals diagnose mental illnesses based on criteria in the american psychiatric association's diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders ( dsm ) and exercise clinical judgment in doing so .

large surveys , however , may not allow for lengthy interviews and use of clinical judgment .

considerations in generating national prevalence estimates of diagnosable mental illness through large surveys include ( 1 ) what survey instrument ( i.e. , set of questions ) is used , ( 2 ) who administers it , and ( 3 ) how generalizable the findings are .

each of these considerations is discussed briefly below .

when designing surveys , researchers must weigh the value of detailed information against the time required to collect that information .

longer survey instruments may be better able to identify mental illness accurately by asking all or most of the questions necessary to assess dsm diagnostic criteria .

shorter survey instruments , while more practical to include in a survey , may not identify mental illness as accurately as longer instruments .

table 1 provides examples of survey instruments assessing mental illness .

survey instruments may be administered in different ways , which may affect both the accuracy of their assessment of mental illness and the feasibility of their inclusion in large surveys .

some , such as the structured clinical interview for dsm disorders ( described in table 1 ) , require trained mental health professionals .

others require trained interviewers who need not be mental health professionals .

still others may be self - administered or administered by interviewers without extensive training .

the prevalence estimates described in this report are weighted to reflect the general u.s. population as closely as possible .

this is accomplished by assigning a weight to each survey respondent based on information that is available for both the survey respondents and the general u.s. population ( eg , age and gender , among others ) .

weighting can correct for known differences between the survey respondents and the general u.s. population ( eg , if people in a certain age range are overrepresented in the survey ) .

weighting cannot , however , correct for subpopulations that are excluded from the survey altogether ( eg , the homeless ) .

prevalence estimates are not generalizable to excluded subpopulations .

the national comorbidity survey replication ( ncs - r ) replicated the original national comorbidity survey ( conducted between 1990 and 1992 ) , which was the first survey to use fully structured research diagnostic interviews to assess a wide range of dsm disorders among a national sample of adults in the united states .

the ncs - r was funded primarily by the national institute of mental health within the national institutes of health ( nih ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , with supplemental support from the national institute on drug abuse ( also within nih ) , the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( of hhs ) , the robert wood johnson foundation , and the john w. alden trust .

between february 2001 and april 2003 , ncs - r staff conducted in - person interviews with more than 9,000 adults aged 18 or older , drawing the sample from households in the contiguous united states .

the sample did not include the homeless , individuals in institutions , or non - english speakers ; these exclusions limit the generalizability of findings based on the ncs - r .

the national comorbidity survey replication adolescent supplement ( ncs - a ) was the first survey to use fully structured research diagnostic interviews to assess a wide range of dsm disorders among a national sample of adolescents in the united states .

like the ncs - r , the ncs - a was funded primarily by the national institute of mental health , with supplemental support from the national institute on drug abuse , the substance abuse and mental health services administration , the robert wood johnson foundation , and the john w. alden trust .

between february 2001 and january 2004 , ncs - a staff interviewed more than 10,000 adolescents aged 13 to 17 , drawing the sample from both schools and households in the coterminous united states .

adolescent participants were interviewed in person , and one parent of each participating adolescent was asked to complete a self - administered questionnaire about the adolescent's developmental history and mental health .

the sample did not include the homeless , individuals in institutions , or non - english speakers ; these exclusions limit the generalizability of findings based on the ncs - a .

the national survey on drug use and health ( nsduh ) focuses primarily on the use of illegal drugs , alcohol , and tobacco and also includes several modules that focus on mental health issues .

the nsduh is funded by the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

each year , the nsduh surveys approximately 68,000 noninstitutionalized civilians aged 12 years or older in the united states , divided roughly between 51,000 adults ( aged 18 or older ) and 17,000 adolescents ( aged 12 to 17 ) .

the nsduh is conducted in both english and spanish .

participants are interviewed in their homes using a combination of personal interviewing and audio computer - assisted self - interviewing , which offers more privacy in order to encourage honest reporting of sensitive topics such as illicit drug use .

the sample does not include homeless persons not living in a shelter , individuals in institutions , those who speak a language other than english or spanish , or military personnel on active duty ; these exclusions limit the generalizability of findings based on the nsduh .

nsduh - based prevalence estimates of any mental illness and serious mental illness among adults aged 18 or older are described below .

although the nsduh collects information related to mental illness ( eg , symptoms of depression ) from adolescents aged 12 to 17 , it does not produce prevalence estimates of mental illness for that population .

knowing how many people are likely to be affected by policies related to mental illness may help policymakers identify specific problems as well as their scope ; however , the national prevalence estimates discussed in this report may raise as many questions as they answer .

for example , given the difference in prevalence estimates between any mental illness and serious mental illness among adolescents , might policymakers choose to focus on a large group of adolescents that includes many whose mental illnesses may be mild and even transient , or might they choose to focus more narrowly on adolescents with serious mental illness ? .

as clinical practice is moving toward more integrated care , should substance use disorders be included in the definition of mental illness ( as in the ncs - r and the ncs - a ) and addressed through the same policies , or should they be identified separately ( as in the nsduh ) and addressed through different policies ? .

how might policymakers address mental illness among populations that are excluded from the prevalence estimates ( eg , the homeless ) ? .

with regard to the ncs - r and the ncs - a , there is an overarching question of whether prevalence estimates based on surveys conducted more than a decade ago remain relevant to current policy discussions .

policymakers may come to different conclusions about the best policy approach depending in part on how they answer such questions .

