at the close of 2001 , argentina plunged into a devastating financial crisis .

deep recession , high unemployment , and social upheaval brought to power a new government , and with it a new direction in economic policy away from market - oriented policies toward greater government control of the economy .

a new emphasis on "social equity" placed additional strain on the budget , but economic recovery , strong foreign demand for argentine commodities , an expansive monetary policy , and debt repudiation brought six straight years of fiscal surplus .

by 2012 , however , the creeping deterioration of argentina's economic fortunes was undeniable .

slowing economic growth , rising inflation , and a tightening budget constraint raised doubts about the country's fiscal capacity to meet the now well - entrenched "populist" expectations .

at risk is the argentine economic model itself , as well as the political and social balance it has supported over the past decade .

supporting an expansive domestic policy agenda has led to a highly distorted economy that in turn has required repeated intervention in the external accounts to maintain a fragile balance .

debt repudiation , expropriation , capital and currency controls , trade protectionism , and refusal to abide by judgments made by international organizations are part of the policy mix that has also created tension with foreign governments , international financial institutions , and private sector interests .

in the united states , the federal courts and the obama administration have taken action against many of argentina's foreign economic policies .

previous congresses have introduced legislation and resolutions denouncing argentina's practices , and the 113 th congress may consider whether to formally respond to argentina's foreign economic policy as well .

this report provides a framework for understanding argentina's economic policies , issues raised for u.s. stakeholders , and implications for the future of u.s. - argentine economic relations .

u.s. - argentine economic relations have long history of mutually beneficial engagement .

still , argentina is only the united states' 29 th - largest export market and 54 th in imports , and accounts for less than 0.05% of total u.s. trade .

the united states is argentina's fourth - largest export market and number three in imports , accounting for roughly 8% of argentine trade , but falling well behind brazil and china .

u.s. foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in argentina is third - highest in south america behind brazil and chile , and reflects the many u.s. firms operating for decades in all sectors of the argentine economy .

nonetheless , u.s. - argentina economic relations have been strained at times , in part because of argentina's struggle to maintain macroeconomic stability , and also because of specific policy choices that have made the business environment difficult to navigate .

for these reasons , elaborated in this report , bilateral trade has remained small and u.s. investment has stalled over the past decade .

for example , from 1993 to 2000 , when argentina had stabilized its economy from the hyperinflation of the late 1980s , the u.s. investment position rose by nearly 300% , from $4.4 billion to $17.5 billion .

in response to the 2001 financial crisis and subsequent policy changes , fdi fell precipitously to $9.2 billion in 2004 .

although it has since recovered , fdi stood at $13.3 billion in 2011 , a 25% decline from 2000 levels .

these trends reflect many problems that have developed for u.s. stakeholders over the economic policies argentina has adopted since 2001 .

the problems have become increasingly difficult in recent years because of deteriorating economic conditions that have led the argentine government to tighten controls over many facets of the economy .

to a great extent , argentina's approach to domestic governance and international economic relations , including the friction it has caused with the united states and other stakeholders , can be understood in the context of its response to the financial turmoil that followed in the aftermath of the 2001-2002 economic collapse .

the fixed exchange rate convertibility program that had anchored the economy since 1991 became untenable , as did the government of president fernando de la rua .

in 2001 , after three years of nagging recession , economic output collapsed into a two - year free fall ( see table 1 ) .

argentina found itself deeply in debt , which forced it to adopt severe austerity measures even as much of the income and wealth of its citizens disappeared virtually overnight .

poverty and unemployment skyrocketed , riots broke out , and violence filled the streets .

intervening presidents ( five in twice as many days ) oversaw a steep currency devaluation , the largest sovereign default in history , and highly restrictive management of the financial sector .

social upheaval led to political uncertainty and ultimately a succession of presidents who shared a vision of major economic policy reform .

the argentine congress took the first step toward reestablishing political stability by appointing to the presidency senator eduardo duhalde , a long - time leader of the peronist party ( partido justicialista — pj ) .

he assumed office on january 1 , 2002 , to complete de la rua's unexpired term .

in the national elections that followed in 2003 , argentines elected another peronist , néstor kirchner , who was succeeded by his wife , cristina fernández de kirchner , in the 2007 and 2011 elections .

each administration took a closer step toward institutionalizing what is frequently referred to as a "populist" economic program that has come to define argentine political and economic reality in the 21 st century .

under presidents kirchner and fernández , these initial policy responses intended to restore order and address the most pressing social problems became permanent programs .

as the recovery took hold , argentina could afford some fiscal largesse because of favorable terms of trade and the strong global demand for argentine commodities , which contributed to nine years of strong economic growth ( see table 1 ) .

expansive fiscal and monetary policies reinforced growth and debt repudiation freed up fiscal resources in the name of national economic independence .

the government disdained reliance on foreign financing and what it considered the meddling of international institutions and foreign governments , many of which were held to be complicit in the economic catastrophe that befell the country a decade earlier .

as a result , argentina's foreign economic policies were largely subordinated to the domestic political agenda , with limited concern for their impact on foreign interests .

the new economic policy framework came with many tradeoffs including an increasingly large fiscal burden , rising inflation , and , as discussed below , questionable ad hoc policy adjustments imposed to counter the effects of economic distortions as they arose .

a near - term economic crisis in argentina may not be at hand , but protests over rising costs are becoming more frequent and surveys conducted by the universidad torcuato di tella point to sharply declining confidence in the government beginning in 2012 .

many economists suggest that it may be too late to engineer a soft landing , raising serious questions about the sustainability of the current economic model , and perhaps stability of the political system as well .

argentina's macroeconomic framework provides a lens from which to evaluate economic priorities of argentina's administrations since 2002 , and the policy tensions they have created for argentina and the world .

this framework appears to be in part constituent driven , grounded in economic nationalism and redistributive social policy , two themes common to argentina's political history .

the extended pursuit of this strategy , however , runs the risk of it becoming unsustainable as instability creeps into the macroeconomic framework , making it increasingly difficult to manage .

high inflation , government price controls , an appreciating currency , a loose monetary program , and the ultimate driver , fiscal deficits , all point in this direction .

foreign stakeholders have borne much of the cost of these policies , many of them adopted as adjustments necessary to make the domestic agenda and internal accounts balance , at least for the short to medium term .

debt has been repudiated , trade has been constrained , dollar investments are not easily transferred , and other international obligations have been postponed indefinitely or repudiated outright .

the major points of contention are discussed below .

argentina's economic policies reflect a certain distrust of international institutions and the government's priority for financial independence , social equity , and what may be considered a commitment to "populist" solutions .

this review of these economic policies is not meant to suggest that there is one ideal macroeconomic model that is being violated .

rather , even in recognizing that countries can govern themselves well under alternative policy frameworks and priorities , what stands out for many in the case of argentina is the sense that policy choices have introduced major distortions in the economy and that deteriorating external accounts , among other factors , are increasing the risk of financial crisis , particularly if history is any judge .

trade protection , managed exchange rates , and capital controls are policy adjustments required to address problems that materialize in a constrained economic system ( eg , subsidy - driven fiscal expansion , price controls , inability to borrow internationally ) that cannot easily accommodate current account deficits , a market exchange rate , or standard macroeconomic responses to combat high inflation .

among the more obvious policy corrections would be to introduce more flexibility in the exchange rate , ease away from an expansionist monetary policy , and begin correcting fiscal deficits .

in their absence , argentina increases the risk of eventually experiencing a more serious economic adjustment .

it may be premature , however , to foretell the demise of the argentine economy .

despite increasing bottlenecks , thresholds that predict collapse so far appear not to have been breached for inflation , current account and fiscal balances , or debt , and argentina has shown a proclivity for surviving economically .

the expected strong soy crop for 2013 and absence of external shocks may allow the argentine government to continue with the current economic program for some time .

even if there were a desire for a policy correction in buenos aires , however , it could be difficult to implement and still avoid a "hard landing" and attendant political and social ramifications .

in fact , it may be that a change in policy toward foreign stakeholders will not occur until either a new government takes office , a new crisis erupts in the wake of large and unsustainable macroeconomic distortions , or both .

international stakeholders , both public and private , find themselves challenged by this system , along with many argentines .

stakeholders , including the united states , criticize argentina for eschewing standard norms of economic behavior and the rule of law , and in response , have sought remedy in national courts and international arbitration , eliminated financial and trade benefits , and previously introduced hardline legislative resolutions .

one indication of the breadth of dissatisfaction over argentina's policies is the call for effectively removing argentina from the g - 20 , despite the lack of precedent and formal procedure for doing this .

notwithstanding these initiatives , argentina has not been moved to change course , and the 113 th congress may decide to consider once again u.s. options for addressing bilateral concerns with argentina .

