the federal government is a creature of the constitution .

it enjoys no authority that cannot be traced back to the constitution .

this is as true of congress as of the other branches .

although the constitution grants congress extensive legislative powers , it vests congress with explicit authority to enact criminal law in only three places .

article i , section 8 , clause 6 states that "congress shall have power ... to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the united states. .

a few lines later , the constitution gives congress authority over three additional classes of crime , when it declares that "congress shall have power ... to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas , and offenses against the law of nations. .

finally , the constitution defines the crime of treason , but empowers congress to set its punishment .

a casual reader might conclude that congress may enact no other class of criminal statutes .

after all , the tenth amendment denies congress any authority that the constitution does not grant it .

upon closer examination , however , it becomes clear that the constitution elsewhere gives congress , the president , and the federal courts sweeping powers .

moreover , the authority it places in the hands of congress includes an implementing power , that is , the authority to enact laws necessary and proper to the implementation of those other powers — authority that by implication includes the authority to enact reasonably related criminal laws .

nevertheless , congress's criminal law enacting powers are not boundless .

some limitations reside with the grant of authority .

article iii , for example , allows congress to set the punishment for treason , but denies it permission to punish treason with corruption of the blood .

the constitution mentions other limitations in areas apart from its grants of authority , like the prohibition on ex post facto laws or abridgement of freedom of speech .

the third class of limitations is more difficult to discern .

whether understood as contextual , or structural , or implicit in the tenth amendment , they are the limitations of federalism , the limitations that flow from the fact the constitution emerged as a compact between the sovereign it created and the sovereigns that created it .

what follows is a discussion of selected recent cases that illustrate the scope and boundaries of congress's power to enact criminal laws under the constitution's necessary and proper , commerce , high seas , law of nations , spending , and military clauses .

the congress shall have power ... to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers , all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united state , or in any department or officer there .

"[t]he necessary and proper clause makes clear that the constitution's grants of specific federal legislative authority are accompanied by broad power to enact laws that are 'convenient or useful' or 'conductive' to the authority's 'beneficial exercise.' .

the phrase "necessary and proper" does not demand absolute necessity .

it is enough that a statute is rationally related to the constitutional power it seeks to "carry into execution. .

the supreme court's comstock decision offered an expansive view of the necessary and proper clause , with caveats .

two sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) cases , kebodeaux and elk shoulder , treat the caveats and thus the scope of the clause very differently .

two other recent appellate decisions , bond and belfast , raise questions of the tenth amendment limits , if any , on congressional authority under the clause .

the supreme court has granted certiorari in bond and kebodeaux .

the congress shall have power ... to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes .

the congress shall have power ... to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas , and offenses against the law of nations .

clause 10 is said to contain three distinct components: one for piracy , one for felonies committed upon the high seas , and one for offenses against the law of nations .

the bellaizac - hurtado court's understanding of the law of nations clause leaves congress with little discretion to "define and punish. .

the dire court's construction of the piracy statute leaves the scope of the piracy clause somewhat uncertain .

on the other hand , once due process concerns are resolved , congress seems to be thought to enjoy much greater legislative latitude under the high seas clause , as evidenced by cases decided under the maritime drug law enforcement act ( mdlea ) and the drug trafficking vessel interdiction act ( dtvia ) .

the congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes ... to provide ... for the general welfare of the united states .

the supreme court has said in the past that congress's exercise of the spending clause is subject to certain limitations: "[f]irst[,] ... the exercise of the spending power must be in pursuit of 'the general welfare. .

... second , ... if congress desires to condition the states' receipt of federal funds , it must do so unambiguously enabling the states to exercise their choice knowingly , cognizant of the consequences of their participation .

third , ... conditions on federal grants might be illegitimate if they are unrelated to the federal interest in particular national projects or programs... .

finally , ... other constitutional provisions may provide an independent bar to the conditional grant of federal funds. .

national federation brings home the point that congress may not use its spending power to coerce state participation in a federal program .

the congress shall have power ... to declare war ... to raise and support armies ... to provide and maintain a navy ; to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces ... to provide for organizing , arming , and disciplining the militia... .

brehm , a foreign national and department of defense ( dod ) contractor , assaulted another foreign dod contractor at kandahar airfield in afghanistan .

he was brought to the united states and convicted of assault resulting in serious bodily injury under the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) .

brehm argued that the constitution gave congress no authority to outlaw altercations between foreign nationals outside the united states and that due process precluded any effort to do so .

the fourth circuit concluded that the military clauses supplemented by the necessary and proper clause supplies all the constitutional authority required .

as for due process limitations , the circumstances and the nature of his conduct afforded brehm fair notice that his dangerous assault exposed him to prosecution .

