the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) provided for automatic reductions to most federal discretionary spending if no agreement on deficit reduction was reached by the joint select committee on deficit reduction .

such reductions , referred to as sequestration , went into effect on march 1 , 2013 , which was the extended deadline for a deficit reduction agreement established under the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) .

in general , sequestration requires agencies to reduce spending for certain suballocations of funds — programs , projects , and activities — within nondefense discretionary accounts by 5.3% in fy2013 .

to implement the sequester - related reductions , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) began to furlough personnel , including air traffic controllers , on april 21 , 2013 .

in the wake of concerns about the adverse effects of furloughs on air travel , the senate passed s. 853 , the reducing flight delays act of 2013 ( rfda ) , on april 25 , 2013 , by unanimous consent .

the bill provided new authority to the secretary of transportation to transfer up to $253 million to faa's "operations" account from other faa accounts , including discretionary grants - in - aid for airports .

the next day , the house agreed to h.r .

1765 under suspension of the rules .

under agreement , h.r .

1765 , being identical in content to s. 853 , was presented to the president on april 30 , 2013 , and was enacted on may 1 , 2013 , becoming p.l .

113-9 .

faa halted furlough actions even before the bill was signed by president obama .

this report provides a brief overview of faa's implementation of the sequester in april 2013 , as it relates to air traffic control operations and staff furloughs .

it then considers the congressional response , including the potential impact of the funds transfers authorized under p.l .

113-9 on faa's airport improvement program ( aip ) .

sequestration under the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 did not affect all federal aviation administration ( faa ) functions .

faa's grants for airport improvements , which are subject to obligation limitations , are statutorily exempt from the sequester cuts .

faa's other functions faced significant spending reductions .

faa interpreted the law as requiring it to reduce spending proportionately in all accounts other than airport grants .

in response , faa implemented agency - wide furloughs of employees , including air traffic controllers , beginning april 21 , 2013 .

faa employees were told they would be required to take 11 furlough days through the remainder of fy2013 .

faa employs about 45,000 people in a variety of functions .

different faa components implemented various approaches to designating furlough days .

faa's air traffic organization , which includes both air traffic controllers and the technicians and engineers who maintain the air traffic control system , implemented rolling furloughs among its 33,000 employees to minimize staffing impacts to flight operations .

following negotiations with the union representing controllers , faa agreed that all air traffic controllers nationwide would be required to take one unpaid furlough day in each two - week pay period , irrespective of the workload or potential impact of reduced staffing at a particular facility .

faa implemented various air traffic management initiatives to mitigate impacts of the reduced staffing due to furloughs , including increased aircraft spacing , which reduces the number of flights an airport can handle in a given period .

these measures led to delays during the first week of reduced staffing , most noticeably in the new york city area and at dallas - fort worth , las vegas , chicago , and tampa airports .

in total , delays related to staffing reductions appear to have affected about 3% - 4% of flights , with some acute delay impacts occurring in congested airspace , particularly in the new york city area .

airlines warned that prolonged furloughs and associated delays could impact revenues , but this could be offset somewhat by lower fuel prices .

also , in response to the furlough delays , airline advocacy groups sought exemption from the department of transportation's tarmac delay rules , which generally require airlines to allow passengers to disembark from aircraft delayed more than three hours and carry fines for airlines that fail to comply .

on april 27 , 2013 , following house and senate passage of legislation to allow it to transfer $253 million from other accounts to its operations account , faa announced that it had suspended all employee furloughs and that air traffic facilities would resume operations under normal staffing levels .

it is not certain that these steps will avert all furloughs of faa employees in fy2013 .

as explained below , faa may be unable to transfer the entire $253 million from aip to its operations account without triggering reductions in many airports' entitlements under aip .

one way for faa to avoid this problem would be for it to transfer some of the funds from programs other than aip .

this would necessitate spending reductions in those programs , which could potentially include employee furloughs .

faa previously furloughed employees in the summer of 2011 .

its furlough actions in april 2013 had significantly different impacts due to the fact that they had a different legal basis from those in 2011 .

the 2011 furloughs resulted from the effective temporary shutdown of the airport improvement program ( aip ) and a lapse in revenue collection authority for the airport and airways trust fund ( aatf ) , which provides major funding for faa programs .

when short - term extensions of faa authority under the airport and airway extension act of 2011 , part iii ( p.l .

112-21 ) , expired on july 22 , 2011 , employees working for faa's office of airports and funded under aip were immediately furloughed .

other employees paid from the facilities and equipment and research , engineering , and development accounts were also furloughed , as the sole funding source for those faa programs , the aatf , could no longer collect revenue .

certain employees funded from the facilities and equipment account who inspected faa navigation and communications equipment were ordered to stay on the job without pay because they were deemed to be essential to the safety of the air traffic system .

about 4,000 faa employees in total , roughly 9% of faa's total workforce , were affected .

as general fund moneys were available to continue paying employees , including any air traffic controllers paid out of the faa's operations account , these employees were not immediately furloughed .

a subsequent short - term extension of aip expenditure authority and aatf revenue collection authority ( p.l .

112-27 ) was enacted on august 5 , 2011 , ending the furloughs for affected faa employees and eliminating the need for possible additional furloughs of other employees paid through the operations account .

although additional legislation ( eg , h.r .

2814 , 112 th congress ) sought to compensate faa employees for lost wages under the august 2011 furlough , the legislation was determined to be unnecessary , and employees were subsequently granted back pay for furloughed days under existing department of transportation authority .

rfda provides faa with the authority to transfer up to $253 million of faa funds from other uses to operations .

although worded broadly , the transfer authority is meant primarily to counteract the impact of sequestration on the air traffic control system .

the act allows faa to transfer funds from two sources .

amounts made available for obligation under the airport improvement program ( aip ) in fy2013 for discretionary grants derived from apportioned funds not required in fy2013 , pursuant to 49 u.s.c .

47117 ( f ) , can be transferred to other uses .

further , the act allows for transfers from "any other program or account" of faa .

the transferred amounts are to be available immediately for obligation and expenditure as directly appropriated budget authority .

the airport improvement program provides federal grants to airports for airport development and planning .

the 3,355 airports eligible for aip grants range from major international hubs to county general aviation airports that have no commercial service .

there are two forms of grant distribution to these airports: entitlement and discretionary .

the entitlement funds ( also called apportionments ) are based on formulas that determine the amount that each eligible airport is entitled to for a fiscal year .

airports do not need to compete with one another for these funds .

once the entitlements are fulfilled , the remaining funds are distributed as discretionary funds by faa .

the distribution is conditioned by certain set - asides and is based on project priority and other selection criteria .

the federal share under aip varies from 75% for projects at large and medium hub airports to 90% for most small airports .

the local match is generally paid for by the airport .

entitlements are available to recipient airports for either three or four years , depending on the type of airport .

if an airport has not obligated its entitlement funds within the allowed period , the amounts are reclassified as discretionary funds and remain available for faa to distribute until expended .

aip spending authority is based on contract authority , which is a kind of spending authority that allows obligations to be incurred in advance of appropriations .

because of this characteristic , aip spending is controlled through a limitation on obligations .

the annual limitation on obligations is usually set in appropriations legislation and restricts the amount of aip contract authority that can be obligated ( i.e. , awarded ) in a particular year .

controlling the rate of the annual obligation of funds allows congress to control the rate of eventual outlays .

section 2 ( a ) ( 1 ) of rfda allows faa to transfer any apportioned entitlement funds that airports have elected not to use in the year that the funds are apportioned , for use as discretionary funds .

these sums historically were referred to as "carryover" funds , but faa now uses the term "protected entitlement funds. .

these entitlement funds are "protected" in the sense that airports have the right to use them in later years of their eligibility .

this movement of funds from entitlement to discretionary ( carryover ) status and back to restored entitlement status is done because of the multiyear nature of the entitlements and the desire to obligate the entire obligation limitation level each year .

in recent years , the balance of protected entitlement funds ( i.e. , carryover funds ) has grown .

this could have occurred for a number of reasons .

some airports , especially small ones , sometimes let the funds build up so that they draw on two or more years' entitlements at once to fund larger projects .

in some cases , the sequence of a project's construction schedule requires entitlement funds to be held for a period before being spent .

some airports in recent years have had difficulty raising their local matching shares .

also , prior to the enactment of the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) , faa funding underwent 23 short - term extensions that made systematic planning difficult for some airports .

these factors have caused some airports to defer the obligation of their apportionments to the later years of their eligibility , and the "carryover" balance has reportedly grown to roughly $700 million .

it is important to understand that the use of the terms "carryover funds" or "unused entitlement funds" does not mean that these are idle surplus funds with no intended use .

the transfer of these funds to other parts of faa under rfda will reduce eventual aip discretionary outlays by a like amount .

airports of all sizes benefit from the discretionary grants , but unlike entitlement funds , not every airport receives funding every year .

in general , small airports depend on aip funds for airport improvements more than large airports , because small airports are less likely to be able to finance improvements by selling bonds or imposing passenger facility charges .

section 2 ( b ) ( 2 ) of the act appears to require the amount transferred to be considered an obligation for grants - in - aid airports , effectively reducing the spending authority made available for such purposes .

in effect , the act appears to reduce the obligation limitation for fy2013 .

should this be the case , there would be two major implications .

because the transferred amounts reduce the fy2013 obligation limitation by a like amount ( pursuant to section 2 ( b ) ( 2 ) ) , faa might have to refrain from making additional awards or reduce the rate of award - making of discretionary grants from now until the end of fy2013 to keep aip within its reduced obligation limitation .

this reduction of obligational authority for aip discretionary funding will eventually lead to reductions in outlays for airport improvements unless congress decides to restore the funding in the future .

under the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21 st century ( p.l .

106-181 ; codified under 49 u.s.c .

47114 ) , a threshold of at least $3.2 billion must be made available for airport planning and development under section 48103 in order for faa to implement certain "special rules" that provide for more generous entitlements .

consequently , if the transfers authorized by rfda reduce the $3.343 billion made available for fy2013 below $3.2 billion , most airports' entitlements could be reduced for the remainder of fy2013 .

the $3.2 billion threshold has been met every year for the last 10 fiscal years , and airports have become accustomed to the larger entitlement distributions .

to prevent reductions in entitlements , faa would have to forgo transferring from aip roughly $100 million to $110 million of the $253 million it is authorized to transfer under rfda .

if faa determines that it needs the entire $253 million amount to avoid controller furloughs , then , to avoid breaching the threshold , it appears that it would have to transfer roughly $100 million to $110 million from faa accounts other than aip unless congress were to provide some other legislative solution .

