on january 31 , 2013 , during the senate armed services committee's hearing on the nomination of former senator chuck hagel to be secretary of defense , senator jeff sessions questioned senator hagel about the obama administration's plans for the next steps in nuclear arms control .

specifically , he asked senator hagel whether he was committed to honoring the provision in the fy2013 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

112-239 , section 1282 ) that requires the administration to provide briefings to congress , twice each year , on the status of arms control negotiations with russia .

senator hagel responded that he was committed to pursuing the required consultations .

senator sessions then asked senator hagel for a commitment that the administration would pursue agreements that would lead to further reductions in u.s. nuclear weapons through "the treaty - making power of the president. .

specifically , he was seeking assurances that the obama administration would not try to bypass the senate , and its role in providing advice and consent to the ratification of treaties , by reducing u.s. nuclear weapons through unilateral or informal bilateral means .

senator hagel did not respond to this request .

he noted that the president "believes in and is committed to treaties," but he did not accept senator sessions' view that future reductions in u.s. nuclear weapons should occur only through the treaty - making process .

senator sessions' questions , and the concerns voiced by other members of congress , respond to both the obama administration's stated interest in pursuing further reductions in nuclear weapons and indications in some press reports that the administration may pursue these reductions , as president george h.w .

bush did in 1991 , without a formal treaty .

president obama views new start , which was signed by the united states and russia in april 2010 and entered into force in february 2011 , as "just one step on a longer journey. .

in his state of the union address on february 12 , 2013 , he pledged that "america will continue to lead the effort to prevent the spread of the world's most dangerous weapons. .

as a part of this effort , the united states would "engage russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals. .

the united states and russia have not yet started formal negotiations on further reductions in nuclear weapons .

disagreements about a number of issues , including the u.s. interest in limiting nonstrategic nuclear weapons and russia's interest in limiting u.s. ballistic missile defense programs , have contributed to this delay .

at the same time , congressional concerns about both the administration's plans to reduce further u.s. nuclear warheads and the magnitude of the administration's funding requests for the modernization of the u.s. nuclear enterprise have raised questions about whether the senate would consent to ratification of a new treaty .

as a result , many analysts and officials have suggested that the united states and russia pursue "parallel reductions" based on a mutual understanding , rather than a formal treaty .

press reports indicate that the administration is considering this approach and might seek an informal understanding , within the framework of the new start treaty , that reduces current negotiated limits on u.s. and russian forces .

over the years , the united states has used three mechanisms to reduce its nuclear weapons — formal , bilateral treaties ; reciprocal , but informal , understandings ; and unilateral adjustments to its force posture .

each of these mechanisms for reducing forces serves different purposes , and each can possess different characteristics for the arms control process .

the role of congress in the arms control process also depends on the mechanism used to reduce forces .

the united states signed several formal arms control treaties that limited the numbers of deployed nuclear weapons with the soviet union during the cold war and with russia in the past two decades .

following article ii of the constitution , the senate reviewed these treaties , and , in most cases , voted to provide its advice and consent to ratification .

the united states has also reduced its forces unilaterally , with reciprocity from russia in 1991 , when president george h.w .

bush withdrew and eliminated most u.s. shorter range nonstrategic nuclear weapons from bases in europe and asia .

president bush did not notify congress or seek congressional approval before pursuing these reductions .

president george w. bush also withdrew from deployment a number of u.s. nonstrategic nuclear weapons , although he did so without seeking or expecting reciprocity from russia .

he also pursued these reductions without seeking approval from congress .

several presidents have reduced unilaterally the number of warheads in the u.s. stored stockpile , as the united states has retired older weapons and responded to changing assessments of the necessary size and structure of the u.s. nuclear force .

these changes are a part of the normal force planning process , managed by the department of defense and approved by the president , and have also occurred without prior explicit approval from congress .

this report reviews these characteristics and demonstrates their effect on decisions about the use of the different mechanisms .

the report begins with a review of the role of nuclear arms control in the u.s. - soviet relationship , looking at both formal , bilateral treaties and unilateral steps the united states took to alter its nuclear posture .

it then turns to the role of arms control in the u.s. - russian relationship , again reviewing the role of both formal treaties and unilateral measures .

the report also describes the role of congress in the arms control process .

it then provides an analytic framework that reviews the characteristics of the different mechanisms , focusing on issues such as balance and equality , predictability , flexibility , transparency and confidence in compliance , and timeliness .

finally the report describes issues that congress may address as the obama administration employs these mechanisms to pursue further reductions in u.s. nuclear weapons .

this report does not address the question of whether the united states should pursue further reductions in deployed nuclear weapons , or , if it does , how deep those reductions should be .

while many in congress disagree with the administration's plans for further reductions , that goal is its stated policy .

as a result , the report evaluates different mechanisms that the administration might use to implement that policy without questioning the underlying policy .

in addition , the report will evaluate these mechanisms only in the context of reductions in u.s. and russian nuclear weapons .

it will not evaluate whether other nations — such as china , the united kingdom , and france — should participate in these reductions or which mechanism would be appropriate if other nations did participate .

the united states and russia deploy far greater numbers of nuclear weapons than these other nations , so they may be able to reduce their weapons further before bringing other nations into the process .

if the obama administration pursues additional reductions in u.s. nuclear weapons , congress will have an opportunity to influence implementation .

the path for this influence depends , in part , on the mechanism the administration uses to reduce u.s. nuclear forces .

if they sign a formal , legally - binding agreement that mandates reductions in nuclear forces , the president would likely submit it to the senate as a new treaty or as an amendment to new start .

as an alternative , the united states and russia could incorporate legally - binding limits in an executive agreement .

if the united states and russia cannot , or choose not to , agree on formal , legally - binding reductions , the president could simply state his intent to reduce u.s. nuclear weapons , either verbally or in writing , in parallel with a similar commitment from russia .

he could also arguably state his intent to reduce the size and structure of the u.s. arsenal unilaterally , without reciprocity from russia , as long as congress appropriated the necessary funds to implement the reductions .

the preceding discussion highlights several characteristics — balance and equality , predictability , flexibility , transparency and confidence in compliance , and timeliness — that can affect a decision to use a formal , bilateral treaty , informal parallel reductions , or unilateral adjustments to alter the size or structure of the u.s. nuclear arsenal .

some of these characteristics may weigh more heavily than others at different times , reflecting conditions in the international security environment and domestic political environment .

this section describes each of these characteristics in more detail .

it includes examples from numerous arms control endeavors that highlight the presence or absence of concern for the characteristics and the way in which this concern promoted a unilateral , bilateral , or , perhaps , mixed approach to reduce u.s. nuclear forces .

additional details about these arms control endeavors can be found in crs report rl33865 , arms control and nonproliferation: a catalog of treaties and agreements .

during its first term in office , the obama administration highlighted two objectives for its arms control policy .

it wanted to reduce the number of nuclear weapons in the u.s. arsenal and it sought to do so in cooperation with russia .

it achieved these objectives with the signing and entry - into - force of the new start treaty .

president obama and others in his administration have indicated that the united states continues to support these two priorities .

however , although the administration has indicated that the united states would like to work with russia to reduce nuclear weapons further , the administration may not insist that the two nations codify these reductions in a formal , legally - binding treaty .

the characteristics reviewed in this report can help explain why some support a possible shift away from formal treaties .

as was noted above , the 2010 npr indicated that the united states preferred to maintain a measure of balance and equality between u.s. and russian nuclear forces , but that absolute parity was not necessary .

this supports a cooperative , reciprocal approach to arms reductions , but does not necessarily require that the parties negotiate a formal treaty that mandates strictly equal limits .

at the same time , although the united states and russia accepted equal limits on the number of strategic delivery systems and warheads in new start , the treaty permitted them to maintain significantly different strategic force structures and far different numbers of nonstrateagic and nondeployed nuclear warheads .

in addition , each has different priorities for the types of forces and types of limits that they would like to include in a "next" arms control treaty .

as a result , it would be difficult , and possibly time - consuming , for the united states and russia to agree on the contents of a treaty that imposed balanced and equal limits on each side .

during the cold war , most u.s. - soviet arms control treaties emphasized predictability over flexibility by incorporating limits on total forces , sublimits on specific types of weapons , restrictions on the locations and movement of limited systems , and precise definitions of items limited by the treaty .

the 2002 moscow treaty emphasized flexibility over predictability because it contained no sublimits , no agreed definitions or rules to count the number of deployed strategic warheads , and no time frame for the reductions .

the new start treaty restored some of the predictability that had existed in the 1991 start treaty , with agreed definitions on most systems limited by the treaty and with the exchange of detailed data on the status and numbers of deployed delivery systems .

but it allowed far more flexibility than the original start treaty as it allowed each side to determine its own mix of forces within the aggregate total .

if the united states and russia agree to reduce their forces further while new start remains in force , they could rely on the definitions and monitoring provisions in new start to retain a degree of predictability and transparency .

those provisions will remain in force through at least 2021 or 2026 , if they extend new start for five additional years .

but they would increase their flexibility if they did not sign a new agreement that specified legally - binding limits .

they would have the flexibility to size and structure their forces according to their own national security requirements and to restore forces if those requirements changed .

the obama administration has indicated that it places a high value on the monitoring and verification provisions in new start and on the information they provide about the capabilities and numbers of nuclear weapons in russia .

they stated that the data exchanges , notifications , unique identifiers , and on - site inspections , provide each side with the ability to monitor strategic nuclear forces from "cradle to grave. .

this would help both sides maintain confidence in the other side's compliance and agreement to pursue further reductions .

on the other hand , the data exchanges and inspections in new start only apply to deployed strategic offensive forces and , in some cases , nondeployed strategic delivery vehicles .

they do not provide any information about nonstrategic nuclear weapons or the stored stockpile of nondeployed weapons .

yet the obama administration has stated that the next round of arms control should include limits on these latter two categories of weapons .

if the united states and russia agree to reduce their strategic nuclear weapons further , within the framework of new start and without negotiating a new treaty , they could rely on the monitoring and verification provisions in new start to provide transparency into the reductions .

however , they would either have to leave nonstrategic and nondeployed weapons outside the framework of a new agreement or , if they counted them in the limits , they would have to accept less transparency about the numbers and locations of those weapons .

although either approach may achieve some u.s. goals for arms control — either deeper reductions in strategic nuclear weapons or reductions in all categories of weapons — neither would be as comprehensive and transparent as a formal treaty .

in addition , this approach would not be consistent with nato's stated goal of negotiating transparency measures that would provide insights into russia's nonstrategic nuclear weapons .

although the united states and russia have taken preliminary steps to prepare for another round of arms control negotiations , there is widespread agreement that the formal arms control process has stalled .

russian officials have made it clear that they do not plan to move forward on further reductions in strategic offensive forces until the united states agrees to limit the eventual scope of its missile defense plans .

further , they have argued that russia would not negotiate limits on , or possibly even transparency measures for , nonstrategic nuclear weapons until the united states withdraws its nuclear weapons from bases in europe .

yet , the president and others in his administration have stated that they believe the united states can achieve its deterrence and national security goals with a reduced number of nuclear weapons .

although the united states does not need to adjust its forces quickly , as it did in 1991 , to respond to events such as the collapse of the warsaw pact and the abortive coup in moscow , a near - term decision to reduce u.s. forces below new start levels could translate into budget savings if it allowed the united states to delay or scale back the planned modernization programs for these weapons .

at the same time , some in the administration , and many in the arms control community , argue that continued , near - term steps to reduce the u.s. nuclear arsenal could help the united states win support from other nations in seeking to stem nuclear proliferation and strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation treaty .

the united states and russia might agree to reduce their strategic nuclear weapons in parallel , without negotiating a new treaty , so that they could avoid delays in implementation that might result from a lengthy debate in the senate or the russian parliament .

while it is not inevitable that senate or parliamentary consideration of a treaty would delay or prevent the implementation of reductions , recent history suggests that this is a possible , or even likely , outcome .

in contrast , as happened in 1991 under the pnis , the two sides could possibly begin to implement unilateral , parallel reductions in a very short amount of time .

if the united states and russia agree to reduce their nuclear weapons below the levels in the new start treaty without signing a new treaty , congress may question whether the agreement represents a legal obligation or a political commitment , and whether the agreement is covered by the terms of the arms control and disarmament act .

the answer to this question may depend on both the substance and the form of the agreement .

if each nation simply announces , in a unilateral statement , that it plans to reduce its forces below the limits in new start , then this almost certainly would not represent a legally - binding obligation subject to congressional review and approval .

arguably , the unilateral statements would simply alter the manner in which the parties intend to implement the treaty .

on the other hand , if the two nations sign an agreement that alters the limits in new start , this would be an amendment subject to the advice and consent of the senate .

between these two extremes , the united states and russia could issue a joint statement or sign a shared memorandum of understanding incorporating the newly agreed levels for nuclear reductions .

the question of whether the president should be required to seek congressional approval for this type of agreement would likely rest on the substance of the agreement .

if the two nations agreed that they would act as if they had changed the limits in new start , and did not specify that they viewed this change to be politically - binding only , then congress may consider this agreement to represent a new legally - binding obligation for the united states .

if it is treated as an amendment to the treaty , then the senate would have to offer its advice and consent , by a two - thirds vote , before it could enter into force .

if it were treated as a congressional - executive agreement , both the house and senate would have to vote to pass legislation that approved its limits .

however , if the joint statement indicated that each side planned , on its own , to reduce its forces below new start levels , without changing the terms of the treaty or adopting an obligation to complete the new , deeper reductions , then congress may not have a role to play in approving the agreement .

congress could , however , limit funding for activities that would reduce the size of the force below a specified standard .

if the united states and russia agree to reduce their nuclear weapons below the levels in the new start treaty , in parallel and without a formal treaty , congress may question whether the obama administration shares its priorities regarding the characteristics described above .

for example , in choosing this path to further reductions while the two sides remained bound by the new start treaty , the administration would indicate that predictability and transparency remained important .

balance and equality would receive a lower priority while flexibility and timeliness would grow more important .

specifically , with this path forward , the two nations would decide for themselves how deeply and how quickly to reduce their forces without requiring strict equality and without consuming months or years in negotiations .

in addition , they could begin to implement the reductions without seeking , and waiting for , the approval of their respective legislative bodies .

some in congress may support this ordering of priorities if , for example , they believe that deeper reductions in nuclear weapons might reduce the costs of these systems without undermining u.s. security .

if the united states and russia find it very difficult and time - consuming to find a balanced , equitable agreement that addressed all the issues that concern both sides , an informal understanding allowing each to move forward on its own could avoid this process .

this could help the united states and russia save money by eliminating the need to operate as many forces in the near term and to procure new replacement systems in the long term .

others , however , may oppose this ordering of priorities , particularly if they see more risks than benefits to lower u.s. force levels .

for example , some members of congress have stated that the united states should not rush to reduce its nuclear forces at a time when nuclear - armed countries like china , india , and pakistan are not bound by arms control agreements .

moreover , some could argue that the united states should not pursue further reductions now , even if it has the flexibility to reverse the reductions in the future , when north korea is increasing its nuclear arsenal and iran is suspected of having a nuclear weapons program .

finally , many in congress may question whether it is necessary for the administration to place such a high priority on timeliness when such a choice could leave congress out of the arms control process .

debates in congress over how to pursue further reductions in nuclear weapons may , in fact , be proxies for debates over whether the united states should pursue reductions at all .

specifically , some in congress may support or oppose the mechanism chosen by administration if it pursues further reductions because they support or oppose the goal of further reductions .

members who believe that the united states should reduce its nuclear weapons further might support that goal whether the united states codifies the limits in a formal treaty , pursues the reductions without a treaty but in parallel with russia , or adjusts its forces unilaterally .

alternatively , members who do not support further reductions in u.s. nuclear weapons may oppose such a policy regardless of whether the limits are codified in a treaty , outlined in mutual , nonbinding agreement , or implemented unilaterally .

as a result , congress may seek to pursue a debate that specifically addresses questions about the degree to which further reductions in nuclear weapons might serve to enhance or undermine u.s. national security .

