on january 10 , 2013 , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) released a final rule implementing the ability - to - repay ( atr ) requirement of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) .

the final rule is effective january 10 , 2014 , one year after it was issued .

section 1411 of the dodd - frank act states that , no creditor may make a residential mortgage loan unless the creditor makes a reasonable and good faith determination based on verified and documented information that , at the time the loan is consummated , the consumer has a reasonable ability to repay the loan , according to its terms , and all applicable taxes , insurance ( including mortgage guarantee insurance ) , and assessments .

as discussed later in this report , lenders can comply with the statute in different ways , one of which is by originating "qualified mortgages," certain mortgages that meet criteria laid out in the atr rule .

a qualified mortgage ( qm ) provides additional legal protections for a lender that the other options do not afford .

some observers and mortgage market participants have expressed concerns that , because of the additional legal protection , some lenders will only originate mortgages that receive qm status .

the scope of the qm definition , therefore , could affect who can qualify for a mortgage .

this report summarizes the atr rule and analyzes the potential effects it may have on the mortgage market .

the next section provides background information on the perceived problems in the mortgage market that motivated the atr requirement .

when a potential borrower applies for a mortgage , a lender underwrites or evaluates the borrower to determine whether a loan should be extended and on what terms .

the underwriting process typically involves the lender examining a borrower's income , assets , credit history , and other factors that may affect a lender's ability to recover the amount loaned .

some studies found that underwriting criteria loosened in the mid - 2000s while house prices were rising .

in particular , some lenders accepted loan applications with little or no documentation to support what was in the applications .

rather than relying on a borrower's verified income or assets to decide whether to extend a loan , some lenders relied on the underlying value of the house to justify offering a mortgage , a process known as collateral - dependent lending .

in a mortgage , the borrower pledges the house as collateral ; if the borrower is unable to repay the mortgage , the lender can sell the house to recover some or all of the amount of the mortgage debt outstanding .

when house prices started to fall and the economy weakened in 2007 , foreclosure rates increased significantly , especially for loans with little or no documentation of borrower income or assets .

in response to increasing foreclosure rates , the federal reserve board issued a rule in 2008 that prohibited lenders from originating a "higher - priced mortgage" without assessing the borrower's ability to repay the loan and verifying the borrower's income and assets .

a first - lien mortgage was deemed to be higher - priced if the annual percentage rate exceeded 1.5 percentage points above the average prime offer rate , which is an estimate of the market mortgage rate based on a survey of rates .

when issuing the rule , the federal reserve noted that the "rule's definition of 'higher - priced mortgage loans' will capture virtually all loans in the subprime market , but generally exclude loans in the prime market. .

the federal reserve's 2008 ability - to - repay rule enhanced the prior approaches to consumer protection that generally emphasized disclosure to borrowers .

the atr requirements in the dodd - frank act are similar to the federal reserve's 2008 rule but expand the atr requirements to a broader portion of the mortgage market , not just higher - priced mortgages .

the federal reserve issued the proposed rule implementing the dodd - frank act's atr requirements in 2011 before the authority to issue the final rule was transferred to the cfpb .

in issuing the final rule , the cfpb stated , "a primary goal of the statute was to prevent a repeat of the deterioration of lending standards that contributed to the financial crisis. .

the next section will explain the cfpb's january 2013 final rule .

prior to offering a borrower a mortgage that is subject to the rule , the atr rule will require a lender to determine , based on documented and verified information , that the borrower has the ability to repay the loan .

failure to comply could result in a lender having to pay damages to a borrower who brings a lawsuit and claims that the lender did not follow the atr rule .

the final rule provides six methods for lenders to comply: ( 1 ) the general atr option , ( 2 ) the standard qualified mortgage , ( 3 ) the temporary agency / gse qm option , ( 4 ) balloon mortgages in rural or underserved areas , ( 5 ) the temporary small creditor balloon - payment qm , and ( 6 ) the small creditor qm .

the different compliance options afford lenders different levels of protection in the event that a borrower brings a lawsuit against a lender .

in addition , lenders may be exempt from the atr rule in certain instances .

the compliance options and exemptions are described below .

some observers and mortgage market participants have expressed concerns that lenders will only originate mortgages that satisfy the safe harbor qm requirements even though there are alternative methods of complying with the atr rule .

the scope of the qm definition , therefore , could restrict who can qualify for a mortgage .

this is an example of the general tradeoff between consumer protection and credit availability .

attempts to ensure that the only borrowers who receive mortgages are those who can repay the mortgage may result in some borrowers being excluded who could actually have repaid their loan .

as part of its analysis of the final rule , the cfpb estimated the fraction of the mortgage market at various points in time that would satisfy the atr rule and receive the different types of qm status .

this section reviews the cfpb's results and compares them to estimates by other researchers .

in addition to affecting who may receive a mortgage , the atr rule may have other effects on the mortgage market .

some potential issues are described below .

the atr rule may also affect the gses .

in its report , corelogic argues that the "irony of the [temporary agency / gse qm option] is that it reinforces the role that the gse's play in the market , making it harder to enact gse reform. .

offering qm status to loans that meet the gses' underwriting standards , some argue , reinforces the dominant role that the gses play in the market .

others argue that the final rule may reduce some of the uncertainty that has prevented private capital from entering the mortgage market and partially displacing the gses .

prior to the release of the final rule , some argued that the regulatory uncertainty about what would be included in the final rule may have been one of the factors that discouraged private capital from entering the housing finance system .

an analysis of the final rule by deloitte argues that the "rule may remove many of the uncertainties to the private - label securitization market and mortgage - backed securities. .

while other factors may prevent private capital from returning , finalizing the atr rule may reduce one potential barrier .

in response to the final rule and as part of its effort to reduce the gses' role in the housing finance system , the regulator and conservator of the gses , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , announced that "it is directing fannie mae and freddie mac to limit their future mortgage acquisitions to loans that meet the requirements for a qualified mortgage , including those that meet the special or temporary qualified mortgage definition , and loans that are exempt from the 'ability to repay' requirements. .

to receive temporary agency / gse qm status , a mortgage must be eligible to be purchased by the gses or insured by the federal government and the mortgage must also satisfy certain product - feature requirements .

fhfa's announcement , essentially , aligns the gses' standards with the standards for the temporary agency / gse qm option listed in table 1 , especially for the first three rows .

the gses , therefore , will not purchase loans subject to the atr rule if the mortgage is an interest - only loan , is negative amortizing , has points and fees above the caps , or has a term longer than 30 years .

the gses will continue to purchase some mortgages that have dti ratios above 43% .

similar to the federal reserve's 2011 proposed rule , the cfpb based its definition of "rural" for " balloon mortgages in rural or underserved areas " off of the usda's urban influence codes ( uics ) .

uics are a way of classifying counties into 1 of 12 categories "depending on the size of the largest city and town in the county. .

the federal reserve proposed a relatively restrictive definition of rural that would have included 4 of the 12 uics and resulted in 2.3% of the u.s. population ( based on the 2000 census ) deemed to be in a rural area .

the cfpb's final rule uses a broader definition of rural that includes additional uic categories and results in 9.7% of the population included in rural areas .

it is unclear for what fraction of the 9.7% of the population in rural areas a rural lender is the only source for an affordable mortgage option .

since the release of the final rule , some have called for the cfpb to use a more expansive definition of rural .

the conference of state bank supervisors ( csbs ) , for example , suggests that the cfpb not use a "nationwide rural classification system" but a "petition process whereby interested parties can petition the cfpb to make a determination that a specified and bounded area be considered rural. .

h.r .

2672 , the cfpb rural designation petition and correction act , would establish a process by which individuals could petition the cfpb for counties that were not designated as rural by the cfpb to receive the designation .

h.r .

2672 would also establish evaluation criteria and an evaluation process for the cfpb to follow in assessing the petitions .

others would prefer the cfpb use the usda's rural housing loan program's definition of rural which does not make classification decisions at the county level but subdivides counties into rural and non - rural areas .

the rural housing loan definition would result in 37% of the population classified as in a rural area with an average of 10 lenders per area .

the cfpb , however , believes "that a wholesale adoption of the rural housing loan definitions would therefore expand the definition of rural beyond the intent of the ... balloon - payment qualified mortgage exemptions ... by incorporating areas in which there is robust access to credit. .

as mentioned previously , the cfpb has stated that it intends to study the definition of rural that it has chosen and has established a two year transition period for small lenders who do not operate in rural or underserved areas .

the ability - to - repay rule is one of several mortgage market rules required by the dodd - frank act that were released by the cfpb in january 2013 .

other rules , such as the risk retention and qualified residential mortgage rule and the rules related to the capital treatment of mortgage - related assets held by banks under basel iii , are expected to be finalized by other agencies in the near future .

while some stakeholders may take issue with a particular rule , others raise concerns about the potential aggregate effect ( in terms of the effect on credit availability and in the compliance burden ) that the new rules will have on the mortgage market and whether regulators are factoring these costs in to their rulemakings .

for its part , the cfpb notes that it "is coordinating carefully the title xiv rulemakings" ( title xiv refers to title xiv of the dodd - frank act which required the rules ) .

it is unclear , however , to what extend other regulators will take the cfpb's rulemakings into account when issuing their rules .

to receive qm status , a loan must not have points and fees above the points - and - fees caps .

for loans above $100,000 , the cap is 3% of the total loan amount .

for loans less than $100,000 , there are different caps with each cap becoming higher as the loan total decreases so that loans less than $12,500 can have points and fees up to 8% .

the points and fees calculation includes , among other things , the compensation paid to the loan originator , some real estate - related fees paid to affiliates of the lender ( eg , for property appraisals ) , premiums for some types of insurance ( such as credit property insurance ) , and prepayment penalties .

points and fees are one way that lenders can earn a return on their loan , with the other being through the interest rate .

capping the points and fees may incentivize lenders to earn more through the interest rate rather than through upfront payments .

the cfpb states that the cap on points and fees may make lenders "take more care in originating a loan when more of the return derives from performance over time ( interest payments ) rather [than] from upfront payments ( points and fees ) .

as such , this provision [the cap on points and fees] may offer lenders more incentive to underwrite these loans carefully. .

lenders hoping to receive safe harbor status for a mortgage , however , may be limited in their ability to adjust the interest rate to account for the cap on points and fees due to the 1.5 percentage point rate threshold between safe harbor and rebuttable presumption .

some argue that the caps are either too low or include too many types of fees , causing some loans to not qualify for qm status that otherwise would .

h.r .

1077 , the consumer mortgage choice act , removes some items from the calculation of points and fees .

in so doing , the bill would make it easier for mortgages to satisfy the cap on points and fees and , therefore , potentially receive qm status .

for example , the bill would exclude insurance paid in escrow from the definition of points and fees ( escrow for future payment of taxes is already excluded ) .

the bill would also exclude fees paid to affiliates of the lender , such as for title insurance ( the fees to third parties unaffiliated with the lender are already excluded ) , and exclude compensation paid by a lender to its employee from the definition of points and fees .

