this report tracks and provides an overview of actions taken by the administration and congress to provide fy2014 appropriations for commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) accounts .

it also provides an overview of enacted fy2013 appropriations for agencies and bureaus funded as a part of the annual appropriation for cjs .

the fy2013 post - sequestration amounts were provided by the departments of commerce and justice , the science agencies ( i.e. , the office of science and technology policy , the national aeronautics and space administration , the national science foundation ) , and each of the respective related agencies .

the fy2014-requested appropriations were taken from s.rept .

113-78 .

the amounts recommended by the house committee on appropriations were taken from h.rept .

113-171 and the amounts recommended by the senate committee on appropriations were taken from s.rept .

113-78 .

fy2014-enacted appropriations were taken from the joint explanatory statement to accompany the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , printed in the january 15 , 2015 , congressional record .

the department of commerce ( commerce department ) originated in 1903 with the establishment of the department of commerce and labor .

the separate commerce department was established on march 4 , 1913 .

the department's responsibilities are numerous and quite varied ; its activities center on five basic missions: ( 1 ) promoting the development of u.s. business and increasing foreign trade ; ( 2 ) improving the nation's technological competitiveness ; ( 3 ) encouraging economic development ; ( 4 ) fostering environmental stewardship and assessment ; and ( 5 ) compiling , analyzing , and disseminating statistical information on the u.s. economy and population .

the following agencies within the commerce department carry out these missions: international trade administration ( ita ) seeks to develop the export potential of u.s. firms and improve the trade performance of u.s. industry ; bureau of industry and security ( bis ) enforces u.s. export laws consistent with national security , foreign policy , and short - supply objectives ; economic development administration ( eda ) provides grants for economic development projects in economically distressed communities and regions ; minority business development agency ( mbda ) seeks to promote private - and public - sector investment in minority businesses ; economics and statistics administration ( esa ) , excluding the census bureau , provides ( 1 ) information on the state of the economy through preparation , development , and interpretation of economic data and ( 2 ) analytical support to department officials in meeting their policy responsibilities ; census bureau , a component of esa , collects , compiles , and publishes a broad range of economic , demographic , and social data ; national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) advises the president on domestic and international communications policy , manages the federal government's use of the radio frequency spectrum , and performs research in telecommunications sciences ; united states patent and trademark office ( uspto ) examines and approves applications for patents for claimed inventions and registration of trademarks ; national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) assists industry in developing technology to improve product quality , modernize manufacturing processes , ensure product reliability , and facilitate rapid commercialization of products on the basis of new scientific discoveries ; and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides scientific , technical , and management expertise to ( 1 ) promote safe and efficient marine and air navigation ; ( 2 ) assess the health of coastal and marine resources ; ( 3 ) monitor and predict the coastal , ocean , and global environments ( including weather forecasting ) ; and ( 4 ) protect and manage the nation's coastal resources .

established by an act of 1870 with the attorney general at its head , doj provides counsel for the government in federal cases and protects citizens through law enforcement .

it represents the federal government in all proceedings , civil and criminal , before the supreme court .

in legal matters , generally , the department provides legal advice and opinions , upon request , to the president and executive branch department heads .

the major functions of doj agencies and offices are described below .

united states attorneys prosecute criminal offenses against the united states ; represent the federal government in civil actions ; and initiate proceedings for the collection of fines , penalties , and forfeitures owed to the united states .

united states marshals service ( usms ) provides security for the federal judiciary , protects witnesses , executes warrants and court orders , manages seized assets , detains and transports unsentenced prisoners , and apprehends fugitives .

federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) investigates violations of federal criminal law ; helps protect the united states against terrorism and hostile intelligence efforts ; provides assistance to other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; and shares jurisdiction with drug enforcement administration over federal drug violations .

drug enforcement administration ( dea ) investigates federal drug law violations ; coordinates its efforts with state , local , and other federal law enforcement agencies ; develops and maintains drug intelligence systems ; regulates legitimate controlled substances activities ; and conducts joint intelligence - gathering activities with foreign governments .

bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) enforces federal law related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives .

it was transferred from the department of the treasury to doj by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

federal prison system ( bureau of prisons , bop ) provides for the custody and care of the federal prison population , the maintenance of prison - related facilities , and the boarding of sentenced federal prisoners incarcerated in state and local institutions .

office on violence against women ( ovw ) coordinates legislative and other initiatives relating to violence against women and administers grant programs to help prevent , detect , and stop violence against women , including domestic violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the activities of the bureau of justice assistance , bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and the office of victims of crime .

community oriented policing services ( cops ) advances the practice of community policing by awarding grants to law enforcement agencies to hire and train community policing professionals , acquire and deploy crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test innovative policing strategies .

most crime control has traditionally been a state and local responsibility .

with the passage of the crime control act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-351 ) , however , the federal role in the administration of criminal justice has increased incrementally .

since 1984 , congress has approved five major omnibus crime control bills , designating new federal crimes , penalties , and additional law enforcement assistance programs for state and local governments .

the science agencies fund and otherwise support research and development ( r&d ) and related activities across a wide variety of federal missions , including national competitiveness , energy and the environment , and fundamental discovery .

the related agencies received a total of $827.9 million , after sequestration , for fy2013 .

for fy2014 , the administration requested a total of $962.1 million for the related agencies .

the house committee on appropriations recommended $800.5 million for the related agencies while the senate committee on appropriations recommended $962.1 million .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 includes $881.8 million for the related agencies .

established by the civil rights act of 1957 , the u.s. commission on civil rights ( the commission ) investigates allegations of citizens who may have been denied the right to vote based on color , race , religion , or national origin ; studies and gathers information on legal developments constituting a denial of the equal protection of the laws ; assesses the federal laws and policies in the area of civil rights ; and submits reports on its findings to the president and congress when the commission or the president deems it appropriate .

for fy2013 , the commission received $8.7 million , after sequestration .

the administration requested $9.4 million for the commission for fy2014 .

the house committee on appropriations recommended $8.8 million for the commission while the senate committee on appropriations recommended $9.4 million , the same as the administration's request .

the fy2014-enacted appropriation for the commission is $9.0 million .

the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) enforces several laws that ban employment discrimination based on race , color , national origin , sex , age , or disability .

in recent years , appropriators were particularly concerned about the agency's ability to reduce the pending inventory of charges due to rising caseloads and limited staff .

due to new hires of enforcement staff and developments in technology , the eeoc continues to reduce the pending inventory of cases .

the pending inventory of private sector cases filed with the eeoc reduced from 78,136 at the end of fy2011 to 70,312 at the end of fy2012 , a 10% decline .

according to the eeoc , the decline reflects investments in staffing , training , and technology .

the eeoc federal sector hearings workload reduced from 8,847 in fy2011 to 8,687 hearings in fy2012 .

the eeoc continues to implement strategies to reduce both federal and private sector cases by implementing a new case management system as outlined in the eeoc strategic plan for fy2012-fy2016 .

the fy2013 appropriation ( after sequestration ) for the eeoc was $344.2 million .

the administration's fy2014 request for the eeoc was $372.9 million , which included $29.5 million for payments to state and local entities with which the agency has work - sharing agreements to address workplace discrimination within their jurisdictions ( i.e. , fair employment practices agencies , fepas , and tribal employment rights organizations , teros ) .

the house committee - reported bill would have provided $355.0 million for the eeoc .

the senate committee on appropriations would have provided $372.9 million for the eeoc .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 includes $364.0 million for the eeoc , which includes $29.5 million for payments to state and local entities .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , requires the eeoc to publish a report within 90 days of enactment on the effect of a new eeoc rule on age discrimination on public safety personnel .

the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) is an independent , quasi - judicial agency established by congress that advises the president and congress on u.s. foreign economic policies .

in its strategic plan for 2009-2014 , the itc identified the following five strategic operations , which define the functions of the agency: ( 1 ) import injury investigations , ( 2 ) intellectual property - based imports investigations , ( 3 ) industry and economic analysis , ( 4 ) tariff and trade information services , and ( 5 ) trade policy support .

as a matter of policy , its budget request is submitted to congress by the president without revision .

congress appropriated $78.9 million ( after sequestration ) for the itc for fy2013 .

the administration's fy2014 request for the itc was $85.1 million .

the house committee - reported bill would have provided $79.0 million for this account .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $85.1 million for the itc .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , provides $83.0 million for the itc .

the legal services corporation ( lsc ) is a private , nonprofit , federally funded corporation that provides grants to local offices that , in turn , provide legal assistance to low - income people in civil ( noncriminal ) cases .

the lsc has been controversial since its incorporation in the early 1970s and has been operating without authorizing legislation since 1980 .

there have been ongoing debates over the adequacy of funding for the agency and the extent to which certain types of activities are appropriate for federally funded legal aid attorneys to undertake .

in annual appropriations bills , congress traditionally has included legislative provisions restricting the activities of lsc - funded grantees , such as prohibiting any lobbying activities or prohibiting representation in certain types of cases .

although the authorization of appropriations for the lsc expired at the end of fy1980 , the lsc has operated for the past 34 years under annual appropriations laws .

after sequestration , the lsc received $340.9 million for fy2013 .

this amount includes supplemental funding the lsc received pursuant to p.l .

113-2 .

for fy2014 , the obama administration requested $430.0 million for the lsc .

the administration's fy2014 budget request included $400.3 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $19.5 million for management and grants oversight , $3.5 million for client self - help and information technology , $4.2 million for the office of the inspector general , $1.5 million for a new pro bono innovation fund , and $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance .

the obama administration also proposed that lsc restrictions on class action suits and attorneys' fees be eliminated .

the house committee on appropriations recommended $300.0 million for the lsc for fy2014 .

this recommendation included $271.9 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $17.0 million for management and grants oversight , $3.4 million for client self - help and information technology , $4.2 million for the office of the inspector general , $2.5 million for a pro bono innovation fund , and $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance .

the senate committee on appropriations included $430.0 million for the lsc for fy2014 .

this recommendation included $400.0 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $19.5 million for management and grants oversight , $3.5 million for client self - help and information technology , $4.5 million for the office of the inspector general , $1.5 million for a pro bono innovation fund , and $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 provides $365.0 million for the lsc for fy2014 .

this amount includes $335.7 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $18.0 million for management and grants oversight , almost $3.5 million for client self - help and information technology , almost $4.4 million for the office of the inspector general , $2.5 million for a new pro bono innovation fund , and $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance .

the marine mammal commission ( mmc ) is an independent agency of the executive branch , established under title ii of the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ; p.l .

92-522 ) .

the mmc and its committee of scientific advisors on marine mammals provide oversight and recommend actions on domestic and international topics to advance policies and provisions of the marine mammal protection act .

as funding permits , the marine mammal commission supports research to further the purposes of the mmpa .

after sequestration , the mmc received $2.9 million for fy2013 .

for fy2014 , the administration requested $3.4 million for the mmc .

the house committee - reported bill included $2.9 million for the mmc .

the senate committee - reported bill would have provided $3.4 million for the mmc .

congress provided $3.3 million for the mmc for fy2014 .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , located in the executive office of the president , is responsible for developing and coordinating u.s. international trade and direct investment policies .

the ustr is the president's chief negotiator for international trade agreements , including commodity and direct investment negotiations .

ustr also conducts u.s. affairs related to the world trade organization .

the ustr is leading the negotiations for the united states for the ongoing talks for the proposed trans - pacific partnership agreement ( tpp ) and for the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) .

congress appropriated $47.6 million ( after sequestration ) for the ustr for fy2013 .

the administration's fy2014 request for this account was $56.2 million .

the house committee - reported bill recommended $50.0 million for this account .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $56.2 million .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , includes $52.6 million for ustr .

the state justice institute ( sji ) is a nonprofit corporation that makes grants to state courts and funds research , technical assistance , and informational projects aimed at improving the quality of judicial administration in state courts across the united states .

it is governed by an 11-member board of directors appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate .

under the terms of its enabling legislation , sji is authorized to present its budget request directly to congress , apart from the president's budget .

after sequestration , the fy2013 appropriation for the sji was $4.8 million .

for fy2014 , the administration requested $5.1 million for sji .

for fy2014 , the house committee on appropriations recommended $4.8 million for sji .

the senate committee - reported bill would have provided $5.1 million , the same as the administration's request .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 includes $4.9 million for the sji .

