electricity today is widely viewed as a commodity .

as a commodity , electricity is bought and sold as both power and energy , with various attributes being traded in electricity markets .

however , electricity has some unique characteristics which distinguish it from almost all other commodities .

electricity must be available upon demand , is rarely stored in bulk , and is generally consumed as soon as it is produced .

and since electricity must be available at the flick of a switch , the power industry has developed over the last century to satisfy goals for availability and system reliability .

electricity prices vary by region across the united states based on supply and demand factors which are largely influenced by the cost of fuels , power generation technologies and infrastructure , and trends in the weather .

electricity is at the base of much of the economic activity in the united states , and regulators of the electricity industry generally seek to ensure that electric power is provided at as low a cost as possible .

electricity was thus considered as essentially a service until the passage of the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-486 ; epact ) introduced a new class of power producers called "exempt wholesale generators" whose primary business was the production of wholesale electricity .

the importance of transparency in wholesale electricity markets was underscored by the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) where under subtitle g section 1281 , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc or the commission ) was directed to facilitate price transparency in interstate markets for the sale and transmission of electric energy "having due regard for the public interest , the integrity of those markets , fair competition , and the protection of consumers. .

epact05 further prohibited energy market manipulation under subtitle g section 1283 .

it shall be unlawful for any entity ( including an entity described in section 201 ( f ) ) , directly or indirectly , to use or employ , in connection with the purchase or sale of electric energy or the purchase or sale of transmission services subject to the jurisdiction of the commission , any manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance ( as those terms are used in section 10 ( b ) of the securities exchange act of 1934 ( 15 u.s.c .

78j ( b ) ) ) , in contravention of such rules and regulations as the commission may prescribe as necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for the protection of electric ratepayers .

competitive electricity markets have enabled a variety of wholesale electricity products and services to facilitate the sale and transmission of power .

services have also arisen to provide transaction flexibility , and to manage ( or hedge ) the risks of various transactions .

but with the california ( or western ) energy crisis of 2000 to 2001 , the susceptibility of electricity markets to manipulation became evident .

enron and its affiliates were principally found liable for "engaging in various gaming and market manipulation schemes," with an initial decision ordering the disgorgement of $1.6 billion in unjust profits .

ferc continues to investigate allegations of energy market manipulation in fy2015 , with the commission's office of enforcement focusing on fraud and conduct that threatens the transparency of regulated markets: [ s]taff opened 19 new investigations and brought 22 pending investigations to closure with settlement or no action .

staff obtained settlements resulting in almost $26.25 million in civil penalties and disgorgement of $1 million in unjust profits .

all settlements included reporting requirements and provisions requiring the subjects to enhance compliance programs.... enforcement also tried an anti - manipulation case before an agency administrative law judge and filed three new petitions in federal district court to enforce commission orders assessing civil penalties .

including those four matters , staff is seeking to recover more than a half - billion dollars in civil penalties and disgorgement through district court and administrative litigation .

questions for congress may include whether current laws and regulations prohibiting energy market manipulation sufficiently protect the public interest , or whether , given the multiplicity of financial and physical transactions that exist ( and the increasing convergence of these and other transactions in electricity markets ) , whether more regulatory oversight is needed .

the broader issue of whether the wholesale electricity markets administered by regional transmission organizations ( rtos ) are currently resulting in greater efficiency , and thus providing cost savings to customers , is not intended to be a major focus of this report .

the power generation industry in its early stages was geared towards serving the needs of industrial manufacturers , building steam - driven power plants to operate machinery .

however , in the early part of the last century , companies specializing in electric power generation developed .

economies of scale for this new industry began to emerge with privately owned , vertically integrated electric utility companies ( i.e. , those which generated power , and were engaged in the transmission and distribution of electricity ) .

with demand for electricity increasing , electric utilities grew to serve the needs of whole towns and cities .

state regulation of electric utilities also began in these early days as companies were granted exclusive service territories in exchange for an obligation to serve all electricity customers within that territory .

figure 1 figure 1. illustrates the components of an electric power system .

while as of 2007 , about 15% of electricity customers were served by public power systems , another 13% were served by rural electric cooperatives , and approximately 68% of electricity customers were served by investor - owned electric utilities ( ious ) .

power marketers served the remaining 4% of electricity customers .

ious are largely vertically integrated companies that own approximately 40% of power generation capacity in the electric power sector , while many public power entities and electric cooperatives are "distribution - only" utilities , owning 10% and 4% , respectively , of power generation facilities .

as distribution utilities , they sell power directly to retail ( end - use ) customers .

in the early years of the last century , electric utility companies quickly realized that they could reduce costs and enhance reliability by interconnecting with one another , thus sharing generation resources .

the development of "power pools" allowed member electric utilities to exchange power , or transfer ( i.e. , "wheel" ) power to another utility in either wholesale or retail ( to an end - use customer ) transactions .

power pools can be "loose" or "tight," with the level of independence being the primary differentiator: a loose power pool is a voluntary association of utilities that negotiates generation sales primarily on a bi - lateral ( two - party ) basis .

bi - lateral transactions are private , thus other participants are unaware of the terms of the exchange , including price and transmission access .

in contrast , tight power pools require true pooling of generating and transmission assets .

the cost of each resource in the pool is known and each is operated on the basis of those costs , with the lowest cost resources being used more than higher cost ones .

operation of pooled generation also requires cooperative operation of transmission in the pool .

as a result , tight power pools have some form of centralized transmission dispatch .

usually , there is a control center for the pool as a whole that issues dispatch instructions to the control centers of the larger utilities in the pool .

in 1927 , the pennsylvania - new jersey interconnect became the first u.s. power pool , transitioning to a fully independent transmission organization in 1997 with the opening of its first bid - based energy market .

ferc approved the pennsylvania , new jersey , maryland ( pjm ) pool as the first independent system operator ( iso ) that year .

in regions with traditional regulation , power plants are generally scheduled to run by the vertically integrated utility which owns the generation and wires ( i.e. , transmission and distribution ) businesses .

however , in rto regions , power generators generally compete to sell electricity from their power plants to retail suppliers ( i.e. , a distribution utility or other load serving entity ( lse ) ) via a wholesale electricity market .

rtos are the facilitator in this supply and demand process , coordinating the purchase , sale , and delivery of wholesale electricity from seller to buyer .

wholesale electricity can theoretically be bought and sold a number of times before it finally is consumed .

given the number of transactions that can occur , liquidity is essential to the efficient functioning of competitive markets .

electricity from the wholesale market is obtained by distribution utilities or lses and resold to retail customers ( i.e. , the end - users or consumers of electricity ) , with actual wholesale prices varying by locality .

while the rtos and most wholesale electricity transactions are under ferc's jurisdiction , lses are under state jurisdiction and make retail sales to end - use customers .

currently , rtos serve approximately two - thirds of electricity consumers in the united states .

rto system operators seek to fulfill the need for electricity , taking transmission system constraints and reliability into consideration .

since the need for power is continuous and variable ( both around the clock and seasonally ) , rtos seek to balance the power going into the grid with the power being withdrawn from the grid using the least costly generation available .

this is called "security - constrained economic dispatch" ( sced ) .

operating reserves are maintained on the system to deal with contingencies .

the process of scheduling power plants to operate to serve a specific increment of load is called dispatch , and is generally designed to meet goals of reliability and economy as the demand for power ( i.e. , the load ) rises and falls .

figure 3 illustrates how the demand for power might vary throughout a day , and shows the various types of generating capacity which may be dispatched to serve the demand for electricity .

base load power plants are designed to run almost continuously , while peaking power plants only run in periods of the highest demand with intermediate load plants serving at both midrange and high demand periods .

rtos generally monitor the system loads every few minutes for dispatch purposes , thus allowing intermediate load plants to maintain or change their output to meet demand periodically ( at least every five minutes ) in a load - following mode of operation .

rtos also seek to maintain power reserves at levels which allow for some unexpected situations ( such as an unplanned power plant outage ) or unexpectedly high demands for power on the system , and to account for the security constraint of maintaining reliability .

some regions have a summertime peak demand for electricity , while demand in other regions peaks in the winter .

to accomplish sced , rto administrators compare the costs of various power plants which offer their energy for dispatch .

these offers to sell are made in price - for - quantity amounts of energy ( which may be submitted on an offer curve reflecting varying levels of generation during an operating day ) in dollars per megawatt - hour ( $ / mwh ) , which the rto matches against bids from loads to purchase varying amounts of energy .

the rto then seeks to serve the entire system demand , matching the lowest cost offers at or below the prices that bidders are willing to pay .

running a system involving multiple generators bidding to serve multiple increments of load at various hours of the day or night requires a computer - run model to optimize the system , and arrive at the least - cost model for serving the next day's load .

in a competitive market , prices for electricity should essentially reflect the underlying forces of supply and demand .

ferc authorizes sellers of wholesale electricity to charge market - based rates if they have demonstrated that they or their affiliates "lack or have adequately mitigated horizontal market power ( percent of generation owned relative to total generation available in a market ) , and vertical market power ( the ability to influence the cost of production for competitive electricity suppliers ) . .

alternatively , ferc may authorize cost - based rates for sellers of electricity in wholesale markets .

market monitors are associated with each rto to observe and report on whether the rto's market rules and tariffs are achieving customer benefits in a competitive environment .

ferc issued a policy statement outlining the duties of market monitors in this role .

[market monitors] should evaluate the market - specific responses of individual market participants to existing or proposed market rules and tariff provisions .

it is therefore critical that the [market monitor] consistently and impartially evaluate the existing iso / rto rules and tariff provisions , including mitigation and their effects on the economic signals sent to market participants .

thus , the market monitor is to recommend changes to the rto's market rules and tariffs to achieve these benefits as part of its ongoing duties .

electricity market issues can be usually separated into two categories — manipulation by market participants or rto market structural issues .

this section will look at some current instances and examples of each .

when rtos were originally authorized , the expectation was that an efficient , functionally competitive market would send price signals with prices reflecting scarcity of capacity .

in 2007 , as it became apparent that pricing signals were not sufficient for a long - lived , capital - intensive investment , forward capacity markets were proposed to augment price signals .

some states and lses still maintain that new generation is not being built despite price signals and high capacity prices in load pockets .

price volatility in markets is said to be part of the reason for the lack of construction , and uncertainty results when the dynamic of constantly changing rules is thrown in .

this uncertainty causes doubts to arise in the minds of investors and builders of generation with regard to the ability of forward capacity markets to incentivize new plant construction .

a question congress may want to consider is how to judge the success of forward capacity markets as regards customer benefits , and whether a single , ferc - mandated approach on forward capacity markets ( where elected ) would serve to provide clear price signals and market rules ? .

should the federal supremacy clause apply to ferc - regulated rto markets , or should states in these regions be allowed to incentivize power plants built to address "long - term" electric power needs ? .

it appears that the rto electricity markets are gradually becoming more financial in nature .

physical and financial transactions are being increasingly linked and apparently converging in order to increase liquidity in the markets .

examples of this convergence are ftrs , virtual trading , and the "up to congestion" transaction which was "created as a mechanism to provide some price certainty in the day - ahead energy market .

customers can specify how much they are willing to pay for congestion... .

if the congestion charges are up to or less than the specified amount , then the transaction is scheduled. .

in essence , these financial tools are taking the place of traditional load forecasting tools which are reliant on using customer history and interactions to estimate demand needs .

as financial instruments available to speculators as investments , it is not surprising that these financial transactions are possible instruments for market manipulation .

further potential concerns for congress may include: as a possible trend increases towards an apparent convergence of financial and physical transactions , will the incidences of market manipulation increase with increasing opportunities to engage in financial electricity transactions ? .

will the potential for increasingly financial transactions lead mostly physical rto market participants to become increasingly involved with hedging to ensure financial health ? .

are current electricity market rules and tariffs designed to encourage liquidity in the marketplace increasing speculation without further benefits to customers ? .

the electricity industry is entering a time of change , and electricity markets are evolving with the industry .

the expected retirement of many coal - fired power plants can affect rto markets as generator portfolios change to include more natural gas - fired plants , and the prices that this new generation is expected to command .

with load growth stagnant or diminishing in many regions , the pull towards a greater use of hedging and more liquid markets may increase as the need to decrease costs and stabilize revenues increases .

market manipulation is said to be difficult to detect , as prices can be manipulated through a variety of mechanisms .

relevant questions may include: would standardized market rules for the rto markets ( or elements of these markets ) help to reduce opportunities for market manipulation ? .

and would such standardized market rules provide regulatory clarity and transparency , and thus help to decrease costs ? .

it should be noted that electricity prices in most u.s. regions are closely tied to natural gas prices .

in the amaranth case , one of the ferc commissioners commented on the appeals court ruling postulating that the decision may mean there is less oversight of cross - market manipulation .

a number of enforcement proceedings at ferc alleged market manipulation by "companies that traded at a loss in either a financial or physical electricity market in order to gain in the other market. .

congress may want to consider whether there is sufficient clarity on jurisdictional issues: given that electricity generation in the united states appears to moving to a greater dependence on natural gas as a fuel , does this trend lend itself to a conclusion that the opportunities and potential gains from cross - market manipulation are likely to increase ? .

are the "seams" between ferc and cftc jurisdiction sufficiently addressed by mou between the agencies ? .

