dietary supplements are marketed for nutritional support and health promotion , as well as for a number of other uses , including weight loss and sports performance enhancement .

these products come in pill , capsule , and liquid form , as well as in forms that may appear similar to conventional food or beverages .

dietary supplement use is common in the u.s. population ; over one - half of u.s. adults over age 20 take dietary supplements .

surveys show that number has been increasing .

dietary supplement production has increased over time .

the number of dietary supplements on the market rose from 4,000 in 1994 to approximately 55,000 in 2009 .

the industry recorded over $30 billion in sales in 2011 .

in 2010-2011 , top - selling supplements included vitamins , herbs and botanicals , sports nutrition supplements , and "specialty" supplements which the industry defines as supplements such as glucosamine , probiotics , dehydroepiandrosterone ( dhea ) , and fish oil that do not fit into other supplement categories .

this report outlines the authority of the food and drug administration ( fda ) to regulate dietary supplements and summarizes dietary supplement - specific regulations for new dietary ingredients ( ndi ) , good manufacturing practices ( gmp ) , labeling , and claims .

the report also discusses adverse event reporting for dietary supplements and other means of ensuring consumer safety through enforcement of these authorities and regulations .

dietary supplement advertising , which is regulated by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) in coordination with the fda , is also discussed .

finally , the report concludes with a discussion of policy issues related to the manufacture , regulation , and use of dietary supplements , including the identification of dietary supplements , the role of dietary supplements in health and health care , and dietary supplement safety .

the food and drug administration , u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , regulates the processing , manufacture , and packaging of dietary supplements under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) of 1938 .

since passage of the ffdca , the federal government has generally regulated dietary supplements as food .

fda's authority specifically in regard to dietary supplements has been amended by subsequent legislation ; these authorities and their implementation and enforcement are discussed in this section .

under the ffdca , the fda regulates the processing , manufacture , and labeling of food products .

the agency has the authority to deem food ( and dietary supplements ) misbranded ( i.e. , inaccurately labeled or presenting unapproved claims ) and adulterated ( i.e. , containing ingredients that pose a significant or unreasonable risk of illness or injury ) .

the law authorizes the fda to recall food ( and dietary supplements ) under specified circumstances .

nutrition labeling requirements for food , including dietary supplements , were established under the nutrition labeling education act of 1990 ( nlea ) .

however , the dietary supplement act of 1992 instituted a one - year moratorium on the implementation of dietary supplement labeling under nlea .

congress subsequently required the fda to create dietary supplement - specific regulations for labeling under the dietary supplement health and education act of 1994 ( dshea ) .

dshea made changes to fda's authority that differentiated certain aspects of dietary supplement regulation from regulation of conventional foods , in regard to 1 ) new dietary ingredients ( ndi ) , 2 ) good manufacturing practices ( gmp ) , 3 ) labeling , and 4 ) certain health claims for dietary supplements .

additionally , dshea excluded dietary supplement ingredients from the definition of a food additive .

the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act required registration of food ( including dietary supplement ) manufacturers , processors , and packers with the fda .

subsequent legislation provided fda with additional authorities .

under the dietary supplement and non - prescription drug consumer protection act , congress added requirements for mandatory reporting of adverse events for dietary supplements .

most recently , the food safety modernization act ( fsma ) provided the fda with mandatory recall authority for adulterated food ( including dietary supplements ) and for food that does not provide adequate allergen labeling .

within the fda , regulation of both food and dietary supplements falls within the purview of the office of foods , center for food safety and applied nutrition ( cfsan ) .

information on cfsan oversight of dietary supplements is summarized in the text box that follows .

although the fda has broad regulatory authority over dietary supplements , the agency shares some responsibility with the federal trade commission ( ftc ) .

while the fda regulates claims made on product labeling ( including packaging , inserts , and information at the point of sale ) , the ftc has primary responsibility to regulate dietary supplement advertising .

this includes print and broadcast advertisements , infomercials , catalogs , internet marketing , and similar direct marketing materials .

the fda and ftc have the responsibility to ensure that both dietary supplement labeling and advertising is truthful , not misleading , and that any claims made may be substantiated .

the ftc's authority derives from section 5 of the federal trade commission act that prohibits "unfair methods of competition in or affecting commerce , and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce. .

additionally , the ftc act prohibits dissemination of false advertisements by any means for the purpose of inducing the purchase of food , drugs , devices , services , or cosmetics .

the ftc act defines false advertisements as "any advertisement , other than labeling , which is misleading in any material respect. .

similar to the fda , the ftc requires that supplement manufacturers' claims are adequately substantiated .

the ftc has created a guide for industry which outlines its expectations , role , and enforcement efforts regarding substantiation .

the ftc standard is summed up as the following: 1 .

advertising must be truthful and not misleading .

2 .

before disseminating an advertisement , advertisers must have adequate substantiation for all objective product claims .

the ftc defines a deceptive advertisement as one that "contains a misrepresentation or an omission that is likely to mislead consumers acting reasonably under the circumstances to their detriment. .

the ftc's standard of substantiation for express and implied claims is one of "competent and reliable scientific evidence," which differs from fda's requirements for health , nutrient content , and structure / function claims .

the ftc generally enforces these standards through targeted law enforcement action .

over the past 10 years , the ftc has filed over 100 law enforcement actions challenging claims about the efficacy or safety of a wide variety of supplements .

consumers , the health care and dietary supplement industries , congress , and federal regulators all have a stake in supplement identification , effectiveness , and safety .

current federal policy toward regulating dietary supplements was intended to balance these competing interests .

dshea provided fda the authority to step in against products that were unsafe or adulterated , but "not to take any actions to impose unreasonable regulatory barriers limiting or slowing the flow of safe products and accurate information to consumers. .

under current law , dietary supplements are generally regulated as food — meaning that the fda does not take regulatory action until something goes wrong ( as opposed to drug regulation , where proof of safety and efficacy are required prior to putting a product on the market ) .

whether this is an appropriate level of regulation has been a long - standing concern .

advocates for industry are concerned that increased regulation would stifle the dietary supplement industry .

public health advocates have ongoing concerns about the safety of the current approach , and have encouraged a regulatory scheme that is more similar to drug regulation .

as the dietary supplement market has grown , regulatory and research questions have become more complex .

these questions continue to reflect the fundamental balance between personal choice and safety .

the following sections discuss current areas of regulatory and legislative concern , including the identification of products as dietary supplements ; their role in individuals' health and health care ; and recent issues regarding supplement safety .

consumers , the health care and dietary supplement industries , congress , and federal regulators all have a stake in supplement identification , effectiveness , and safety .

research into the effectiveness and safety of supplements , industry compliance , surveillance and effective reporting strategies , and enforcement of current authorities are perennial concerns in this area .

with each legislative and regulatory action over the years , congress and fda have tried to balance often conflicting goals: safety and effectiveness ; access to up - to - date , complete , and unbiased information on dietary supplements ; accurate reporting of adverse events ; and consumer choice .

congress has demonstrated a sustained interest in dietary supplement related issues .

it is uncertain if the 114 th congress will consider any new dietary supplement related legislation .

such issues may arise in the broader context of congressional interest in nutrition and food safety .

appendix a .

selected laws regulating dietary supplements federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( p.l .

75-717 ) the ffdca provides fda with the authority to oversee the safety of food , drugs , and cosmetics .

nutrition labeling and education act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-535 ) the nutrition labeling and education act ( nlea ) amended the ffdca to require most foods , including dietary supplements , to bear nutrition labeling .

it provided required information for labels and required the fda to promulgate regulations regarding nutrition labeling and health claim requirements for foods and dietary supplements .

prescription drug user fee act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-571 ) title ii of the prescription drug user fee act is referred to as the "dietary supplement act of 1992" and required a one - year moratorium on fda's implementation of dietary supplement labeling under nlea .

dietary supplement health and education act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-417 ) the dietary supplement health and education act ( dshea ) amended the ffdca to create new manufacturing and labeling requirements for dietary supplements , and established the office of dietary supplements within the national institutes of health .

public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-188 ) this law mandates a chain of possession identification ( manufacturer , processor , packer , distributor , and other possessors ) for those firms that seek to import components of drugs , devices , food additives , color additives , or dietary supplements for further processing and export .

dietary supplement and nonprescription drug consumer protection act ( p.l .

109-462 ) this law mandates the reporting of any dietary supplement related serious adverse event to the fda within 15 days of the event .

serious adverse event reporting is mandatory for manufacturers , packers , or distributors whose name appears on the dietary supplement label .

fda food safety modernization act ( p.l .

111-353 ) fsma provides fda with mandatory recall authority for food , including dietary supplements .

this law also requires fda to issue ndi guidance no later than 180 after its enactment .

appendix b .

principal display panel , dietary supplements appendix c. acronyms used in this report government agencies cdc — centers for disease control and prevention cfsan — center for food safety and applied nutrition , office of foods , fda dea — drug enforcement administration dod — department of defense fda — u.s .

food and drug administration ftc — federal trade commission gao — u.s. government accountability office hhs — u.s .

department of health and human services nih — national institutes of health oig — office of the inspector general , u.s. department of health and human services legislation dshea — dietary supplement health and education act of 1994 fdama — fda modernization act ffdca — federal food , drug , and cosmetics act fsma — fda food safety modernization act of 2011 nlea — nutrition labeling and education act of 1990 miscellaneous cfr — code of federal regulations faers — fda adverse event reporting system gmp — good manufacturing practices gras — generally recognized as safe ndi — new dietary ingredient ssa — fda's significant scientific agreement standard for approved health claims ind — investigational new dru .

