over the last two decades , contractors have played a critical role in u.s. military operations , making up more than half of department of defense's ( dod ) total workforce in iraq , afghanistan , and the balkans .

with the end of combat operations in iraq and the drawdown of forces in afghanistan , dod is turning its attention to preparing for future military operations .

as reflected in recent defense strategic planning guidance , the united states must prepare for a diverse range of security challenges .

although future contingency operations may differ from those of the past decade , many analysts and defense officials believe that contractors will continue to play a central role in military operations .

these observers believe that , in order to meet the challenges of future operations , dod should be prepared to effectively award and manage contracts at a moment's notice , anywhere in the world , in unknown environments , and on a scale that may exceed the total contract obligations of any other federal agency .

this report provides background information and identifies issues for congress on the use of contractors to support military operations .

dod's extensive use of contractors poses several potential policy and oversight issues for congress and has been the focus of numerous hearings .

congress' decisions on these issues could substantially affect the extent to which dod relies on contractors in and is capable of planning for and overseeing contractors in future operations .

related crs reports include crs report r42084 , wartime contracting in afghanistan: analysis and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , which focuses on the challenges of contract support in afghanistan , and crs report r41820 , department of defense trends in overseas contract obligations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , which focuses on trends in dod contract obligations around the world .

dod has long relied on contractors to support overseas military operations .

post - cold war defense budget reductions resulted in significant cuts to military logistics and other support capabilities , requiring dod to hire contractors to "fill the gap. .

recent operations in iraq and afghanistan , and before that in the balkans , have reflected this increased reliance on contractors supporting u.s. troops — both in terms of the number of contractors and the type of work being performed .

according to dod data , contractors , on average , represented just over half of the force in the balkans , afghanistan , and iraq ( see figure 1 ) .

source: balkans: congressional budget office .

contractors' support of u.s. operations in iraq .

august 2008. p. 13 ; afghanistan: crs analysis of dod data , calculated as an average for the period september 2007 – march 2013 ; iraq: crs analysis of dod data , calculated as an average for the period september 2007 – march 2011 .

note: dod did not begin releasing data on contractors in u.s. central command until the second half of 2007 .

as of march 2013 , there were approximately 108,000 dod contractor personnel in afghanistan , representing 62% of the total force ( see appendix a ) .

of this total , there were nearly 18,000 private security contractors , compared to 65,700 u.s. troops .

over the last six fiscal years , dod obligations for contracts performed in the iraq and afghanistan areas of operation were approximately $160 billion and exceeded total contract obligations of any other u.s. federal agency ( see appendix b ) .

according to government officials and analysts , the military is unable to effectively execute many operations , particularly those that are large - scale and long - term in nature , without extensive operational contract support .

even in short - term operations , contractors can play a variety of critical roles .

for example , the first fragmentary order for operation tomodachi — dod's response to the earthquake and tsunami that struck japan in 2011 — involved contract support .

given the extensive role of contractors in military operations , many dod officials and analysts consider contract management a mission - essential task .

dod has recognized the role contractors are likely to play in future operations .

as stated in its budget request for fy2013 , operational contract support is a critical function in support of military operations , natural disasters , and unanticipated calamities .

contractors can provide significant operational benefits to dod , including freeing up uniformed personnel to conduct combat operations ; providing expertise in specialized fields , such as linguistics or weapon systems maintenance ; and providing a surge capability , quickly delivering critical support capabilities tailored to specific military needs .

contractors are often responsible for such critical tasks as providing armed security to convoys and installations , providing life support to forward deployed warfighters , conducting intelligence analysis , and training local security forces .

because contractors can be hired when a particular need arises and released when their services are no longer needed , contractors can be less expensive in the long run than maintaining a permanent in - house capability .

and when a decision is made to limit the number of troops on the ground , contractors can fulfill critical manpower needs .

just as the effective use of contractors can augment military capabilities , the ineffective use of contractors can prevent troops from receiving what they need , when they need it , and can lead to the wasteful spending of billions of dollars — dollars that could have been used to fund other operational requirements .

contractors can also compromise the credibility and effectiveness of the u.s. military and undermine operations , as many analysts believe happened in iraq and afghanistan .

improved planning for and management of contractors may not eliminate all problems , but it could mitigate the risks of relying on contractors during overseas operations .

despite the progress made to date , observers believe dod still faces significant challenges in effectively utilizing and managing contractors to support current contractor support and prepare for future operations .

the 2010 quadrennial defense review stated that the military's ability to effectively and efficiently use contractors to provide operational support "is an enduring priority and an area where continued improvements must be made. .

secretary of defense chuck hagel reiterated this point when he stated i believe that investments made over the last few years... have vastly improved the department's ability to effectively manage contractors on the battlefield .

if confirmed , i will continue to improve our capabilities in this critical area .

dod officials in 2013 stated that it could take four to five more years to fully institutionalize operational contract support .

in light of future budget constraints , some observers are concerned that dod may not sufficiently fund the efforts to effectively institutionalize operational contract support and prepare for the use of contractors in future operations .

dod officials , however , believe that modest funding of education , training , and exercises in the near - term will likely save billions of dollars , and enable greater likelihood of operational success in the future .

for example , the cost to hold the jcrx exercise is estimated to be less than $1.5 million annually .

many analysts and senior dod officials believe that congress will play a pivotal role in determining the extent to which dod funds and continues to implement its current initiatives .

the role contractors are expected to play in future operations raises a number of questions for congress , including the following .

as discussed in this report , post - cold war budget cuts resulted in an increased reliance on contractors .

a number of analysts argue that dod was over - reliant on contractors in iraq and afghanistan .

many analysts also argue that contractors were assigned responsibilities that should have been performed by government personnel .

however , most analysts agree that dod did not have the manpower to perform its mission without using contractors .

a potential question for congress is: to what extent will budget cuts , the imposition of personnel caps , or a restructuring of the force lead to an increased reliance on contractors ? .

planning can be critical to effective contractor management .

dod faces a number of challenges in planning for the use of contractors in future operations , including identifying the role contractors will play in future operations , anticipating the nature of future military operations , and accounting for possible budget cuts and changes to force structure .

in light of these and other challenges , potential questions for congress include: to what extent is dod identifying the role of contractors in future operations ? .

to what extent is the development of the future force structure being informed by a well - thought - out plan for how contractors will be used in future operations ? .

to what extent is dod integrating the use of contractors into future operational planning ? .

to what extent are lessons learned in contractor management and oversight being incorporated into doctrine and strategy ? .

observers believe education and training are critical elements in preparing for future operations .

richard ginman , director , defense procurement and acquisition policy , department of defense , recently testified before congress that "the curriculum for each phase of joint and service - specific professional military education should include [operational contract support] content appropriate for each phase of an officer's professional development. .

potential questions for congress include: to what extent is dod adapting what is taught in military educational institutions to address operational contract support ? .

to what extent is dod including contractor scenarios in post - and field - exercises ? .

are dod efforts sufficient to prepare the operational force for how contractors will be used in future operations ? .

most analysts believe that effective use of contractors to support military operations requires dedicating sufficient resources to plan for , manage , and oversee the use of contractors .

yet many analysts have argued that insufficient resources are dedicated to operational contract support .

this raises a number of potential questions for congress: does dod have sufficient numbers of planners to effectively prepare for the integration of contractors into future operations ? .

does dod have an appropriately sized and capable acquisition workforce ? .

what steps are being taken to ensure that the infrastructure is in place to better track contractor data and measure contractor performance so that commanders and decisions makers will have necessary information upon which to make more informed decisions ? .

does dod have the information technology capabilities necessary to support operational contract support planning and execution ? .

in light of potential budget constraints , will dod sufficiently fund efforts needed to institutionalize operational contract support and prepare for the use of contractors in future military operations ? .

appendix a .

number of contractors vs .

number of troops in iraq and afghanistan appendix b. dod contract obligations appendix c. select legislative history concerned over dod's use of contractors in iraq and afghanistan , congress has held oversight hearings and enacted legislation aimed at improving operational contract support .

this appendix summarizes legislation affecting operational contract support in recent years .

national defense authorization act for fy2007 ( p.l .

109 – 364 ) section 854 directed dod to develop joint policies for requirements definition , contingency program management , and contingency contracting during combat operations and post - conflict operations .

national defense authorization act for fy2008 ( p.l .

110 – 181 ) section 841 established the commission on wartime contracting to investigate federal agency contracting for: the reconstruction of iraq and afghanistan ; the logistical support of coalition forces operating in iraq and afghanistan ; and the performance of security functions in such operations .

section 1129 established the special inspector for afghanistan reconstruction to provide independent and objective: audits and investigations relating to programs and operations supported with u.s. reconstruction dollars ; recommendations to promote economy , efficiency , and effectiveness ; leadership on policies to prevent and detect waste , fraud , and abuse ; and communication with the secretary of state and the secretary of defense to keep them informed about problems and deficiencies relating to the reconstruction , the need for corrective actions , and progress on implementing corrective actions .

section 842 directed the inspectors general with jurisdiction over the relevant contracts to conduct a series of audits to identify potential waste , fraud , abuse , or mismanagement in the performance of federal contracts for support to coalition forces in iraq and afghanistan , as well security and reconstruction efforts .

section 861 directed dod , the department of state , and the u.s. agency for international development to enter into a memorandum of understanding regarding matters relating to contracts in iraq or afghanistan .

the agencies subsequently entered into an agreement that designates dod's synchronized predeployment and operational tracker ( spot ) as a common database for associated contract information .

section 849 required contingency contracting training for non - acquisition dod personnel .

section 851 required dod to develop a strategic human capital plan for the acquisition workforce .

section 852 established the defense acquisition workforce development fund for the recruitment , training , and retention of acquisition personnel .

section 862 directed dod to prescribe regulations on the selection , training , equipping , and conduct of personnel performing private security functions under a covered contract in an area of combat operations .

national defense authorization act for fy2009 ( p.l .

110 – 417 ) section 503 authorized five billets for joint general officer / flag officers to serve in acquisition positions .

section 834 required dod to establish policy and guidance to ensure proper development , assignment , and employment of military personnel in the acquisition field .

section 870 established a government - wide contingency contracting corps to an emergency , major disaster , or contingency operation .

national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( p.l .

111 – 383 ) section 873 required dod to establish policies and issue guidance to ensure the proper development , assignment , and employment of civilian members of the acquisition workforce .

section 831 established oversight and accountability mechanisms for contactors performing private security functions in areas of combat operations .

section 832 extended regulations on contractors performing private security functions to areas of other significant military operations .

section 833 required dod to review standards and certification for private security contractors .

national defense authorization act for fy2012 ( p.l .

112 – 81 ) section 515 amended the definition of contingency operation .

section 820 required dod to address contractor support in the quadrennial review and other defense planning documents .

section 841 directed dod to amend the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement to allow for the prohibition of contracting with the enemy in the united states central command theater of operations .

section 842 .

directed dod to amend the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement to allow additional access to contractor and subcontractor records in the united states central command theater of operations .

section 843 authorized dod to designate a single contracting authority that uses domestic 'reachback' capabilities in support of overseas contracting .

this activity may use increased micro - purchase threshold and the overseas increased simplified acquisition threshold for contracts providing support to operation enduring freedom and operation joint dawn .

section 844 required an annual review of omnibus contracts providing support to contingency operations , to include the logistics civil augmentation program , be performed by a dod competition advocate .

national defense authorization act for fy2013 ( p.l .

112 – 239 ) section 846 required combatant commanders to develop a contractor reliance risk assessment and risk mitigation strategy for all operational or contingency plans .

section 861 required dod ( to include each military services and the defense logistics agency ) , department of state , and the u.s. agency for international development to have an independent suspension and debarment official .

section 1273 assigned sustainability requirements for certain capital projects in connection with overseas contingency operations .

section 843 required dod to develop and issue guidance on responsibility and authority for operational contract support policy , planning , and execution .

section 848 described responsibilities of inspectors general for overseas contingency operations .

section 849 updates the responsibility of the chief acquisition personnel within dod , department of state , and u.s. agency for international development for oversight of contracts and contracting activities for overseas contingency .

section 952 enhanced the responsibilities of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff regarding the inclusion of operational contract support in national military strategy .

section 803 extended expedited hiring authority to fill shortages in the defense acquisition workforce through 2017 .

section 845 mandated the inclusion of operational contract support in certain requirements for department of defense planning , joint professional military education , and management structure .

section 844 required dod , department of state , and the u.s. agency for international development to issue guidance regarding data collection on contract support for future operations outside of the united states that involve combat .

section 847 extended and modified reports on contracting in iraq and afghanistan through 2015 .

section 851 required agencies to establish and maintain a database on price trends of items and services under federal contracts .

section 862 stipulated uniform contract writing system requirements .

