questions about the scope and efficacy of the background checks required during certain firearm purchases have gained prominence following recent mass shootings .

these background checks are intended to identify whether potential purchasers are prohibited from purchasing or possessing firearms due to one or more "prohibiting factors," such as a prior felony conviction or a prior involuntary commitment for mental health reasons .

if disqualifying information surfaces during the background check , the transfer is not completed .

operationally , such background checks primarily use information contained within the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) , maintained by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and a particular focus of the debate in congress has been whether the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) privacy rule or state privacy laws are an obstacle to the population of nics with prohibiting mental health records .

on january 7 , 2014 , the department of justice ( doj ) issued a proposed rule that would clarify the existing regulations related to those who would qualify as "adjudicated as a mental defective" and who have been "committed to a mental institution" for purposes of the gun control act of 1968 .

at the same time , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) issued a proposed rule that would clarify when entities that are regulated under hipaa may share certain information with nics .

this report provides an overview of prohibiting mental health records under current federal law , and distinguishes those records from other types of mental health information that would not disqualify an individual from purchasing a firearm .

this report also provides an overview of nics and discusses potential issues arising from state and federal medical privacy laws that may impede states' efforts to submit prohibiting mental health records to nics .

under the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) , as amended , certain categories of persons are prohibited from possessing , shipping , transporting , and receiving firearms and ammunition .

these nine categories of persons who are prohibited include 1. persons convicted of a crime punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year ; 2. fugitives from justice ; 3. individuals who are unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance ; 4. persons adjudicated to be mentally defective , or who have been committed to a mental institution ; 5. aliens illegally or unlawfully in the united states , as well as those who have been admitted pursuant to a nonimmigrant visa ; 6. individuals who have been discharged dishonorably from the armed forces ; 7. persons who have renounced united states citizenship ; 8. individuals subject to a pertinent court order ; and 9. persons who have been convicted of a misdemeanor domestic violence offense .

of these categories , only the fourth is primarily concerned with mental health issues .

the sections below provide a more detailed discussion of the scope of this category's two sub - components: adjudication as a mental defective and commitment to a mental institution .

under the brady handgun violence prevention act of 1993 ( brady act ) , the attorney general was required to establish a computerized system to facilitate background checks on individuals seeking to acquire firearms from federally licensed firearms dealers .

the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) was activated in 1998 and is administered by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

through nics , federal firearms licensees submit background checks on prospective transferees to the fbi , which queries other databases — including the national crime information center ( ncic ) , the interstate identification index ( iii ) , and the nics index — to determine if the transferees are disqualified from receiving firearms .

according to the fbi , records in the nics index are voluntarily provided by local , state , tribal , and federal agencies , and it "contains [disqualifying records] that may not be available in the ncic or the iii of persons prohibited from receiving firearms under federal or state law. .

the brady act also authorized the attorney general to "secure directly from any [federal] department or agency of the united states" information on persons for whom receipt of a firearm would violate federal or state law .

the act does not mandate that federal agencies disclose these records , rather it mandates that "upon request of the attorney general , the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the system. .

with respect to states , which are not required to submit records to nics , the brady act provided grants to "improv[e] state record systems and the sharing ... of the records ... required by the attorney general under [the brady act]. .

however , it did not mandate that states turn over any specific records , even upon request .

officials in approximately half of the states told maig that state health privacy laws as well as the privacy rule promulgated by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) under the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) were potential obstacles to nics reporting .

in some states , officials cited privacy concerns as the primary impediment to reporting .

during the past few years , questions have arisen with respect to the efficacy of the federal background check that is required for certain firearm transfers .

of particular congressional focus is whether enough records of individuals who are prohibited by federal law from firearm possession because they have been "adjudicated as a mental defective" are being shared with nics , the system through which background checks are generally conducted .

in particular , the question has become whether the hipaa privacy rule or state privacy laws are an obstacle to the population of nics with prohibiting mental health records .

although the hipaa privacy rule currently allows disclosure of information where state law expressly requires disclosure of records to nics , some state officials have reported that they view state health privacy laws and the hipaa privacy rule as potential obstacles to nics reporting .

in response to these concerns , hhs proposed a rule that would modify the hipaa privacy rule "to expressly permit [but not require] certain hipaa covered entities to disclose" to nics the identities of individuals who are subject to the mental health disqualification under federal firearms law .

interestingly , hhs seeks comments from states on whether its proposed rule should also permit hipaa - covered entities to share records with nics regarding individuals who are prohibited from firearm possession due to mental health reasons under state firearms laws , the coverage of which may be broader than the federal mental health prohibitor .

another question long unaddressed and unclear to states is whether the term "committed to a mental institution" includes individuals who are ordered by a court , board , or other lawful authority to receive outpatient treatment .

to clarify this , doj also has proposed a rule that would clarify that the term includes both mandatory inpatient and outpatient commitments .

due to the perceived barriers under the hipaa privacy rule , as well as uncertainties in the relevant federal definitions , states have been reluctant to share relevant mental health records with nics .

with clarifications in these areas under way , states could ultimately turn over more relevant records to nics , though some may still be hindered by deficiencies in their technological capacity to share such records with nics .

