the small business administration ( sba ) administers several programs to support small businesses , including the 7 ( a ) , 504 / cdc , and microloan lending programs to enhance small business access to capital ; the small business investment company ( sbic ) program to enhance small business access to venture capital ; contracting programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting ; direct loan programs for businesses , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters ; and small business management and technical assistance training programs to assist business formation and expansion .

congressional interest in these programs , and the sba's assistance to small business startups in particular ( defined as new businesses that meet the sba's criteria as small ) , has increased in recent years , primarily because these programs are viewed by many as a means to stimulate economic activity and create jobs .

the small business act specifies four missions for the sba: it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small - business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

as part of its mission to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation , the sba has always been interested in promoting job creation and job retention .

for example , the sba currently gathers data from its clients concerning the number of jobs either created or retained as a result of the assistance they receive from the sba .

the sba refers to these self - reported data as the number of "jobs supported. .

the sba also regularly sponsors research on the role of small businesses in job creation and retention , and considers that research when designing its programs .

economists generally do not view job creation as a justification for providing federal assistance to small businesses .

they argue that in the long term such assistance will likely reallocate jobs within the economy , not increase them .

in their view , jobs arise primarily from the size of the labor force , which depends largely on population , demographics , and factors that affect the choice of home versus market production ( eg , the entry of women in the workforce ) .

however , economic research does suggest that increased federal spending on small business assistance programs may result in additional jobs in the short term .

the sba's interest , and congressional interest , in providing assistance to small business startups is derived primarily from economic research indicating that startups play an important role in job creation .

that research suggests that startups create many , and in some years almost all , net jobs in the national economy .

although there is a consensus that startups have an important role in job creation and retention , economic research suggests that startups have a more limited effect on net job creation over time because fewer than half of all startups are still in business after five years .

that research also suggests that the influence of startups on net job creation varies by firm size .

startups with fewer than 20 employees tend to have a negligible effect on net job creation over time whereas startups with 20-499 employees tend to have a positive employment effect , as do surviving younger businesses of all sizes ( in operation for one year to five years ) .

given the relatively high rate of firm deaths among startups , providing sba assistance to startups , especially in the form of a sba guaranteed loan or venture capital investment , is generally viewed as a relatively "high risk - high reward" endeavor , with advocates focusing on the possibility of job creation and opponents focusing on the risk of default .

for example , opponents point to the sba's experiences with its sbic participating securities program as an example of the risk in providing venture capital to startups .

the sbic participating securities program was established in 1994 , with congressional authorization , to encourage the formation of participating securities sbics that would make equity investments in startup and early stage small businesses .

the sba created the program to fill a perceived investment gap created by the sbic debenture program's focus on investments in mid - and later - stage small businesses .

the sba stopped issuing new commitments for participation securities on october 1 , 2004 , following relatively major losses ( exceeding $2.7 billion in losses on investments of just over $6.0 billion ) in the program following the burst of the "technology stock market bubble" from 2000 to 2002 .

the sba's action began a process to end the program , which continues today .

this report examines startups' experiences with the sba's management and technical assistance training programs , focusing on small business development centers ( sbdcs ) ; women business centers ( wbcs ) ; score ( formerly the service corps of retired executives ) ; the sba's 7 ( a ) , 504 / cdc , and microloan lending programs ; and the sba's sbic venture capital program .

the sba's growth accelerators initiative , which targets entrepreneurs looking to "start and scale their business" by helping them access "seed capital , mentors , and networking opportunities for customers and partners," and the recently sunset sbic early stage debenture program , which focused on providing venture capital to startups , are also discussed .

with some notable exceptions , such as the microloan lending program and sba's growth accelerators initiative , these programs are designed to assist small businesses at all developmental stages , as opposed to targeting startups for special attention .

nonetheless , all of these programs provide assistance to startups , and report both outcome data ( eg , the number of small businesses receiving training and the number and amount of loans and venture capital provided ) and performance data ( eg , the usefulness of the training and the number of jobs supported by the loan ) based on the age of the business .

as a result , the experiences of startups can be compared with the experiences of older firms both within and across the sba's programs .

for example , as will be shown , the sba programs that specifically target startups for special attention provide a relatively larger share of its assistance to startups than other sba programs .

although the data collected by the sba concerning these programs' impact on economic activity and job creation are somewhat limited and subject to methodological challenges concerning their validity as reliable performance measures , most small business owners who have participated in these programs report in surveys sponsored by the sba that the programs were useful .

given the data limitations , however , it is difficult to determine the cost effectiveness of these programs .

the sba has provided management and technical assistance training "to small - business concerns , by advising and counseling on matters in connection with government procurement and on policies , principles and practices of good management" since it began operations in 1953 .

initially , the sba provided its own management and technical assistance training programs .

over time , the sba has relied increasingly on third parties to provide that training .

the sba reports that more than 1.5 million aspiring entrepreneurs and small business owners receive training from an sba - supported resource partner each year .

the sba has argued that its support of management and technical assistance training for small businesses has contributed "to the long - term success of these businesses and their ability to grow and create jobs. .

it currently provides financial support to about "14,000 resource partners," including 63 lead sbdcs and nearly 1,000 sbdc local outreach locations , 116 wbcs , and over 300 chapters of the mentoring program , score .

the sbdc , wbc , and score programs are the sba's three largest management and technical assistance training programs .

these programs provide training assistance to small businesses at all stages of development , and do not target their assistance exclusively at startups .

all three of these programs provide assistance to small businesses , as defined by the sba's size standards and regulations .

however , there are some differences in the small businesses that tend to seek their services .

for example , businesses owned by sbdc clients tend to be somewhat larger , both in terms of annual revenue and employment , than those owned by score and wbc clients .

also , as expected given their mission , wbcs' clients are more likely to be female than sbdc and score clients .

the sba's business lending programs are designed to encourage lenders to provide loans to small businesses "that might not otherwise obtain financing on reasonable terms and conditions. .

historically , the sba's lending programs have been justified on the grounds that small businesses can be at a disadvantage , compared with other businesses , when trying to obtain access to sufficient capital and credit .

as an economist explained , growing firms need resources , but many small firms may have a hard time obtaining loans because they are young and have little credit history .

lenders may also be reluctant to lend to small firms with innovative products because it might be difficult to collect enough reliable information to correctly estimate the risk for such products .

if it's true that the lending process leaves worthy projects unfunded , some suggest that it would be good to fix this "market failure" with government programs aimed at improving small businesses' access to credit .

in fy2018 , the sba enhanced small business access to capital by approving about $30.2 billion in loans to small businesses .

the sba's two largest loan guaranty programs are the 7 ( a ) loan guaranty program ( nearly $25.4 billion approved in fy2018 ) and the 504 / cdc loan guaranty program ( nearly $4.8 billion approved in fy2018 ) .

in addition , the sba's microloan program , which includes startups among its targeted audiences , provides direct loans to 144 active nonprofit intermediary microloan lenders to provide "microloans" of up to $50,000 to small business owners , entrepreneurs , and nonprofit child care centers .

the microloan program provided $76.8 million in loans to small businesses in fy2018 .

the sba has two venture capital programs .

the sbic program , authorized by p.l .

85-699 , the small business investment act of 1958 , as amended , is the sba's flagship venture capital program .

it is designed to "improve and stimulate the national economy in general and the small business segment thereof in particular" by stimulating and supplementing "the flow of private equity capital and long - term loan funds which small business concerns need for the sound financing of their business operations and for their growth , expansion , and modernization , and which are not available in adequate supply. .

the sba also sponsors the much smaller new markets venture capital program , which is not discussed here given its relatively small size ( $1.65 million in financing to four small businesses in fy2015 , and no new financing since then ) .

it is designed to promote economic development and the creation of wealth and job opportunities in low - income geographic areas by addressing the unmet equity investment needs of small businesses located in those areas .

the sba has indicated , from the very start of the agency , that assisting small businesses to create and retain jobs is part of its mission .

however , the sba also has a long - established tradition of providing assistance to all qualifying small businesses .

with some exceptions , the sba has generally not taken actions or requested authorization to focus its assistance solely onto those businesses , such as startups , that are judged to be the ones most likely to contribute to job growth or wealth creation .

the tradition of providing sba assistance to all qualified small businesses without regard to their potential for job growth or wealth creation is perhaps understandable given that the tradition aligns with one of the sba's primary missions , which is to promote free markets — by limiting monopoly and oligarchy formation within all industries .

in addition , the tradition of providing assistance to all qualified small businesses has , for the most part , never been challenged by congress or interested small business organizations .

the sba's recent initiatives to focus increased attention to assisting startups ( eg , the growth accelerators initiative and the recently sunset early stage debenture sbic initiative ) are less of a challenge to the sba's tradition of assisting all qualified small businesses than a recognition of the potential role of startups in job creation and concerns about the pace of job growth during the current economic recovery .

for example , the sba has offered the initiatives as supplements to , rather than replacements of , existing programs .

as mentioned previously , the relatively "high risk - high reward" of targeting sba assistance to startups makes it tempting for some and controversial for others .

most who have participated in these programs report in surveys sponsored by the sba that the programs were useful .

however , determining if the risk of financial losses associated with targeting sba assistance to startups outweighs the startups' potential for job growth is difficult because the data collected by the sba concerning these programs' impact on economic activity and job creation are somewhat limited and subject to methodological challenges concerning their validity as reliable performance measures .

