w ildfire ( or wildland fire ) , an unplanned and unwanted fire , can have beneficial and harmful impacts on human , historical , cultural , and ecological resources .

wildfires can damage timber resources and soils and degrade water quality and watershed functions .

wildfires can also damage communities , destroy homes , and lead to loss of human life .

in addition , wildfire can reduce fuel loads , increase ecosystem health and functioning , and restore fire - adapted ecosystems .

in 2015 , more than 68,000 wildfires burned approximately 10.1 million acres , 7.4 million of which were federal lands .

this figure was the largest acreage burned on record and is larger than the acreage burned in the previous two years combined ( 4.3 million acres in 2013 and 3.6 million acres in 2014 ) .

although acreage burned is one indicator of the annual level of wildfire activity , it may also be misleading , since many of these fires may have occurred in areas that are large and relatively undeveloped , with very little impact on human development or communities .

acreage burned also does not indicate the severity of the wildfire or the degree of damage caused to the ecosystem .

thus , other indicators of wildfire activity should also be considered in conjunction with acreage burned , such as the severity of each wildfire or the cumulative number of severe wildfires in a year .

in 2015 , 1.5% ( 1,052 ) of the wildfires were classified as large or significant wildfires .

another statistic used to examine annual wildfire severity is the number of days spent at the highest national preparedness levels .

the national fire preparedness levels ( pls ) are indicative of the level of nationwide mobilization of resources , with higher numbers indicating higher levels of response .

for the six - year period of 2009 through 2014 , the pl was at the highest level ( pl5 ) for a total of 7 days ; in 2015 , the pl was at pl5 for 24 days .

wildfires can have a devastating impact on those communities adjacent to or within wildfire activity .

data reflecting the level of destruction caused by a wildfire can be useful but are not consistently collected on a nationwide scale .

in 2015 , 4,636 structures were destroyed by wildfires .

wildfires also pose safety risks ; in 2015 , 13 firefighter fatalities were reported .

wildfire management is a series of coordinated activities undertaken by federal , state , and local authorities to prepare for , resolve , and recover from wildfire events .

resolution of an active wildfire may involve immediate and aggressive measures to suppress a wildfire ( eg , personnel and large air tanker response for a wildfire moving quickly toward a populated area ) , or it may involve immediate but less intense measures ( eg , monitoring a grassland wildfire where there is no immediate threat to humans ) .

wildfire management activities are generally categorized as fuel reduction , preparedness , suppression , or site rehabilitation .

fuel reduction is manipulation ( including combustion ) or removal of fuels to reduce the likelihood of ignition and / or to lessen potential damage and resistance to control .

preparedness is any activity that leads to safe , efficient , and cost - effective fire management .

preparedness includes the range of tasks necessary to build , sustain , and improve the capability to protect against , respond to , and recover from incidents .

suppression is the work associated with extinguishing or confining a fire .

site rehabilitation includes efforts undertaken , generally within three years of a wildfire , to repair or improve fire - damaged lands unlikely to recover to a management - approved condition within a specified time frame or actions taken to repair or replace minor facilities damaged by fire .

a number of federal , state , and local agencies can and do respond to wildfires .

states are responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on nonfederal ( state , local , and private ) lands , except for lands protected by the federal agencies under cooperative agreements .

the federal government is responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on federal lands .

the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service ( fs ) carries out wildfire response and management across the 193 million acres of national forests and national grasslands .

the department of the interior ( doi ) carries out wildfire management and response for more than 400 million acres of national parks , wildlife refuges and preserves , indian reservations , and other public lands .

sometimes more than one agency may respond , depending on where the fire occurs , the potential threats , and the expertise required .

in these cases , the national interagency fire center ( nifc ) coordinates the national mobilization of resources for wildfire and other incidents throughout the united states .

both doi and fs receive annual discretionary appropriations for wildfire management activities through the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bills .

wildfire management funding for doi is provided to the office of wildland fire , which then allocates the funding to four doi agencies — bureau of land management ( blm ) , bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) , national park service ( nps ) , and the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) .

congress also provides funding for wildfire - related activities through the federal emergency management agency , such as emergency financial assistance for some nonfederal wildfires through fire management assistance grants and the disaster relief fund ; those funds and activities are discussed in other crs products .

doi and fs each have two accounts for wildfire: a wildland fire management ( wfm ) account and a federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act ( flame ) account .

flame is a reserve fund for wildfire suppression that requires certain conditions be met to transfer funding from flame to the wfm account .

the wfm appropriation is distributed among two programs: f ire o perations and o ther f ire o perations .

the f ire o perations program receives the bulk of the wfm appropriation and funds two activities: preparedness and suppression .

appropriations for preparedness are used to support efforts that assist with fire prevention and detection , equipment , training , and baseline personnel .

suppression appropriations are used primarily for wildfire response .

the o ther f ire o perations program funds hazardous fuels reduction activities , such as restoring forest vegetation type and structure to improve a forest's resilience and resistance to catastrophic wildfires .

the other fire operations program also funds joint fire research and science programs ( eg , nifc operations ) and programs to provide financial and technical assistance for state and volunteer wildfire management .

table 1 contains annual total wildfire management appropriations from fy2007 to fy2016 .

appropriations for preparedness , suppression , hazardous fuels reduction , flame , and additional suppression appropriations are discussed in more detail below .

wildfire management appropriations began to increase in the late 1990s and increased significantly after fy2000 , partly in response to the severe 2000 fire season ( figure 1 ) .

as measured in constant 2015 dollars , wildfire appropriations have varied between $3.8 billion in fy2001 and nearly $5.0 billion in fy2008 and in fy2016 ( to date ) .

from fy2007 to fy2016 , combined fs and doi wildfire management appropriations have averaged $3.8 billion .

the majority of wildfire management appropriations go to fs .

from fy2007 to fy2016 , fs received on average 76% of the total wildfire management appropriations and doi received 24% .

in addition , fs wildfire management appropriations constitute a large portion of total fs discretionary funding .

for example , in fy2016 , fs wildfire management appropriations are approximately 61% of the agency's discretionary funds , although not all of those funds counted against discretionary spending limits .

figure 2 reflects the proportion of fs discretionary funding between wildfire and non - wildfire activities over the past 10 years .

the administration requested a total of $4.4 billion for wildfire management for fy2017 ( $3.3 billion for fs and $1.1 billion for doi ) .

this figure is a decrease of $472.9 million from the fy2016 enacted level of $4.9 billion ( see table 3 ) , which included a $700.0 million supplemental appropriation .

the administration proposed a new funding mechanism for wildfire suppression activities , which includes eliminating the flame reserve account and providing a portion of the suppression appropriation outside discretionary spending limits .

on july 14 , 2016 , the house passed h.r .

5538 , the fy2017 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act .

h.r .

5538 would provide a total of $3.9 billion for wildfire management for fy2017 ( $3.0 billion for fs and $0.9 billion for doi ) , $505.5 million below the requested amount .

this appropriation would fully fund the 10-year suppression obligation average , provide additional funds for hazardous fuel management , and include $407.0 million for both flame accounts .

h.r .

5538 would not adopt the administration's proposal to eliminate the flame account or provide a budgetary adjustment mechanism to fund a portion of the wildfire suppression appropriation .

the house committee on appropriations supports such a proposal but declines to make a recommendation in regard to the budgetary adjustment mechanism , citing lack of jurisdiction .

the house bill would make the fs wfm appropriation available for three fiscal years ( through fy2019 ) .

previously , these appropriations were provided without a fiscal year limitation , meaning that any unobligated balance could carry over indefinitely .

on june 16 , 2016 , the senate committee on appropriations reported s. 3068 , the fy2017 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act .

s. 3068 would provide a total of $4.4 billion for wildland fire management for fy2017 ( $3.3 billion for fs and $1.1 billion for doi ) , $16.1 million above the requested amount , although $661.3 million would be designated as emergency spending for wildfire suppression purposes and not subject to certain discretionary spending limits .

the senate committee bill would not provide any appropriations to the flame reserve accounts and includes a recommendation and legislative language to adopt the framework of the administration's proposed new funding mechanism for wildfire suppression activities .

congress is debating several issues related to federal funding for wildfire management .

issues under debate include the level and direction of federal spending on wildfire management as well as the effectiveness of that spending ( eg , whether the funding is allowing agencies to meet wildfire management targets and the adequacy of those targets ) .

wildfire spending has more than tripled since the 1990s , increasing from $1.6 billion in fy1995 in constant dollars to $4.9 billion in fy2016 .

a significant portion of that increase is related to rising suppression costs , even during years of relatively mild wildfire activity , although the costs vary and are difficult to predict in advance .

congress also is debating the level of appropriations dedicated for certain wildfire management activities , such as whether the rising cost of suppression should come at the expense of funding other activities or whether investing more funds in hazardous fuel reduction activities now may help reduce wildfire costs in the future .

when wildfire suppression funding is exhausted during a fiscal year with severe fire activity , the agencies may have to transfer funds from non - wildfire management suppression accounts , which may impact the performance of those activities .

congress then faces a decision as to whether to reimburse the accounts from which funding was transferred or to otherwise provide supplemental appropriations , sometimes outside of its regular budget .

if a reimbursement decision is made after the end of the fiscal year in which transfers were made , the decision may disrupt the regular budget cycle and complicate discussions about how much suppression funding is needed for coming fiscal years during the appropriations process .

congress has provided funding for wildfire management in addition to what was provided in the interior appropriations bill — usually for wildfire suppression — for 6 of the last 10 years , including fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2016 .

this fact may lead to questions regarding the structure of wildfire funding and wildfire suppression funding estimation methods , among other things .

wildfire suppression funding estimates depend on multiple factors ( eg , weather , fuel load , nearby dwellings , access to wildfire site ) , and numerous reasons have been given as to why suppression estimates have at times not accurately forecast suppression expenses , with estimates typically underestimating suppression spending .

wildfire suppression is complicated , and both the efficiency of resources used for wildfire suppression and the federal protocol for wildfire management have an impact on wildfire suppression costs .

analyzing trends in wildfire management could provide insights useful for congress during these debates .

however , analyzing wildfire funding trends over time — particularly prior to fy2001 — is challenging for many reasons .

the agencies' account structures have changed over time , with different activities funded through different programs .

additional accounts and programs have been created .

for example , the flame account was established in fy2010 , with appropriations that previously had gone entirely to wfm suppression then being allocated between two different accounts .

a further complication is that costs for one wildfire season ( using a calendar year ) often are covered by appropriations for two fiscal years , and sometimes appropriations are enacted in one fiscal year to cover costs incurred in previous fiscal years .

