since 2007 , violence perpetrated by warring criminal groups has wreaked havoc on mexico , partially as a result of the weakness of the justice sector institutions responsible for combating them .

ineffective and often corrupt police forces , weak and unaccountable prosecutors , and an overcrowded and disorganized prison system have undermined anticrime efforts .

recent spikes in violence and criminality have overwhelmed mexico's justice sector institutions , with record numbers of arrests rarely resulting in convictions .

on average , fewer than 20% of homicides have been successfully prosecuted with convictions , suggesting high levels of impunity .

over the last five years , congress has devoted considerable resources — close to $2 billion — and oversight attention to supporting mexico's efforts to address a security crisis that has been fueled in part by u.s. drug demand and illicit southbound flows of weapons and money .

u.s. assistance under the mérida initiative has increasingly focused on supporting mexico's efforts to reform its justice sector institutions in order to reduce corruption and impunity .

judicial reform is one part of that effort .

policy analysts contend that until mexico's judicial system is able to prosecute and punish crime , the effects of law enforcement efforts against criminal groups will be limited .

the u.s. government is providing significant support for judicial reform efforts in mexico at a time when those reforms are at a critical juncture .

progress has moved forward in many states , but is stalled at the federal level .

without political will and investment from the new enrique peña nieto administration , both the federal government and the states may not meet the 2016 constitutional deadline for implementing judicial reforms enacted in 2008 .

should the reforms move forward , the u.s. congress may consider how best to support them .

should the reforms falter , congress may question the value of continuing u.s. assistance for judicial reform .

since the 1980s , congress has provided significant funding for judicial reform projects in latin america , with mexico being one of the last countries to seek u.s. assistance .

mexico's federal structure makes its transition from an inquisitorial to an accusatorial system more complicated than in other countries where the united states has previously supported reform efforts .

some view mexico's federalism as an advantage , however , as states can serve as incubators for reform , with successful experiences in certain states serving as models for others to follow .

mexico's middle income status also means that it is better equipped to scale up u.s. - funded efforts than other countries in latin america should it choose to make judicial reform a top priority .

although usaid has been providing judicial reform assistance to mexico since the late 1990s , u.s. support for judicial reform has increased significantly as a result of the mérida initiative , a bilateral security effort for which congress appropriated $1.9 billion from fy2008-fy2012 .

the strategy behind the mérida initiative has evolved over time .

that initial strategy was designed in response to the calderón administration's request for specific forms of u.s. equipment , training , and technical assistance to help mexico combat drug trafficking and organized crime .

in 2009 , u.s. and mexican officials began to revise the strategic framework underpinning bilateral efforts in order to seek to address some of the deeper causes of criminality in the country — institutional weakness , corruption , and a weak social fabric .

the mérida strategy now focuses on four pillars: ( 1 ) disrupting organized criminal groups ; ( 2 ) institutionalizing the rule of law ; ( 3 ) building a 21 st century border ; and ( 4 ) building strong and resilient communities .

funding for "institutionalizing the rule of law" ( pillar two ) now dwarfs other types of u.s. assistance provided to mexico under the mérida initiative .

nevertheless , while spending plans state that $590.5 million of the $1.9 billion in mérida funding appropriated from fy2008-fy2012 went to support the purchase of aircraft and helicopters for security forces , it is difficult to parcel out how much of the $1.9 billion in aid has gone to support judicial reform .

according to the state department , total deliveries under pillar two of the mérida strategy ( which includes support for judicial reform ) stood at $146.2 million as of november 2012 .

that total does not include the $104 million in mérida pillar two aid that usaid is administering ( discussed below ) .

ensuring that u.s. agencies are supporting judicial reform as part of broader justice sector reform efforts in mexico has been a priority for congressional appropriators .

in the first appropriation for the mérida initiative , for example , congress earmarked funding to support mexico's transition from an inquisitorial justice system to an accusatory system .

congress has since increased funding for rule of law programs ; asked the state department to report on how u.s. programs are helping to achieve judicial and police reform in mexico ( h.rept .

112-331 ) , and expressed support for future rule of law funding .

congress has also conditioned mérida assistance to the police and military on ensuring that the mexican government is enforcing prohibitions against using evidence obtained through torture that were codified in mexico's 2008 judicial reforms .

u.s. rule of law programming is now focusing on supporting mexico's transition to an oral , accusatorial justice system and helping mexico address institutional weaknesses in its justice sector institutions .

u.s. assistance is geared toward: 1 ) helping the federal and state governments adopt legislative frameworks to underpin the reform process ; 2 ) providing in - depth training for justice sector operators on their roles in the new system at all levels of government ; 3 ) building support for the reforms in mexican civil society ; and 4 ) addressing institutional and operational problems at all levels of government that may not directly relate to the reform process .

it is also focusing on improving the analytic and quality control capacity of justice sector institutions and on expanding access to justice and victims' assistance .

since high turnover rates of personnel in justice sector institutions has limited the effectiveness of past u.s. training programs , future assistance may focus on helping institutions change their incentive structures , policies , and cultures so that the reforms can be sustained .

the three main implementing agencies for the u.s. rule of law programs in mexico are the state department , the department of justice ( doj ) , and usaid .

the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) is the lead funder and coordinator of rule of law programs .

inl also implements law enforcement reform ( police , forensics , and prisons ) and anti - corruption efforts ( helping institutions install better vetting and internal controls ) , while doj and usaid have been the lead implementers for justice reform .

u.s. law enforcement training and equipment efforts initially focused largely on the federal police , but then expanded to support the attorney general's police force and state - level academies in chihuahua , nuevo león , puebla , and sonora .

state department funding has helped provide training and equipment to build the forensic capacities of the federal police and the attorney general's office and to expand and improve the country's federal penitentiaries .

the state department is training mexican federal and state police for the new investigatory roles they will be called upon to play in the ncjs .

anti - corruption efforts have spanned the full range of mexican law enforcement and judicial institutions .

doj is administering some $46 million in state department funding .

doj has supported justice reform at the federal level , including the adoption of a federal criminal procedure code .

in 2012 , doj worked with the pgr to design and implement a national training program known as project diamante through which prosecutors , investigators , and forensic experts were trained to work as a team rather than in isolation ( as was customary ) .

upon completion of phase i , in august 2012 , 7,700 pgr prosecutors , investigators and forensic experts had been trained to work together to manage cases in the current inquisitorial system as well as together to function once mexico transitions to an accusatorial system .

project diamante also established a cadre of over 200 instructors capable of replicating this and other training to new pgr personnel .

until recently , u.s. assistance did not provide significant training and assistance for judges , a key constituency that must be convinced about the value of the reforms .

doj has recently established the judicial studies training institute , a training program in puerto rico for mexican federal judges .

the nine - day training program focuses on building practical experience in the accusatory system with the goal of educating judges about the advantages that it provides .

the future of doj programming in mexico may depend upon the extent to which mexico's attorney general jesús murillo karam embraces the diamante model that began late in the calderón administration .

some states have reportedly expressed an interest in doj replicating the training they provided to federal officials at the state level , but it remains to be seen whether that will take place .

training for federal judges could also potentially be increased .

usaid has concentrated most of its work in support of justice reform at the state level , but also sought to strengthen the capacity of setec , the federal entity coordinating the federal and state reform efforts , and províctima , the federal entity providing victims' assistance services under the ncjs .

usaid had been supporting code reform , judicial exchanges , alternative dispute resolution , and citizen's participation councils , as well as training justice sector operators in five mexican states since 2004 .

usaid has helped law enforcement and attorney generals in those states form partnerships with their u.s. counterparts that have involved training and mentoring .

usaid expanded its rule of law efforts with roughly $104 million in fy2008-fy2012 mérida assistance , a significant portion of which is supporting comprehensive judicial reform programs in seven of mexico's 32 states .

usaid has provided more limited help with drafting legislation and implementing policy changes in four additional states .

usaid has also provided support to the american bar association to help mexican law schools and bar associations change their curriculums and professional standards to reflect the new system .

usaid appears to be trying to strike a balance between providing enough assistance to certain key states to demonstrate the merits of the ncjs and providing more limited assistance to a larger number of states to help mexico reach its 2016 implementation targets .

although some have urged usaid to continue concentrating its efforts in key states , the agency is in the process of expanding its programs and activities into no less than 20 states .

this state - level work will be accompanied by continued technical assistance to setec and províctima , as well as increased support for civil society organizations .

mexico enacted historic judicial reforms in 2008 that have the potential to dramatically revamp the country's criminal justice system .

whether or not those reforms are fully implemented is ultimately up to the mexican government and mexican society as a whole to decide .

the depth and breadth of u.s. assistance provided for judicial reform will in part depend upon whether the peña nieto government makes judicial reform a priority .

should mexico make judicial reform more of a priority , as security experts have long recommended , u.s. technical assistance and training could play a significant role in supporting the reform process .

during his confirmation hearing , secretary of state john kerry vowed to try to protect u.s. assistance under the mérida initiative from budget cuts , including support for judicial reform .

however , if mexico does not prioritize the judicial reforms , congress may question whether funding for such programs in mexico should be discontinued , scaled back , or made contingent upon the federal and state governments demonstrating political will to implement the reforms .

should the reforms continue to move forward , congressional funding and oversight of judicial reform programs in mexico could continue for a number of years .

as congress considers president obama's fy2014 budget request for mexico , it may question how funding for judicial reform in particular , and justice sector reform more broadly , fits into bilateral security priorities , including efforts to combat criminal groups and punish corruption .

is the new criminal justice system more effective than the old system at convicting dto leaders and corrupt politicians ? .

have any emblematic cases been resolved that might help improve mexicans' perception of their criminal justice system and its capacity to deter and sanction crime ? .

when faced with funding decisions , congress may seek to balance the need to ensure that u.s. funds are provided in a way that is flexible enough to respond to changing events in mexico , while also retaining adequate control over the way those funds are being spent .

congress may also consider weighing in on how implementing agencies divide the assistance provided for judicial reform between the federal and state level reform efforts .

finally , congress may examine the extent to which u.s. agencies are balancing "top down" support for government entities engaged in the reform process with "bottom up" support to civil society groups .

many argue that the award - winning documentary film , presumed guilty , which was theatrically released in 2011 , did more to galvanize support for the reforms than any government - sponsored efforts .

the state department used roughly $100,000 in international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) funding to help promote the film in mexico .

another area that could be expanded is u.s. support for culture of lawfulness programs that seek to educate all sectors of mexican society on the importance of upholding the rule of law .

congress has closely monitored human rights conditions in mexico and compliance with human rights conditions on mérida assistance .

congress has an oversight interest in ensuring that , as implemented , the new criminal justice system is strengthening human rights protections .

some have urged congress to make future conditions more specific by , for example , conditioning aid on whether mexico is videotaping confessions and interviews with witnesses so as to prove that torture or other ill treatment is not occurring .

others have argued against changes to the conditions on u.s. assistance , preferring that the current conditions be more strictly enforced .

congress may also examine how best to ensure that u.s. implementing agencies correctly sequence and coordinate support to key actors within the criminal justice system ( police , prosecutors / defense attorneys , courts ) .

at the federal level , is the amount of assistance being provided to the pgr and the courts adequate when compared to the aid provided to the interior ministry ( which now includes the federal police and penitentiary system ) ? .

if one federal entity seeks u.s. cooperation more aggressively than another , should that entity receive more assistance ? .

at the state level , are usaid's judicial reform efforts being coordinated with the police assistance that the state department is providing ? .

are police in states that have adopted or are close to adopting the new criminal justice system being adequately trained to carry out investigations in support of the public prosecutor ? .

as foreign aid budgets tighten , congressional scrutiny of u.s. programs in mexico may intensify .

past reports by the government accountability office ( gao ) and the inspector general of usaid have criticized u.s. agencies for failing to develop "outcome" rather than "output" measures to gauge the efficacy of u.s. programs .

usaid has adjusted its indicators in response to those criticisms and the state department is in the process of establishing a metrics office in mexico city that will develop indicators for its rol programs .

the results of those efforts to improve metrics may prove useful for congressional appropriators as they oversee current programs and consider future support for judicial reform in mexico .

congress might also consider providing funding for more polling and surveys regarding attitudes toward the reforms , since this is an important means of evaluation and assessment of progress toward the reform .

in sum , policy experts continue to recommend that mexico hasten implementation of judicial reforms enacted in 2008 that are aimed at making its judicial system more transparent , efficient , and impartial .

implementing the reforms is a stated priority of both the mexican and u.s .

administrations .

nevertheless , nearly five years into the reform process , implementation has lagged at the federal level and faced significant challenges in states that have begun operating under the new system .

congress is likely to closely monitor the actions taken by the peña nieto government and state governments in mexico to advance the reform process as it oversees current u.s. justice sector programs and considers future support to mexico .

