human rights conditions in the people's republic of china ( prc ) remain a central issue in u.s. - china relations .

for many u.s. policy - makers , china's political development represents a test of the success of u.s. policy toward china .

some analysts contend that the u.s. policy of cultivating diplomatic , economic , and cultural ties with the prc has failed to produce meaningful political reforms , and that without fundamental progress in this area , the bilateral relationship will remain rocky .

they add that u.s. efforts to promote human rights and democracy in the prc are constrained by the overarching policy of u.s. engagement with china , which includes other u.s. interests and values .

the u.s. government has developed a comprehensive array of tactics and programs aimed at promoting democracy , human rights , and the rule of law in china , although their effects have been felt primarily along the margins of the prc political system .

other experts argue that u.s. engagement has helped to accelerate economic and social change and create the necessary conditions for political reform in china .

they hold that washington has little direct leverage over beijing's internal policies , and that sanctions and efforts to link the bilateral relationship to improvements in human rights in china have not been very effective .

many observers argue that violations of civil liberties and cases of political and religious persecution in china have increased in recent years , the leadership remains authoritarian , and economic development , based in part upon trade with the united states , has strengthened the communist government rather than empowered the people .

other analysts and many chinese citizens contend that , at the same time , economic and social freedoms have grown considerably , the government's control over most aspects of people's lives has receded , opportunities for providing opinions on policy have increased , and rights activism has sprouted .

disagreements over whether progress has been made often stem from differences over which indicators are emphasized , such as central government policies , local government actions , civil society , or short - term versus long - term trends .

in many ways , growing government restrictions on political , religious , and other freedoms and greater assertion of civil rights have occurred simultaneously .

a number of events of the past year indicate the evolving relationship between the prc state and a changing society .

as incidents of social protest have increased , the government has bolstered funding and staff for social control efforts .

in many cases of public protest against violations of economic rights , such as property and labor rights , the central government has attempted to strike a neutral or sympathetic tone , particularly when corrupt local officials were involved .

however , it has not directly addressed the concentrations of power that lie at the root of the problems .

although direct elections for village committees , instituted in the 1980s , sowed the seeds for a modicum of democratic decision - making in china , their progression to higher levels of government has stalled for over two decades .

recent efforts by citizens to rejuvenate the process illustrated how many chinese embrace the notion of grassroots democracy , and how wary the ccp is of losing political control .

the events surrounding blind legal advocate chen guangcheng in may 2012 showed how the prc government has attempted to silence outspoken rights advocates and dissidents , but also how activist networks have managed to survive in its shadow .

 ( for more on chen's case , see " chen guangcheng " below. ) .

finally , the tibetan immolations reflect beijing's hard line against some ethnic and religious groups , despite demonstrating some flexibility in other areas .

as discussed above , major , ongoing human rights violations in china include the following: excessive use of violence by security forces and their proxies ; unlawful and abusive detention ; torture ; arbitrary use of state security laws against political dissidents ; coercive family planning policies ; and state control of information .

other violations include harassment and persecution of people involved in unsanctioned religious activities , including worship in unregistered protestant "house churches" and catholic churches that express loyalty to the pope ; and mistreatment and deportation of north korean refugees .

the following list provides a selection of specific human rights issues in china , some of which are discussed at greater length elsewhere in this report: harassment , beatings by public security forces and plainclothes agents , house arrest , and unlawful detentions of petitioners , protest leaders , human rights attorneys , journalists , dissidents , and others .

unlawful killings of persons in state custody .

physical abuse and the use of torture by the state against political detainees and criminal suspects , often resulting in forced confessions or renunciations of faith .

arbitrary use of state security laws against political dissidents , tibetans , uighur muslims , internet bloggers , and others .

sporadic reports of coercive abortions , forced sterilizations , and other related , unlawful government actions against women .

strict controls over and punishments for public speech , discussion , and reporting of politically sensitive topics , such as the tiananmen events of 1989 , taiwan relations , tibet , falun gong , and the legitimacy of the chinese communist party .

harassment and arrests of christians worshipping in unofficial churches .

persecution of falun gong adherents .

repatriation of north korean nationals residing in china , who likely face severe forms of punishment after returning north korea , in violation of the u.n .

refugee convention and its protocols .

chinese non - state entities play a small but growing role in social welfare , policy - making , and political discourse , although many of them rely upon the state for their economic or political survival .

in 2012 , the prc government acknowledged the importance of civil society while attempting to harness its capabilities for its own ends , according to some observers .

some experts argue that this approach broadens the space for civil society while assuming a government role in shaping it .

an editorial in the official global times opined that civil society plays a significant role in addressing and diluting social conflicts .

another commentary upheld chinese ngos as important partners in the government's social management and "social innovation" efforts .

in other cases , civil society actors have pushed the boundaries of permissible social activity at great personal risk .

lawyers , journalists , and activists have been at the forefront in helping to protect and promote human rights and the public interest , although many of them have faced government harassment and deprivation of their freedoms .

china has the world's largest number of internet users , estimated at 564 million people , including an estimated 309 million people with accounts on twitter - like microblogging sites .

china also has one of the most thorough and aggressive internet censorship systems in the world .

human rights organizations report that 78 chinese citizens are serving prison sentences for writing about politically sensitive topics online and 32 journalists are serving jail terms .

the prc has among the lowest levels of internet and "new media" freedom in the world and is one of the lowest ranked countries for press freedom .

despite government efforts to limit the flow , chinese internet users are able to access unprecedented amounts of information .

the web has served as a lifeline for political dissidents , social activists , and civil society actors .

"netizens" have helped to curb some abuses of government authority and compelled some officials to conduct affairs more openly .

the web also has enabled the public to occasionally engage in civil discourse on a national level .

in the short space of three years , microblog sites ( weibo ) , similar to twitter , have become the most important source of news , "most prominent place for free speech," and the country's "most important public sphere. .

although twitter is blocked in china , many chinese , particularly those with international connections , find ways to access the service .

dissident artist ai weiwei continues to be an avid user of twitter , despite efforts by state authorities to silence him .

both weibo and twitter helped to keep chinese supporters and foreign reporters apprised of chen guangcheng's status during the diplomatic standoff over his fate .

the state has the capability to block news of events and to partially shut down the internet .

as noted above , in xinjiang , the government blocked the internet for 10 months following the ethnic unrest in 2009 .

nonetheless , politically sensitive news often gets disseminated , if only fleetingly , due to the sheer volume of information on the internet .

the prc government employs a variety of methods to control online content and expression .

these include website or ip address blocking and keyword filtering by routers at the country's eight internet "gateways," telecommunications company data centers , and internet portals ; regulating and monitoring internet service providers , internet cafes , and university bulletin board systems ; and occasional arrests of high - profile "cyber dissidents. .

to comply with government directives , large internet portals and blogging services are estimated to each employ hundreds of people to filter online discussion .

in may 2011 , the prc government created a new central body , the state internet information office , to better coordinate the myriad agencies that oversee the internet in china .

blocked websites , social networking sites , and file sharing sites include radio free asia , voice of america ( chinese language ) , international human rights websites , many taiwanese news sites , facebook , twitter , and youtube .

online english language news sites , including the voice of america , the new york times , and the washington post , are generally accessible or only occasionally or selectively censored .

commonly barred internet searches and microblog postings include those with direct and indirect or disguised references to tibet ; the tiananmen suppression of 1989 ; falun gong ; prc leaders and dissidents who have been involved in recent , politically sensitive events , scandals , or issues ; democracy ; highly charged foreign affairs issues ; and sexual material .

the government reportedly also has hired thousands of students and other internet commentators to express pro - government views on websites , bulletin boards , and chat rooms .

for chinese internet users in search of blocked information from outside the prc's internet gateways , or "great firewall," circumventing government controls ( also known as fanqiang or "scaling the wall" ) is made possible by downloading special software .

these methods mainly include proxy servers , which are free but somewhat cumbersome , and virtual private networks ( vpns ) , which are available at a cost ( roughly $40.00 ) , but also enable secure communication .

proxy servers and vpns enable some motivated internet users to avoid censorship , but impose just enough inconvenience to keep foreign information out of the reach of most chinese users .

the use of these tools is often tolerated by the government as long as it remains politically manageable , according to some observers .

in addition to the effectiveness of censorship , some studies show that the vast majority of internet users in china do not engage the medium for political purposes .

although a small community of dissidents and activists use the web to broach political topics , they reportedly make up a small minority — less than 10% of all users according to some estimates .

between 1% and 8% of web users in china access proxy servers and virtual private networks to get around government - erected internet firewalls to access censored content — both political and non - political .

moreover , many chinese reportedly accept the government's justification that it regulates the internet in order to control illegal , harmful , or dangerous online content , services , and activities , such as pornography , gambling , slander , cyberattacks , and social networking by criminal organizations .

since internet use became widespread in china in the mid - 2000s , the government and chinese netizens have engaged in a game of cat and mouse , with new communications technologies and services and novel censorship circumvention methods challenging the government's efforts to control the web , followed by crackdowns or new regulations , and then a repeat of the cycle .

in the latest round of the struggle , in december 2012 , the government enacted a new law requiring those who apply for an internet or mobile service account to use their real names .

related legislation calls for service providers to delete posts that are deemed illegal .

beijing reportedly also has increased interference with circumvention tools used by many web users to surmount the great firewall .

the new measures have raised anger and concern among both netizens and internet companies .

some internet users have proclaimed that the requirements reduce the space for free expression .

sina weibo , which offers a twitter - like microblogging service , reportedly has resisted past government pressures to register real names .

the company reportedly expressed alarm about the new laws , suggesting that they will result in service disruptions and the decline of its user base .

the government claims that these measures are part of its efforts to improve web security , including protecting internet users' personal information , reducing online rumors and harassment , preventing libel , cracking down on spam e - mail , and combating pornography .

an opinion piece published by the government news agency argued that the new laws would not restrict freedom of speech nor hamper the use of the internet to expose official corruption .

during the past several years , the prc government has enacted some laws aimed at reducing some of the most serious patterns of human rights abuse .

new measures designed to protect or promote human rights include those related to criminal defendants , the use of torture , organ transplants , the death penalty , labor conditions , and private property .

the lack of transparency , enforcement , and oversight mechanisms prevent many legal protections from having a significant impact .

however , the reforms may provide some basis for citizens to claim their rights under the law .

major laws related to rights protections include the following: criminal procedure law: amendments to the criminal procedure law , which went into effect in january 2013 , provide for greater protections against torture and coerced confessions , expanded access to legal defense , longer trial deliberations , mandatory appellate hearings , more rigorous judicial review , and greater government oversight of the legal process .

other changes in the law are designed to improve the treatment of juveniles , women , and people on death row .

however , the revised law also sanctions the use of "residential surveillance" or secret detention centers ( for up to six months ) for suspects in cases involving state security .

many analysts argue that this practice leaves detainees , particularly political dissidents , highly vulnerable to arbitrary treatment and abuse by security personnel .

organ transplants: in 2007 , the ministry of health implemented regulations requiring written consent from organ donors , banning the sale of human organs , restricting organ donors mainly to family members of those needing transplants , and limiting the number of hospitals performing transplants .

in 2011 , the prc criminal law was revised to include organ trafficking as a crime .

in 2012 , the government announced its intention to end the illegal trade in organs and to phase out the transplantation of organs from executed prisoners within five years .

these restrictions followed international criticism of an allegedly booming , unregulated international trade in organs of executed chinese prisoners .

the death penalty: the number of executions in china has declined , to around 3,000 per year , according to some estimates .

in 2010 , the national people's congress amended the criminal law to reduce the number of crimes punishable by death from 68 to 55 .

in may 2011 , the supreme people's court instructed lower courts to suspend death sentences for two years for "all cases that do not require immediate execution. .

state secrets law: in 2010 , the prc government amended the law on guarding state secrets .

the changes , while tightening government control over the internet , also reduced the scope of the law , clarified its terms , and promised greater transparency .

some observers hoped that the amendments would reduce the number of prosecutions of people accused of stealing or leaking state secrets .

however , according to most experts , the law remains vague and still can be used broadly against political dissidents and others .

state compensation law: in 2010 , the national people's congress approved amendments to the state compensation law , which would grant citizens greater powers to obtain compensation when the state is found to have violated their rights or acted negligently .

labor rights: the labor contract law of 2008 provided for greater protections of the rights of workers and stronger enforcement of regulations related to working conditions .

the law reportedly spurred a dramatic rise in labor dispute arbitration cases and strikes , and was a catalyst for the surge in labor unrest in 2010 .

property rights: in 2007 , the national people's congress passed a constitutional amendment designed to protect property rights that had been debated since 2002 .

the new property law aimed to protect private entrepreneurs , urban home owners , and farmers whose crop lands often risk seizure by government - backed real estate developers .

in 2008 , the government issued new measures allowing farmers to lease and sell rights to use the property allocated to them by the state .

government transparency: in 2007 , the prc government announced new rules requiring greater disclosure of official information .

in addition , institutional and legal mechanisms were established to provide for greater government responsiveness and accountability .

in part , these measures represented attempts to compel local governments to reveal financial accounts related to land takings in rural areas .

many experts and policy makers have sharply disagreed over the best policy approaches and methods to apply toward human rights issues in china .

differing u.s. goals include promoting fundamental political change in the prc and supporting incremental progress .

a perennial challenge is how to balance u.s. values against sometimes incompatible u.s. interests in the relationship .

possible approaches range from placing human rights conditions upon bilateral ties to inducing democratic change through bilateral and international engagement .

since the end of the 1980s , successive u.s. administrations have employed broadly similar strategies for promoting human rights in china .

some analysts have referred to the u.s. foreign policy approach of promoting democracy in china through diplomatic and economic engagement , without directly challenging communist party rule , as a strategy of "peaceful evolution. .

president bill clinton referred to this policy as "constructive engagement" — furthering diplomatic and economic ties while pressing for open markets and democracy , calling it "our best hope to secure our own interest and values and to advance china's. .

president george w. bush also came to view u.s. engagement as the most effective means of promoting u.s. interests and freedom in china .

as china's importance in global economic , security , environmental , and other matters has grown , the obama administration , like the bush administration , has attempted to forge bilateral cooperation on many fronts , while disagreeing with beijing on many human rights issues .

in his remarks during the summit with prc president hu jintao in january 2011 , president obama referred to the universality of the freedoms of speech , assembly , and religion , a point frequently made by president clinton .

echoing a theme evoked by george w. bush in his second term , obama also suggested that greater respect for human rights in china would benefit china's success and global stability .

the u.s. congress has been at the forefront of u.s. human rights policy toward china , through such measures and efforts as sanctions , resolutions , hearings , and foreign assistance in support of human rights and democracy in china and in tibetan areas of the prc .

congress imposed sanctions following the tiananmen military crackdown in 1989 and has withheld support for united nations population fund programs in china .

members of congress have introduced resolutions calling attention to human rights abuses in the prc , including the imprisonment and detention of political and religious figures ; persecution of tibetans , uighurs , and falun gong adherents ; censorship of the internet and other mass media ; coercive abortions ; and the deportation of north korean refugees .

foreign operations appropriations measures have authorized and funded democracy , human rights , rule of law , and internet freedom programs in china and economic , cultural , and environmental programs in tibet and tibetan areas .

in recent years , the following committees have held hearings related to human rights in china: the house committee on foreign affairs ; the africa , global health , global human rights , and international organizations and the asia and the pacific subcommittees of the house committee on foreign affairs ; and the subcommittee on immigration policy and enforcement of the house committee on the judiciary .

topics have included the congressional - executive commission on china annual report ; the china democracy promotion act ; the crackdown on dissent in 2011 ; the one - child policy ; internet censorship ; chinese rights defenders ; the repatriation of north korean refugees ; labor conditions ; and u.s. foreign assistance to china .

the cecc , the tom lantos human rights commission , the u.s. commission on international religious freedom , and other congressional and congressionally mandated bodies and fora have also investigated , publicized , and reported on human rights conditions in china .

many u.s. experts and policy makers have disagreed over the best methods to apply toward promoting democracy and human rights in china .

the u.s. government has often employed a range of means simultaneously .

policy tools include sanctions ; open criticism of prc human rights policies ; quiet diplomacy ; international pressure ; bilateral dialogue ; foreign assistance programs ; internet freedom efforts ; public diplomacy ; and support of dissident and pro - democracy groups in china and the united states .

many u.s. sanctions on the prc in response to the tiananmen military crackdown in 1989 remain in effect , including some foreign aid - related restrictions , such as required "no" votes or abstentions by u.s. representatives in international financial institutions on loans to china ( except those that meet basic human needs ) .

since 2004 , congress has required that u.s. representatives to international financial institutions support projects in tibet only if they do not encourage the migration and settlement of non - tibetans into tibet or the transfer of tibetan - owned properties to non - tibetans , which some policymakers fear may further erode tibetan culture and identity .

foreign operations appropriations measures have prohibited support to the united nations population fund from being used for programs in china .

some analysts argue that the u.s. government should take principled stands against china's human rights abuses more openly , forcefully , and frequently , while other experts believe that more overt efforts can undermine human rights objectives .

many prominent chinese dissidents have claimed that international pressure or attention protected them from harsher treatment by prc authorities .

other observers suggest that open criticism of prc human rights policies by the u.s. government can both hearten reform - minded chinese and provoke hardliners in the prc leadership or create greater suspicion of foreign influences and ties .

during the obama administration's first term , former secretary of state hillary clinton described the administration's human rights policy as one of "principled pragmatism. .

this notion is based upon the premise that tough but quiet diplomacy is both less disruptive to the overall relationship and more effective in producing change than public censure .

clinton's approach also may have played a role in the efforts by u.s. diplomats to secure the release of rights advocate chen guangcheng from chinese authorities so that he could study law in the united states , while simultaneously participating in the bilateral strategic and economic dialogue ( s&ed ) in may 2012 .

the obama administration has openly pressed china on human rights issues in a number of cases .

during his visit to china in november 2009 , president obama briefly spoke about human rights and internet freedom during a town hall meeting with university students in shanghai .

although the broadcast of the speech was limited to shanghai and transcripts on the internet were censored , thousands of chinese reportedly accessed the white house website and cheered obama's appeal for internet freedom .

former secretary clinton spoke out on human rights issues , including criticizing china's internet censorship and alleged hacking of u.s. companies in january 2010 , demanding nobel laureate liu xiaobo's release from prison in october 2010 , calling for the freedom of dissident artist ai weiwei in april 2011 , and discussing china's human rights record , calling it "deplorable," in a june 2011 interview .

vice - president joe biden , on a trip to china in 2011 to meet then - prc vice - president xi jinping , told his chinese hosts that "allowing for greater human rights would make china , like the u.s. , more stable and strong , rather than harming its economic progress. .

in may 2012 , at the conclusion of the s&ed in beijing , former secretary clinton spoke on several key bilateral issues , including cooperation on addressing international issues such as the north korean and iranian nuclear programs , the civil war in syria , and human rights in china .

she stated , "we raise specific matters of individuals and situations whenever necessary because we cannot ignore our areas of difference in the comprehensive relationship that we are building. .

prc state councilor dai bingguo responded that "no country can claim to be perfect," and that human rights should not be used as an "excuse to interfere in the internal affairs of countries. .

the united nations human rights council was formed in 2006 to replace the u.n. commission on human rights ( unchr ) , which had been faulted for being unduly influenced by non - democratic countries .

the united states had sponsored several resolutions at the unchr criticizing china's human rights record , but none were successful ; china was able to thwart voting on most resolutions through "no - action motions. .

the prc has often been able to employ its soft power — diplomatic and economic influence — in global fora in order to reduce international pressure to improve its human rights conditions .

the bush administration opposed the formation of the council and declined to become a member , arguing that it did not offer improvements over the unchr and that it would place too much focus on israel .

the obama administration sought and was granted a seat on the human rights council in june 2009 .

the united nations established the universal periodic review ( upr ) mechanism by which the human rights council assesses the human rights records of all u.n. members once every four years .

the upr working group conducted a periodic review of china in february 2009 .

representatives of some countries voiced serious concerns about china's human rights record , while representatives of some developing and non - democratic countries expressed support of china .

china's next review is scheduled for october - november 2013 .

the prc reportedly has not fulfilled several recommendations that it agreed to during its first review , including ratifying the international covenant on civil and political rights and accepting a visit by the u.n. office of the high commissioner for human rights .

the united states , which was an observer but not yet a member of the human rights council in february 2009 , is expected to take a much more active and critical approach during china's next review .

the u.s. - china human rights dialogue was established in 1990 .

it is one of eight government - to - government dialogues between china and other countries on human rights .

beijing formally suspended the process in 2004 after the bush administration sponsored an unsuccessful u.n. resolution criticizing china's human rights record .

the talks were resumed in may 2008 , after a gap of six years .

the obama administration has participated in three rounds between 2010 and 2012 , co - chaired by then u.s. assistant secretary of state for democracy , human rights , and labor michael posner and prc ministry of foreign affairs , department of international organizations director general chen xu .

the 17 th round of the dialogue took place in july 2012 in washington , dc .

the meetings also included a visit to the united states supreme court and u.s. nongovernmental and media organizations .

u.s. officials brought up a number of individual cases , including those of chinese dissidents , rights activists , lawyers , journalists , bloggers , ngo leaders , and religious figures .

u.s. interlocutors reportedly raised the case of chen kegui , the nephew of chen guangcheng , and feng jianmei of shaanxi province , who had been detained and forced to have a late - term abortion .

other concerns included the persecution of uighurs in xinjiang and chinese policies that may have contributed to the self - immolations in tibet .

some experts have criticized the bilateral human rights dialogue for providing both governments with opportunities for claiming achievements on human rights issues in china , without establishing benchmarks for progress or imposing penalties for failing to produce results .

they have expressed concern that separating the human rights dialogue from the s&ed has marginalized human rights issues , and that the dialogue lacks coordination with other u.s. agencies .

furthermore , they say , the human rights dialogue is not sufficiently transparent and does not include participation from other stakeholders , including members of congress , non - governmental organizations , and human rights activists .

administration officials respond to critics by explaining that the human rights dialogue is an important means by which to regularly express u.s. positions on human rights , and not an arena for negotiation .

u.s. participants aim to "amplify" the voices of chinese citizens on human rights issues , and to discuss them in greater depth .

u.s. officials contend that the human rights dialogue is one of many channels of communication on human rights and not intended to remove the topic of human rights from the s&ed .

they argue that the talks enable the u.s. government to focus on human rights within one forum , and suggest that , given the deep disagreements on human rights and other contentious issues , the holding of the bilateral dialogue and the agreement to continue them represent positive steps .

furthermore , some observers contend , the absence of the dialogue would undermine other u.s. efforts to promote human rights in china .

a related bilateral dialogue , the legal experts dialogue ( led ) , was launched in 2003 .

the obama administration convened the fourth round in 2011 , the first since 2005 .

the led is designed to serve as a forum to discuss the means of implementing an effective system of law .

at the april 2012 led , the u.s. delegation was headed by harold koh , legal adviser of the department of state , and assistant secretary michael posner .

the prc side included members of the supreme people's court and national people's congress , officials from the ministry of justice , ministry of public security , and supreme people's procuratorate , and representatives of the chinese academy of social sciences and the all china lawyers' association .

the four main agenda items were community corrections , the role of lawyers , legal aid , and counterterrorism and human rights .

since 2001 , foreign operations appropriations measures have funded democracy and human rights programs in china .

between 2001 and 2012 , the united states government authorized or made available $338 million for department of state and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) foreign assistance efforts in the prc , including peace corps programs .

of this amount , $279 million was devoted to democracy , human rights , rule of law , and related activities ; tibetan communities ; and the environment .

program activities have included developing democratic norms and institutions ; training legal professionals ; building the capacity of judicial institutions ; reforming the criminal justice system ; and supporting sustainable livelihoods and cultural preservation in tibetan communities .

the direct recipients of state department and usaid grants have been predominantly u.s. - based non - governmental organizations and universities .

some chinese ngos , universities , and government entities have participated in , collaborated with , or indirectly benefited from u.s. programs and foreign aid grantees .

appropriations for department of state and usaid programs in china reached a peak in fy2010 , totaling $46.9 million .

funding decreased by nearly 40% between 2010 and 2012 , resulting in the discontinuation of a number of rule of law and environmental programs .

the u.s. government has undertaken efforts to promote global internet freedom .

in 2006 , the bush administration established the global internet freedom task force ( gift ) .

continued under the obama administration as the netfreedom task force , the grouping's duties are to coordinate policy within the state department on internet freedom efforts , monitor internet freedom around the world , respond to challenges to internet freedom , and expand global access to the internet .

congress appropriated $50 million for u.s. government global internet freedom efforts between fy2008 and fy2010 , $20 million in fy2011 , and $25 million in fy2012 .

program areas include censorship circumvention technology , internet and mobile communications security training , media and advocacy skills , and public policy .

the primary target countries of such efforts , particularly circumvention and secure communications programs , have been china and iran .

u.s. congressional committees and commissions have held hearings on the internet and china , including the roles of u.s. internet companies in china's censorship regime , cyber security , free trade in internet services , and intellectual property rights .

the global internet freedom caucuses , founded in 2010 and currently chaired in the house by representative chris smith and in the senate by senators chris coons , mark kirk , and bob casey , jr. , aim to promote online freedom of information and expression .

the global online freedom act ( gofa ) , first introduced in 2006 , has evolved through four congresses .

the most recent version of the bill in the 113 th congress , the global online freedom act of 2013 ( h.r .

491 ) , aims to "prevent united states businesses from cooperating with repressive governments in transforming the internet into a tool of censorship and surveillance , to fulfill the responsibility of the united states government to promote freedom of expression on the internet…. .

u.s. public diplomacy programs aim to expose chinese participants , many of them young and / or educated , to u.s. politics , society , culture , and academia ; sponsor exchanges ; and promote mutual understanding .

according to the department of state , approximately one - third of all chinese citizens participating in u.s. - sponsored professional exchange programs work in fields related to democracy , rights , and religion .

in 2011 , 733 u.s. citizens and 959 prc citizens participated in exchange programs sponsored by the state department's bureau of educational and cultural affairs .

the voice of america ( voa ) and radio free asia ( rfa ) provide external sources of independent or alternative news and opinion to chinese audiences .

the two media services play small but unique roles in providing tastes of u.s. - style broadcasting , journalism , and public debate in china .

voa , which offers mainly u.s. and international news , and rfa , which serves as an uncensored source of domestic chinese news , often report on critical world and local events to chinese audiences .

the prc government regularly jams and blocks voa and rfa mandarin , cantonese , tibetan , and uighur language broadcasts and internet sites , while voa english services receive less interference .

both voa and rfa are making efforts to upgrade their internet services and circumvention or counter - censorship technologies .

voa "special english" international news programs , aimed at intermediate learners of english , are popular with many young , educated , and professional chinese .

established by the u.s. government in 1983 to promote freedom around the world , the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) is a private , non - profit organization that receives an annual appropriation from congress .

ned has played a major role in promoting democracy in china since the mid - 1980s .

activities of ned and its core institutes include supporting chinese pro - democracy organizations in the united states and hong kong , helping to advance the rule of law in china , promoting the rights of workers and women in the prc , and assisting the development of tibetan communities .

the endowment's china programs have received support through the annual foreign operations appropriation for ned ( an estimated $118 million in fy2012 ) and congressional earmarks to ned for democracy - related programs in the prc and in tibet .

in addition , the department of state has provided direct grants to ned's core institutes .

