the u.s. constitution specifies the enumerated powers of the federal government .

these powers , however , have been interpreted broadly so as to create a large potential overlap with state authority .

states may generally legislate on all matters within their territorial jurisdiction .

indeed , criminal law , family law , property , and contract and tort law , among others , are typical areas of law that are regulated at the state level .

accordingly , states have enacted their own laws regarding the unlawful possession and disposition of firearms , as well as the manner in which firearms may be carried .

congress , too , has enacted legislation related to firearms control .

it includes , among others , the national firearms act of 1934 , the gun control act of 1968 , the firearm owners' protection act of 1986 , and the brady handgun violence prevention act of 1993 .

generally , congress has relied on its authority under the commerce clause to enact such statutes .

the commerce clause states: "the congress shall have power ... to regulate commerce with foreign nationals , and among the several states , and with indian tribes. .

although a plain reading of the text might suggest that congress has only a limited power to regulate commercial trade between persons in one state and persons of another state , the clause has not been construed quite so narrowly , particularly in the modern era .

since the 1930s , the u.s. supreme court has held that congress has the ability to protect interstate commerce from burdens and obstructions "no matter what the source of the dangers which threaten it. .

over time , the court concluded that congress had considerable discretion in determining which commercial activities , including intrastate commercial activities , "affect" interstate commerce , as long as the legislation was "reasonably" related to achieving its goals of regulating interstate commerce .

furthermore , the court in wickard v. filburn also held that an activity , "though it may not be regarded as commerce , it may still , whatever its nature," be regulated by congress if , in the aggregate , "it exerts a substantial economic effect on interstate commerce. .

under this prevailing interpretation of the commerce clause , the supreme court has upheld a variety of federal laws , including those regulating the production of wheat on farms , racial discrimination by businesses , and loan - sharking .

federal firearms laws have been challenged periodically on grounds that congress did not have authority under the commerce clause to pass them .

this section examines lower courts' decisions regarding the constitutional validity of certain federal firearms laws , particularly the application of these laws to intrastate possession and intrastate transfer of firearms .

as described above , congress's authority under the commerce clause extends to regulating items that move through interstate commerce and commercial activities that affect interstate commerce .

it is therefore relatively settled that congress may regulate the manufacture and transfer of firearms .

for example , the constitutionality of a federal semiautomatic assault weapons ban , which was in effect for ten years , was challenged under the commerce clause .

in 1994 , congress passed the violent crime control and law enforcement act , which included a provision making it unlawful to possess , manufacture , or transfer certain types of semiautomatic pistols , rifles , and shotguns ( i.e. , "assault weapons" ) .

the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) , in navegar , inc. v. united states , addressed the question of whether the activities regulated under this act fell within one of the three categories of activity identified in lopez .

like the court in lopez , the d.c .

circuit determined that it was not required to analyze the act under the first or second categories because the "[it] readily falls within category 3 as a regulation of activities having a substantial [e]ffect on interstate commerce. .

the court analyzed individually the act's prohibitions on manufacture , transfer , and possession .

regarding the manufacturing prohibition , the d.c .

circuit declared that "[t]he supreme court has repeatedly held that the manufacture of goods which may ultimately never leave the state can still be activity which substantially affects interstate commerce. .

regarding the prohibition on transfers , the court similarly remarked that "the supreme court precedent makes clear that the transfer of goods , even as part of an intrastate transaction , can be an activity which substantially affects interstate commerce. .

based on these maxims , the court held that "it is not even arguable that the manufacture and transfer of 'semiautomatic assault weapons' for a national market cannot be regulated as activity substantially affecting interstate commerce. .

however , with respect to the possession of a semiautomatic assault weapon , the court in navegar noted that the lopez decision raised a question of whether "mere possession" can substantially affect interstate commerce .

the court proceeded to analyze the purposes behind the act to determine whether "it was aimed at regulating activities which substantially affect interstate commerce. .

analyzing the congressional hearings , the court determined that the ban on possession was "conceived to control and restrict the interstate commerce in 'semiautomatic assault weapons,'" and that the "ban on possession is a measure intended to reduce the demand for such weapons. .

the d.c .

circuit stated that the ban on possession was "necessary to allow law enforcement to effectively regulate the manufacture and transfers where the product comes to rest , in the possession of the receiver. .

based on these factors , the court concluded that the "purpose of the ban on possession has an 'evident commercial nexus.' .

accordingly , the court held that the federal semiautomatic assault weapons ban was valid under congress's commerce power .

congress has broad authority pursuant to the commerce clause to enact laws in areas that may overlap with traditional state jurisdiction .

as such , congress has passed complex statutory provisions that regulate the possession , receipt , transfer , and manufacture of firearms and ammunition .

notwithstanding this broad authority , congress may not exceed other constitutional provisions or doctrines , such as the tenth or second amendments to the u.s. constitution .

thus , congress may not pass legislation that infringes on the right guaranteed by the second amendment , nor may it pass legislation that orders state legislatures or its officials to implement and perform a federal law or program .

outside these types of limitations , exercise of congress's commerce power appears to be proper as long as the regulated activity or conduct falls within one of the three categories established by the supreme court in united states v. lopez , that is , ( 1 ) the channels of interstate commerce ; ( 2 ) the instrumentalities of interstate commerce , including persons and things ; and ( 3 ) activities that substantially affect interstate commerce .

as explored in this report , courts have been confronted with the question of whether federal laws can be applied to intrastate possession and intrastate transfers of firearms , or whether such application exceeds the authority of congress under its commerce power .

generally , the courts have upheld such laws under these as - applied challenges .

with respect to intrastate possession , there remains noticeable tension between the commerce clause analysis set forth in lopez and the pre - lopez supreme court precedent that is still relied on by lower courts to uphold regulations on the possession of firearms .

it is unclear how congress's authority to regulate firearms possession would be affected should the supreme court resolve any perceived doctrinal inconsistency .

furthermore , the supreme court's analysis in gonzales v. raich has also buttressed the reasoning by which lower courts have concluded that congress's authority to regulate firearms extends to intrastate manufacture and intrastate transfers and , as such , states cannot exempt themselves from federal regulation .

