on april 24 , 2013 , rana plaza , an eight - story building , in dhaka , bangladesh , collapsed , killing more than 1,100 garment workers .

it brought international focus on portions of the global supply chain .

it also raised the issue of what might be done to improve working conditions , especially for lower - wage workers in developing countries around the world .

according to press reports , the day of the building collapse workers arrived and saw cracks in the outside of the building where five manufacturing operations were trying to meet production deadlines on apparel products for the u.s. and european union ( eu ) markets .

reportedly , management assured them that the building was safe , and told workers that they would not be paid if they did not work .

an hour later , the building collapsed .

it has been labeled the deadliest disaster in the history of the garment industry .

the rana plaza collapse took place five months after a december 17 , 2012 , fire at another bangladesh apparel factory , tazreen fashions limited ; the tazreen fire killed 112 workers .

survivors reportedly stated that their managers locked one exit route and told workers that the fire alarms were false , thereby delaying timely evacuation .

the combined tragedies brought the six - month total loss of life in bangladesh in the garment sector to at least 1,200 .

after the building collapse , reportedly , thousands of workers took to the streets and vandalized vehicles and shops before being dispersed by police .

soon after that , the government shut down a number of apparel factories , for safety reasons , as concerns about industrial safety across the country continued to grow .

bangladesh's major export is apparel , which , along with a small amount of textiles , accounts for more than 80% of the country's $24 billion in exports to the world in 2012 , or nearly $20 billion .

 ( see the text box , "bangladesh in brief." ) .

as a result of the rana plaza building collapse , some firms , such as disney , have indicated they may no longer source production from bangladesh , largely due to concerns over their brand reputation .

if this becomes a major trend , one consequence could be that many women , who constitute 80% of the workers in the apparel sector , could lose their jobs .

these women , mostly muslim , have found new independence and an increased standard of living for their families , and have , in many cases , become primary breadwinners .

the effect on the economic structure of bangladesh could be compounded by an ongoing struggle between a secular bangladeshi identity and a more fundamental / religious islamic identity .

a number of factors may have led to the recent building collapse .

bangladesh's economy is labor - intensive , which attracts lower - wage and lower - skilled industries such as apparel .

bangladesh is a densely populated country , where a population half the size of the united states is crowded into a geographic area the size of iowa .

to meet increasing global demand for apparel production , primarily by the united states and europe , certain buildings may have been converted to multi - story manufacturing operations .

in many countries , apparel production is generally carried out in one - or two - story buildings because of the inherent fire hazards associated with this production .

three additional floors that reportedly were illegally constructed were added to the rana plaza .

according to press reports , working conditions in bangladesh were theoretically addressed , at least in part , by bangladesh labor laws and building codes , international labor organization ( ilo ) commitments , codes of conduct held by multinational corporations , and gsp trade preferences .

response to the bangladesh tragedy has come from congress , the administration , the bangladesh government , the ilo , and the private sector , and continues to evolve .

this section briefly describes recent , somewhat overlapping , developments .

congressional options relating to the rana plaza collapse may cover a range of issues , including allowing the situation to resolve itself .

broadly speaking , congress may wish to conduct oversight and examine a comprehensive effort by the international community to support change in bangladesh .

key questions for congress include the following: is the ilo / world bank better work program an effective approach , and has it been implemented successfully in other countries ? .

how soon should gsp eligibility for bangladesh be reconsidered ? .

should tariff benefits for apparel be extended to bangladesh to support it in improving the safety conditions of its workers ? .

are there other steps the u.s. government should take ? .

how much progress have the accord and the alliance achieved so far in promoting safety workplaces in bangladesh ? .

will the ilo be monitoring the implementation of changes to bangladeshi labor law ? .

what are its current efforts in bangladesh ? .

what are possible unintended consequences for bangladeshi apparel workers if action leads to a decline in the apparel industry ? .

leading up to passage of the 2014 national defense authorization act , the house bill contained a provision ( sec .

634 ) that would have required the defense commissary system and the exchange store system to: ( a ) comply with requirements of the bangladesh accord ; and ( b ) in its purchases , give preferences to signatories of the accord .

in addition , the department of defense would have been required to notify congress of garments sold in defense commissaries or exchanges that did not comply with these requirements ( i.e. , were manufactured by nonsignatories ) .

the final agreement did not include these provisions .

the house sponsors of the amendment noted in a joint statement that garments and documents with u.s. marine insignia were found in the rubble in the november 2012 bangladesh tazreen fire .

data indicated that the army - air force exchange , a military retailer , imported 124,000 pounds of garments from several factories in bangladesh .

the sponsors argued that "as a huge purchaser of garments , the u.s. military should not be complicit" in putting the lives of bangladesh workers at risk .

this appendix compares key provisions of the bangladesh accord and the bangladesh alliance .

both plans build on bangladesh's "national tripartite action plan on fire safety ( nap ) for the ready - made garment sector in bangladesh," released in july , 2013 .

this plan , jointly agreed to by the government of bangladesh , employer organizations , and worker organizations , with help from the international labor organization ( ilo ) , is a consolidation of two earlier tripartite plans .

it focuses on legislation and policy , administration , and practical activities to improve safety in apparel factories .

the accord and the alliance plans are similar in some regards .

both plans require health and safety committees in all bangladesh factories that supply companies that are signatories .

both plans require inspections and remediation of hazards , and training of management and workers , in accordance with bangladeshi law .

they differ , however , in their approach to worker protections .

under the accord , signatories are obligated to require suppliers to extend certain rights to workers , including the right to refuse work they justifiably believe to be unsafe , and the right to a continued employment relationship and income , while the factory is undergoing required safety improvements .

under the alliance , workers are not given these rights directly .

rather , they are "empowered" to report safety hazards ; and 10% of a fund contributed to by the signatories is reserved to support workers temporarily displaced because of factory remediation .

because the programs are still in their early stages of implementation , no reports have yet been issued estimating the effects of either plan .

stakeholders for the alliance typically emphasize the similarities between the plans and emphasize their rapid development of protocols .

many stakeholders for the accord argue that the accord is a legally binding agreement between companies and trade unions , and includes a central role for workers and worker representatives , including direct trade union participation in factory training .

they argue that the alliance is not legally binding and has no role for trade unions , workers , and worker representatives .

