the global landscape for foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is undergoing significant transformation .

over the past few decades , investment flows have increased with greater economic integration of the global economy and the growth of international value chains .

although global fdi flows dipped amid the 2008 international financial crisis , they surpassed pre - crisis levels in 2011 .

previous distinctions between advanced country / capital exporters and developing country / capital importers are being blurred as more and more countries are both sources of and hosts for fdi .

the united states , which remains a major source of and destination for fdi , seeks to facilitate investment flows by reducing restrictions on foreign investment and enhancing protections for investors , while balancing other policy interests .

in 2011 , the obama administration issued a statement reaffirming the united states' commitment to an open investment policy that treats all investors in a fair and equitable manner under the law , and encourages and supports business investment from both domestic and foreign sources .

the primary policy tools through which the united states advances its investment policy interests are bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) and bit - like chapters in free trade agreements ( ftas ) — collectively referred to as "international investment agreements. .

the united states negotiates investment agreements to provide non - discriminatory treatment to private investment , help facilitate market - oriented policies in partner countries , and promote u.s. exports , among other goals .

congress plays an important role in shaping u.s. investment policy through its oversight and legislative responsibilities .

for example , congress can set trade policy negotiating objectives on investment in trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

as international treaties , u.s .

bits require the advice and consent of two - thirds of the senate in order to be ratified for implementation .

u.s. ftas , which generally include investment chapters , require enactment of implementing legislation by both the house of representatives and the senate .

this report provides an overview of u.s. international investment agreements , focusing specifically on bits and investment chapters in ftas .

it discusses key trends in u.s. and international investment flows , governance structures for investment at the bilateral and multilateral levels , the goals and basic components of investment provisions in u.s. international investment agreements , the outcomes of the administration's model bit review , and key policy issues for congress .

following european success with bits in the 1960s , the united states established its bit program in 1977 .

the program is jointly administered by the department of state and the united states trade representative ( ustr ) .

the united states uses a "model bit" to negotiate bits and investment chapters of ftas .

the united states completed its original model text in 1981 , and its first bit was in 1982 with panama .

the u.s. model bit has been revised several times , most recently in 2004 and 2012 .

as both a major source of and destination for fdi , the united states has engaged in negotiations through bits and ftas to remove restrictions on foreign investment and other market - distorting measures to maximize the benefits of such investment and provide for reciprocal non - discriminatory treatment for u.s. investors .

what follows is a discussion of existing u.s. investment agreements and current u.s. investment negotiations .

congress plays an active role in developing and implementing the u.s. policy on direct investment , including through setting investment negotiating objectives in trade promotion authority ; senate ratification of bits ; and approval and enactment of implementing legislation for trade agreements by both the house of representatives and the senate .

congress may wish to consider several policy issues as it considers new bilateral investment treaties .

given u.s. efforts to negotiate investment agreements , a major debate is whether such agreements actually facilitate investment .

the presence of investment agreements is one of many factors that might contribute to a company's decision to pursue direct investment abroad .

others include the size and growth of the host country market , labor force , endowment of natural resources , exchange rates , taxes , the level of trade and investment protection , rule of law , political stability , infrastructure , and business facilitation measures .

several economic studies have looked at the impact of bits by comparing changes in fdi flows against a variety of independent variables .

many early studies found no significant connection between the presence of a bit and increased fdi flows .

more recent research suggests that , under certain circumstances , signing and ratifying a bit could lead to increased investment ( see text box ) .

however , such empirical analysis may have limitations .

one possible shortcoming is that many studies , to date , have used aggregate investment data .

the peterson institute for international economics ( piie ) , for example , argues that different fdi streams ( extractive industries , infrastructure , manufacturing , and services , etc. ) .

have distinct benefits , costs , and policy challenges , and should be analyzed separately .

in any case , the presence of a bit or fta provisions on investment and the protections they offer may have a positive effect on the investment climate ( see text box ) .

investors consider the provisions in investment agreements critical to providing the protections necessary to conduct business in foreign markets .

for many developing countries , fdi is the largest source of external financing for their economies .

some consider fdi to be critical to fostering rule of law , reducing corruption , building institutions , promoting respect for and protection of private property and contract rights , streamlining administrative and legal procedures , and developing a regulatory environment conducive to capital formation in general and international investment in particular .

u.s. investment negotiations can help to advance u.s. trade , foreign policy , and development objectives .

a major issue for congress is the administration's prioritization of countries and policy objectives in u.s. investment negotiations .

congress could press the administration through legislation and oversight to pursue certain investment negotiation directions .

for example , congress will likely debate and actively consider negotiating objectives and priorities in legislation to renew tpa .

congress could also express its preferences through other legislative vehicles , for example , through oversight of current free trade negotiations , such as tpp .

one possible area of focus is prioritizing certain countries or regions in bit negotiations .

for instance , the united states could intensify and conclude previously launched bit negotiations , such as those with india and china .

negotiations with these countries could yield substantial economic benefit to u.s. investors , although they could raise questions about outsourcing .

a second area of focus could be to launch investment negotiations with new trading partners that represent key u.s. trade , foreign policy , and development priorities .

for example: sub - saharan africa ( ssa ) : some u.s. policymakers have expressed increasing interest in expanding u.s. economic relations with ssa countries .

bits could serve as one of the policy tools for expanding these relations , and could ultimately pave the way for bilateral or regional ftas .

middle east and north africa ( mena ) : in light of the ongoing political transitions taking place in the mena , u.s. policymakers have been engaged in efforts to support democratic transitions and economic development in these countries .

u.s .

bits with countries in the region could help to promote economic development , support political reform , and encourage good governance and the rule of law .

such efforts could help lay the groundwork for possible future u.s. ftas with mena countries individually or with the region in the long term .

latin america: the region could constitute a bigger priority for u.s. policymakers in response to increased hostility toward foreign investment in the region .

increased state - led intervention in several growing emerging economies in the region ; the associated rise of "resource" expropriation activities in certain economies ; and increased resistance to investor - state arbitration through icsid will likely challenge u.s. investors in the region .

several countries including argentina , ecuador and venezuela have withdrawn from icsid and are seeking to withdraw their bits , including those with the united states .

some have argued that the united states should seek a bit with brazil , the region's largest economy and a major commodities exporter .

more so than other south american countries , brazil has shunned investment treaties completely and despite signing several in the 1990s , there are no agreements currently in force .

a third area of focus could be the "renegotiation" of existing u.s .

bits .

although the united states typically does not renegotiate bits following the release of a new model bit , congress could consider whether "updates" may be needed in certain cases .

possible candidates for updates could include the u.s .

bits with egypt and tunisia , both signed more than two decades ago .

since these agreements came into effect , the 2004 and 2012 u.s. model bit templates have made revisions in multiple areas , responding to the changing nature of the global investment landscape .

for example , the u.s .

bit with egypt does not include many services ( such as telecommunications , banking , and insurance ) within the scope of "covered investments. .

in establishing such negotiating priorities , congress could examine the criteria which the administration uses to determine which countries to select to approach for negotiating a bit .

in turn , congress also could identify what its negotiation priorities are or should be .

factors for consideration may include the potential economic benefit to the united states , the willingness of countries to negotiate , the feasibility of such negotiations , and the foreign policy and development benefits that may be served .

the conclusion of high - standard investment agreements with such countries may prove difficult because of divergent views of certain investment - related issues , such as labor and environmental protections .

a fourth area for future consideration is whether there should be renewed efforts to negotiate a more comprehensive multilateral framework on investment at the wto or to establish an appellate body for icsid ( or other ) investor - state arbitration .

