the process by which lower federal court judges are nominated by the president and considered by the senate has , in recent decades , been of continuing interest to senators .

during recent senate debates over judicial nominations , differing perspectives have been expressed about the relative degree of success of a president's nominees in gaining senate confirmation , compared with nominees of other recent presidents .

senate debate often has concerned whether a president's judicial nominees , relative to the nominees of other recent presidents , encountered more difficulty or had to wait longer , before receiving consideration by the senate judiciary committee or up - or - down floor votes on confirmation .

of related concern to the senate have been increases in recent years in the number and percentage of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary and the effect of delays in the processing of judicial nominations on filling judicial vacancies .

this report seeks to inform the current debate in three ways: first , by providing a statistical analysis of president barack obama's nominees , during his first term , to u.s. circuit court of appeals and u.s. district court judgeships , and of any actions taken on their nominations by the senate judiciary committee and the full senate ; second , by using various statistical measures to compare the success of president obama's judicial nominees , during his first term , in advancing through the senate confirmation process with the success of the judicial nominees during the first terms of the four most recent preceding presidents ( ronald reagan , george h.w .

bush , bill clinton , and george w. bush ) ; and third , by identifying various factors which might help explain differences or variations found in judicial nomination statistics across the first terms of the five presidents .

most of the statistics presented and discussed in this report were generated from an internal crs judicial nominations database .

other data sources , however , are noted where appropriate .

the statistics account only for nominations made to u.s. circuit court and u.s. district court judgeships .

article iii , section i of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

along with the supreme court , the courts that constitute the article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. circuit courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

as mentioned above , this report concerns nominations made by president obama and other recent presidents to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts ( including the territorial district courts ) .

outside the report's scope are the occasional nominations that these presidents made to the nine - member u.s. court of international trade .

this section provides a statistical analysis of president obama's nominations to u.s. circuit courts of appeals and u.s. district courts from january 20 , 2009 , through january 19 , 2013 .

it begins with a statistical summary of the confirmation status of president obama's circuit and district court nominees who were nominated during his first term , including identifying the judicial circuits with the greatest and smallest percentage of circuit and district court judgeships that were filled by appointees of president obama at the end of his first term ( see " variation across geographic circuits in number and percentage of confirmed nominees " ) .

it concludes by comparing the number and percentage of circuit and district court judgeships that were vacant at the start of the obama presidency with vacancy statistics at the end of his first term ( see " u.s .

circuit and district court vacancies at beginning and end of first term " ) .

this section uses various statistical measures to compare the judicial nomination and confirmation processes at work during the first terms of president obama and his four immediate predecessors .

it first compares the number and percentage of confirmed u.s. circuit and district court nominees during the first terms from presidents reagan to obama .

it then provides , for the same presidents , the circuit and district court vacancy rates that existed at the beginning of each president's first term with the rates at the end of his first term .

the section concludes by comparing selected features of the senate judicial confirmation process during the first terms of the five most recent presidents .

specifically , it compares , for circuit and district court nominees , ( 1 ) the average and median number of days that elapsed from nomination to confirmation ; ( 2 ) the average and median number of days from nomination to committee hearing ; and ( 3 ) the average and median number of days from committee report to confirmation .

this report , it should be acknowledged , does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of a president's judicial nominees that would be appropriate for the senate to confirm ; on the average ( or median ) length of time that would be appropriate for , or needed by , the senate judiciary committee to process judicial nominations or for the senate to take final action on them .

similarly , this report does not analyze or take a position on the appropriate amount of time for an administration to select nominees for circuit and district court judgeships .

this final section identifies selected factors that may influence various statistical aspects of the lower court appointment process and variation in these statistics across presidencies .

the factors are organized and discussed in the approximate order in which they influence the selection and confirmation process from its initial to final stages from ( 1 ) the appointment opportunities a president has during his tenure , to ( 2 ) the process used by an administration for identifying , vetting , and selecting judicial nominees , to ( 3 ) the processing of a president's judicial nominations by the senate .

the factors discussed below do not constitute an exhaustive list of independent variables that affect confirmation rates , and are not always readily quantifiable in terms of how they affect the selection and confirmation process for judicial nominees .

opportunities for a president to make circuit and district court appointments arise when judgeships are vacant or are scheduled to become vacant .

various factors influence the number of such opportunities a president will have during his tenure in office .

one such factor , at the start of a presidency , is the number of judicial vacancies already in existence ( i.e. , the judicial vacancies a president inherits when taking office ) .

the number of inherited vacancies , in turn , is influenced by various factors .

these include the frequency with which judicial departures occurred and new judgeships were statutorily created in the years or months immediately prior to a new presidency ; the extent to which the outgoing president , during this same period , made nominations to fill judicial vacancies ; and the rate at which the senate confirmed these nominations before the new president took office .

a large number of judicial vacancies created before the start of a new presidency might or might not result in many appointment opportunities for the incoming president .

much would depend on how prompt the previous president was in making nominations to fill newly created judicial vacancies and on how willing the senate was to confirm those nominations .

the different rate , for instance , at which the senate confirmed district court nominations immediately prior to the g.w .

bush and obama presidencies was one factor in how many district court appointment opportunities each president inherited upon taking office .

during the presidential election year of 2000 , 56 district court nominations were pending in the senate , of which 31 ( 55.4% ) were confirmed .

in contrast , during the presidential election year of 2008 , 37 district court nominations were pending in the senate , of which 24 ( 64.9% ) were confirmed .

this variation contributed to differences in the number of appointment opportunities for presidents g.w .

bush and obama .

legislation creating new judgeships might also provide a new president with the opportunity to appoint a greater number of judges than he might have otherwise inherited .

legislation substantially increasing the number of authorized judgeships was enacted in 1978 ( omnibus judgeship act , p.l .

95-486 ) ; 1984 ( bankruptcy amendments and federal judgeship act , p.l .

98-353 ) ; and 1990 ( federal judgeship act , p.l .

101-650 ) .

the large number of district court vacancies , for example , inherited by president clinton contributed , in turn , to the relatively large number of district court confirmations during his presidency .

the large number of district court vacancies inherited by president clinton was , in part , the result of 74 new district court judgeships created by the federal judgeship act of 1990 .

over the course of a presidency , opportunities for a president to make circuit and district court appointments continue to be affected by the rate at which judges depart office ( by taking senior status , retiring , resigning , or dying ) .

during some presidencies , substantial new judicial appointment opportunities also have arisen because of the statutory creation of new circuit and district court judgeships .

both factors — judicial departures and the statutory creation of new judgeships — can , throughout a president's tenure , affect the number of persons nominated by the president and the number confirmed by the senate .

for example , a study found that , largely as a result of judges retiring from full - time service on the bench , president obama was confronted during his first three years in office with more judicial vacancies than his two immediate predecessors: ... 92 judges took senior status in the first three years of the obama administration compared to 72 and 70 in the clinton and bush administrations' first three years.... had district judges taken senior status in obama's first three years at the same rate they did under clinton or bush , there would have been almost no increase in vacancies... .

the "hallmarks of the modern presidential role in judicial appointments are the selection , vetting , and evaluation of federal judicial nominees. .

a variety of factors can affect how long it takes a president to select , vet , and evaluate nominees to fill judicial vacancies .

these factors include how many individuals are involved in identifying and vetting potential nominees , the specific selection criteria a president desires to emphasize in identifying nominees , whether a supreme court vacancy occurs , and , if so , the resources devoted to filling that vacancy .

a vacancy on the supreme court , for example , occurred early in both the clinton and obama administrations , and in both instances , while the administrations' searches were underway for a supreme court nominee , the presidents sent few lower court nominations to the senate .

the level of consultation between a president and a nominee's home state senators also can influence the president's pace in selecting nominees for judicial vacancies .

home state senators traditionally play an important role in the selection of district and , to a lesser extent , circuit court judges .

the pace might be slowed by communication or other difficulties between the president and those senators who represent states with vacant federal judgeships .

additionally , if the home state senators are themselves slow in recommending a candidate , or if they and the president cannot agree on a suitable candidate , the nomination of an individual to fill a vacant judgeship may be delayed .

another factor affecting a president's pace in selecting judicial nominees is the degree of priority he attaches to the process .

according to one account , for example , judicial selection may not have been a priority for the obama administration during the 111 th congress .

"the surest key to understanding the politics , processes , and outcomes of the obama judicial selection record in the 111 th congress," according to the account , is "the recognition that judges were not seen as a priority by those closest to the president .

judicial selection was not a major focal point in the administration's legislatively driven domestic policy agenda , nor was it seen as a 'legacy' issue. .

finally , the speed at which a president selects nominees might be influenced by the length of his administration's vetting process .

one recent study , for example , found that the time from vacancy to nomination during the first 14 months of the obama administration was longer than at the same point in the g.w .

bush administration , especially for circuit court nominees .

the greater time for president obama to submit nominees , the study said , was likely due in part to the pre - nomination candidate vetting by the american bar association's ( aba's ) standing committee on the federal judiciary .

the g.w .

bush administration , the study noted , chose not to have its judicial candidates rated by the aba committee ( prior to submitting them to congress ) .

by contrast , the obama administration "brought the committee , and thus the additional 30 to 45 days typically consumed by its investigations , back into the pre - nomination stage. .

as in the nominee selection stage , the processing of judicial nominations by the senate from first nomination to final senate action is also affected by many institutional and political factors .

various studies , for example , have concluded that how long lower federal court nominees wait in the senate confirmation process , from first nomination to final action , is affected by such factors as the extent of ideological differences between the president and the opposite party in the senate , or of interest group opposition to certain nominees .

other factors cited have been whether nominees had "champions" on the senate judiciary committee , the point in a session when nominations arrived in the senate , and the kind of ratings given nominees by the aba's standing committee on the federal judiciary .

some of these factors might also contribute to other features of the confirmation process discussed in this report , for example , whether a nominee is ultimately confirmed , and , if so , whether he or she is confirmed by roll call vote rather than voice vote .

the presence or absence of "divided government" ( with the president and senate majority of opposite political parties ) also might influence the processing of judicial nominations by the senate .

one study concludes , however , that whether the president and senate majority are of the same party or not , "presidents continue to select judges according to the same criteria and the senate confirms or does not confirm nominations according to the same criteria. .

divided government , though , may affect the procedural strategies used to oppose a president's nominees .

it has been suggested , for example , that senators "may rely on certain types of ... tactics during the confirmation process more or less depending on" whether the party controlling the presidency is also the majority party in the senate .

some factors might influence how quickly judicial nominations are processed at the committee level but not on the floor ( and vice versa ) .

for example , the role of the aba's standing committee on the federal judiciary in evaluating judicial candidates may be seen as a factor in the time that a circuit or district court nomination is pending in the judiciary committee ( but not in the time that a reported nomination is pending on the senate executive calendar ) .

if the aba committee's role is ( as it usually has been over the decades ) to evaluate judicial candidates before the president selects a nominee , then the aba's evaluation does not add to the time between when the president makes a nomination and the senate judiciary committee reports it .

if , however , the aba's role is ( as it was during the g.w .

bush presidency ) to evaluate only after a person has been nominated , then the time taken for that evaluation will add to the total time that the nomination is pending in the judiciary committee .

another factor that affects the length of time it takes the judiciary committee to process a judicial nomination is the amount of information on a nominee that senators and their staff review prior to holding hearings or reporting a nomination .

additionally , any committee member can request that a vote on a nomination be postponed for one week or until the next committee meeting , whichever is later .

consequently , final committee action on some nominations might be delayed when a recess or adjournment occurs .

once a nomination has been reported from committee , the time taken until final senate action might be influenced by political or other factors not present ( or minimally so ) at the committee level .

even if a nominee is noncontroversial and received bipartisan support from the committee , significant delays in filling a judicial vacancy might occur when a judicial nomination , after having been placed on the executive calendar , is blocked for one reason or another from floor consideration by senators through the use of "holds," or objections to unanimous consent requests .

finally , another factor that might affect the processing of judicial nominations by the senate ( and , thus , judicial confirmation statistics ) is the blue - slip policy of the senate judiciary committee , as set by its chair .

under this policy , which dates back to at least 1917 , the committee chair seeks the assessment of senators regarding various nominations for offices related to their states , including those for u.s. district court judgeships , u.s. circuit court judgeships , u.s. attorneys , and u.s. marshals .

in practice , the chair sends a blue - colored form to both home state senators regarding judicial nominations related to their state .

if a home state senator has no objection to a nominee , the blue slip is returned to the chair with a positive response .

if a senator , however , has misgivings about the nominee and wants to stop or slow committee action , he or she can decide not to return the blue slip , delay returning it , or return it with a negative response .

most chairs of the judiciary committee have required a return of positive blue slips by both a state's senators before allowing consideration of a nomination .

it should be noted , however , that the return of positive blue slips by both home state senators does not always lead to a relatively speedy confirmation .

during president obama's first term , for example , circuit and district court nominations were reported by the judiciary committee only after home state senators returned positive blue slips for the nominations .

nevertheless , the average ( and median ) time during which circuit and district court nominations waited on the senate executive calendar before being confirmed , as discussed above , reached historically high levels ( see " length of time from committee report to confirmation " ) .

a new standing order in the 113 th congress , however , might serve to facilitate negotiations arranging for floor consideration of district court nominations ( circuit court nominations are not affected ) .

under a new procedure in effect for just this congress , the senate could move more quickly to final action on district court nominations supported by at least three - fifths of the senate .

specifically , if cloture is invoked on a district court nomination in accordance with rule xxii of the senate , post - cloture consideration is reduced from a maximum of 30 hours to 2 hours .

generally , district court nominations are considered pursuant to unanimous consent agreements , in part because of the greater amount of time necessary to consider them through the cloture process in the absence of unanimous consent .

the majority leader , when the new standing order was approved , indicated that the intent is to continue to negotiate unanimous consent agreements for the consideration of nominations .

the ability to more quickly vote on district court nominations in the absence of unanimous consent , however , might facilitate unanimous consent negotiations and , therefore , reduce the waiting time from committee report to final senate action for such nominations during the 113 th congress .

