the individual states have been the primary regulators of insurance in this country for the past 150 years .

the 1945 mccarran - ferguson act specifically authorized the states' role , and congress has recognized state primacy in insurance regulation in more recent laws shaping the financial regulatory system , such as 1999's gramm - leach - bliley act ( glba ) and 2010's dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( the dodd - frank act ) .

although congress may have generally reaffirmed the state - based system in such laws , congressional interest in the operation of the insurance regulatory system has continued .

much of the congressional focus on the insurance regulatory system since 1999 has been on the efficiency of the state - based system .

organizations such as the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) and the national conference of insurance legislators ( ncoil ) create model laws and undertake other steps to harmonize insurance regulation and laws across the country .

to be legally binding , however , any models suggested by the naic or ncoil must first be adopted in a state .

the states may amend models to fit local circumstances or completely reject suggestions from outside groups .

various federal proposals have been advanced to change the workings of the state - based regulatory system , ranging from creation of a broad federal charter that might replace much of the state - based system to narrower concepts using federal powers to preempt some state laws while leaving the state - based regulatory system largely in place .

in the 113 th congress , issues around licensing for insurance agents and brokers ( known generally as insurance producers ) came to the fore in the form of legislation — the national association of registered agents and brokers act , passed in different forms by both the senate and the house .

this legislation , which would mandate the creation of a national association of registered agents and brokers ( narab ) , is generally referred to as "narab ii" legislation .

the 114 th congress passed identical versions of h.r .

26 , which included narab ii provisions as title ii .

the president signed the bill , now p.l .

114-1 , on january 12 , 2015 .

licensing of insurance producers has long been an integral part of the insurance regulatory system .

individual states typically require insurance producers operating within their borders to obtain a license from that state , with different licenses often required for different lines of insurance .

such licensure provides a mechanism for insurance regulators to enforce standards of conduct , particularly with regard to consumer protections , as well as a revenue source to help defray the cost of the insurance regulatory system .

aspects of insurance producer licensing include specific education or knowledge requirements , such as passage of a written exam prior to licensing and continuing education afterward , and , in some states , criminal background checks .

the naic has adopted model laws regarding licensure and a model insurance producer license form , but individual states are free to modify such models , or not adopt them at all , resulting in variability in licensing requirements across the country .

the number of insurance producers potentially affected by the variability of state licensing laws appears relatively large ; in one survey , 83% of producers reported having licenses in at least 2 and up to 10 states .

larger insurance agencies tend to hold a greater number of licenses , with 47% of the firms of more than 500 financial advisors having licenses in 21 or more states .

insurance producers that operate in multiple states have long sought increased uniformity and reciprocity across states to reduce their costs resulting from the multiplicity of license requirements .

insurance producers report , for example , that , on average , 3% of agency operating expenses are spent on "licensing compliance efforts," with higher figures ( 4.3% ) at the smallest agencies .

although insurance producers consider the multiplicity of licenses to be a burden , others consider the requirements for local licenses and knowledge of specific local risks or legal requirements to be important consumer protections by others .

one consumer representative has argued , for example , that "[property and casualty] insurance varies too much state to state as respects law and risk to not maintain local control of licensure. .

glba attempted to address the multiplicity of different requirements among states for insurance producer licensing .

although many states satisfied the glba statutory requirements for reciprocity by 2002 , insurance producers continued to identify inefficiencies and costs of the state licensing system in the years following .

in 2008 testimony before a house subcommittee , for example , an insurance agent representative indicated that states continued to "impose additional conditions and requirements" on nonresident agents despite the reciprocity called for in law .

in 2009 , the government accountability office ( gao ) cited issues regarding fingerprinting and background checks as particular barriers to uniformity or reciprocity in producer licensing and as potentially creating uneven insurance consumer protection in states in which full - background checks were not able to be performed .

gao also determined that differences in licensing requirements and insurance line definitions could potentially be creating inefficiencies that "could result in higher costs for insurers , which in turn could be passed on to consumer[s]. .

in addition to concerns about the substance of the reciprocity in place , reciprocity laws have not been adopted by every state .

the naic ultimately certified 47 states as reciprocal , but the 3 states not certified — california , florida , and washington — together represented nearly 20% of the nation's population .

in addition to the costs that might result from the specific aspects of the insurance licensing system , any professional licensing regime acts as a barrier to entry for those who might be interested in providing services that require a license .

economic theory suggests such barriers increase consumer costs to some degree and have the potential to be used as a protectionist measure to prevent competition , allowing license holders to extract economic rents from consumers .

whether the public benefits resulting from licensure outweigh the costs is determined by policy makers on a case - by - case basis .

some form of licensure for those in the financial services industry has been generally accepted and is required in federal law for people involved in securities transactions with the public , for example .

legislation to mandate the creation of a narab organization , similar to p.l .

114-1 , title ii , was first introduced into the house of representatives in the 110 th congress ( h.r .

5611 ) , with similar legislation introduced in the 111 th congress ( h.r .

2554 ) .

the house passed these bills in the respective congresses by voice vote , and the legislation was referred to committee when received by the senate .

narab ii legislation was introduced in the 112 th congress ( h.r .

1112 and s. 2342 ) , but , unlike in the previous congresses , the house did not bring narab ii legislation to the floor in the 112 th congress .

the general outlines of the various narab ii bills have been similar .

the bills would amend the narab sections to create a narab organization regardless of state actions on reciprocity and uniformity .

narab ii legislation would create an organization similar to the one originally envisioned in glba .

it would be a nonprofit , private body whose members would be required to be state - licensed insurance producers but could operate across states without having licenses from the individual states .

the specifics of the narab ii bills have , however , differed to some degree , particularly in the makeup of the board of directors and how the board would be appointed .

the initial narab ii legislation ( h.r .

5611 , 110 th congress ) included a nine - person board of directors , four to be appointed by the naic and five to be appointed by the insurance industry .

h.r .

2554 ( 111 th congress ) and h.r .

1112 ( 112 th congress ) changed this makeup to an 11-person board ( with 6 insurance commissioners and 5 insurance industry representatives ) to be appointed by the president with senate confirmation .

s. 2342 ( 112 th congress ) and the current legislation again changed the narab board to be comprised of 13 people ( 8 insurance commissioners and 5 insurance industry representatives ) who are presidentially appointed and senate confirmed .

in addition , h.r .

5611 required a report by the narab association to the president , congress , and the naic , whereas subsequent legislation required the report be made solely to the president and the naic .

legislative provisions creating a narab appeared as part of broad financial regulatory reform legislation in the 105 th congress and the 106 th congress , ultimately becoming law as part of glba in the 106 th congress .

glba sought to address insurance producer complaints about the variation in state licensing requirements through a sort of provisional federal preemption of state laws .

the law called for the creation of a private , nonprofit licensing body , the narab , whose insurance producer members would have been authorized to operate across state lines without individual licenses from every state .

membership in narab would have been open only to people already holding a state insurance producer license and who fulfilled other criteria .

although established by federal authority , the narab to be created by the provisions in glba would have been entwined in the system of state regulation .

the naic would have appointed the seven members of the narab board and had other oversight authorities .

the narab i language in glba also offered the states the opportunity to avoid creation of the narab organization if a majority of them created among themselves systems of either uniformity or reciprocity in insurance producer licensing within a three - year window after passage of glba .

the naic was given the authority to determine whether the states met this glba standard , with the possibility of federal judicial review of the determination .

the individual states and the naic reacted relatively quickly to this opportunity with the promulgation of an naic model law that would provide for reciprocity .

a sufficient number of states adopted laws providing for insurance producer licensing reciprocity that the naic determined the glba standards to avoid creation of the narab organization were met .

as a result , the narab organization was not created .

the first legislation specifically providing for the creation of a narab that the congressional research service has been able to identify was introduced in the 102 nd congress ( title iv of h.r .

4900 ) .

the bill was reintroduced in the 103 rd congress and subcommittee hearings were held that addressed narab , but the bill was not acted on further .

the original narab provisions were part of legislation that would have created a federal commission for solvency oversight of insurers .

the narab created by this legislation would have been similar to subsequent versions in that it would have been a nonprofit association whose members would have been state - licensed insurance producers , but the preemption of state law would have been narrower than in subsequent versions .

the original version of narab would not have permitted its members to operate with a single state license but instead would have operated to enforce uniformity though a central clearinghouse and a uniform producer application .

the board of directors would have been elected by the membership , and the federal solvency commission to be created by the bill would have had oversight authority over this version of narab .

