in the late 1970s , the supreme court launched an effort to construct a coherent jurisprudence under the fifth amendment takings clause .

this clause contains the constitution's principal safeguard of private property rights against the actions of government , mandating "just compensation" when property is "taken" by the government .

from the late 1970s until 2005 , the court's output in this area was prolific , with one or more decisions on takings clause issues handed down almost every year .

in mid - 2005 , however , the decisions came to a halt , and the court decided no more takings cases until mid - 2010 .

beginning then , the court seemed intent on making up for lost time .

in june 2010 , the court decided one taking case , followed by two non - taking but property - rights - related decisions in the court's 2011-2012 term , followed by no less than three takings decisions in the just - concluded 2012-2013 term .

this recent turn - about in the court's case - acceptance pattern raises the prospect that it is becoming interested anew in property rights .

the fact that the court ruled in favor of the property owner and against the government in five out of six of these cases buttresses that impression .

the taking case decided in 2010 is stop the beach renourishment , inc. v. florida dep't of environmental protection .

there , a four - justice plurality concluded that courts , just as other branches of government , could be subject to taking liability , as when they change the law in a manner that divests existing property rights .

the two property - rights - related cases decided in the court's 2011-2012 term did not involve the takings clause .

one is ppl montana llc v. montana , making clear that the court's test for "title navigability" requires a court to entertain claims of nonnavigability in a generally navigable river for all but the shortest river segments .

the consequence of nonnavigability when a state was admitted to the union is that title to that river segment did not pass to the state .

the other decision is sackett v. environmental protection agency , holding that when property owners receive an administrative order from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the clean water act , they may challenge at least the jurisdictional basis of that order , and likely any other legal inadequacies therein , right away — before epa seeks to enforce the order in court , requesting the court to impose potentially large penalties .

the three property - rights - related decisions during the court's 2012-2013 term , all takings cases , began with arkansas game & fish comm'n v. united states .

there , the court jettisoned its long - standing rule that when a government project induces flooding of private property , only flooding that is continual or at least "intermittent but inevitably recurring" can result in takings liability .

temporary flooding , the court now says , may also in appropriate cases subject the government to takings liability .

next , the court decided horne v. department of agriculture , ruling that a takings defense may be raised in federal district court — rather than the usual court of federal claims — to federal administrative penalties imposed under a depression - era commodity - price - support statute .

the narrow decision raises broader questions about when a property owner subject to a directive it regards as a taking can elect not to comply and then defend any subsequent enforcement action by asserting a taking defense .

last , the court decided koontz v. st. johns river water management district , holding that its previously announced test for when exaction conditions on land development approvals constitute takings applies even when a permit is denied because the landowner refused to accede to the conditions , and to monetary exactions as well as land - dedication conditions .

all six decisions confine themselves to general legal issues .

for property - owner - petitioners in five of the six cases , this meant that the supreme court had to remand the case to the lower courts to determine , based on the court's ruling , the merits of the property owner's particular claims .

as a result , while each of these five petitioners won in the supreme court , they may or may not obtain ultimate redress .

this report discusses each of these decisions in turn , noting their importance for federal programs .

it then comments on their aggregate significance .

why the supreme court takes cases is usually speculative .

the process by which the court decides which cases in its discretionary docket it will hear is famously opaque , other than the fact that at least four justices must approve any grant of certiorari .

few of the cases described in this report even involve a split in the circuit courts , a factor traditionally boosting the likelihood the justices will take a case .

some have speculated that the period of no property - rights - related decisions began just as chief justice rehnquist and justice o'connor left the court , in 2005 .

these justices indicated a particular interest in property rights in their opinions , and their departure from the court , some conjecture , may have left the issue without a strong champion .

no one has yet suggested , however , why their replacements on the court , chief justice roberts and justice alito , or others on the court should at this moment in time be motivated to reenter the area .

nonetheless , an informed guess can be made as to the court's motives .

in all six of the cases discussed here , the decisions below were against the private property owner .

this suggests that the justices ( or at least some justices ) are looking for circumstances where property rights are unfairly burdened .

and indeed , in five of its six decisions , the court reversed , ruling ( in four cases unanimously ) for the aggrieved property owner .

the one decision to go against the property owner was stop the beach renourishment .

as to three of the six cases , there are more specific clues as to the court's intentions .

in both stop the beach renourishment and koontz , one or more of the justices on the court when certiorari was granted had previously signed onto a dissent from denial of certiorari expressing concern , or at least interest , in the key issue in the current cases .

in koontz , the court noted its desire to resolve a split in the lower - court decisions .

undoubtedly , the decision with the greatest potential to alter how government relates to property owners , and thus analyzed at greatest length here , is koontz .

enlarging the reach of the supreme court's test for when exactions imposed as conditions on development approval effect takings could , depending on how the decision is read , bring in countless conditions used by local governments to induce land developers to spend money , invest labor , or supply equipment before they can proceed .

because the exactions taking test is viewed as friendlier to landowners than alternative takings tests that would otherwise apply , enlarging its scope may lead local governments to impose more modest exaction conditions or use them less frequently .

as noted , koontz has more limited relevance to federal programs .

for most of the supreme court decisions included here , major questions exist as to their scope and what they mean .

a decade from now , with the benefit of lower - court interpretation , the significance of these decisions will likely be easier to evaluate .

