both congressional and executive branch policy makers assert that science and technology play significant roles in improving homeland security .

congress established the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to ensure that dhs has access to science and technology advice and research and development ( r&d ) capabilities .

the dhs supports both short - and long - term r&d activities .

however , successful r&d activities may not result in a deployable product for many years .

the s&t directorate and other dhs offices have not developed technological advances at the rate some members of congress expected .

since the establishment of dhs , the appropriations committees have often expressed displeasure at the rate of technology transfer , the direction of r&d efforts , and the ability of the s&t directorate to align its resources and mission .

in a time of increasing fiscal constraint , some members have questioned whether s&t directorate r&d activities should receive priority over other non - r&d activities .

this report provides a brief overview of the s&t directorate's mission , organization , and budgetary structure ; a discussion of selected critiques of the s&t directorate ; and an analysis of selected issues facing congressional policy makers .

the s&t directorate is the primary organization for r&d in dhs .

congress also authorizes and appropriates funding for r&d in the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) and the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) .

with a total budget of $1.22 billion for fy2014 , the s&t directorate conducts r&d in several laboratories of its own , and funds r&d conducted by other government agencies , the department of energy ( doe ) national laboratories , industry , and universities .

additionally , the directorate supports the development of operational requirements and oversees the operational testing and evaluation of homeland security systems throughout the department .

the homeland security act provided direction and broadly defined functions for the s&t directorate .

however , how the under secretary for science and technology was to apply these functions and with what relative priority was left open for subsequent interpretation by the administration and congress .

this section highlights a selection of issues: priority - setting mechanisms for the directorate's r&d programs ; the scope of the directorate's r&d activities ; efforts to consolidate r&d activity within the s&t directorate ; and the directorate's role in the dhs acquisition process .

this list of issues is not comprehensive , but it illustrates some of the major challenges facing the s&t directorate .

in the past , congress has generally addressed these and other issues primarily through appropriations bills and reports , oversight hearings , and authorization of particular programs within the s&t directorate .

in prior congresses , members have introduced comprehensive reauthorization legislation for dhs as well as specifically for the s&t directorate , but none of these bills were enacted .

in the 113 th congress , members may introduce additional legislation to further refine oversight of the s&t directorate .

the 113 th congress enacted p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , which provided 2014 funding for dhs and other agencies .

see " funding " section , above , and crs report r43147 , department of homeland security: fy2014 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , for more information about fy2014 s&t directorate funding .

the 113 th congress enacted p.l .

113-6 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , which provided fy2013 funding for dhs and other agencies .

see " funding " section , above , and crs report r42644 , department of homeland security: fy2013 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , for more information about fy2013 s&t directorate funding .

h.r .

4034 , the wmd prevention and preparedness act of 2014 , would , among other provisions , direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to produce and update periodically a terrorism risk assessment of chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats ; and an integrated terrorism risk assessment that assesses all of those threats and compares them against one another according to their relative risk .

the under secretary would also perform tailored risk assessments to inform national recovery activities and at least every two years assess the risks posed by synthetic biology .

in addition , h.r .

4034 would direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to implement a process for establishing biological agent detector performance standards and evaluation that evaluates performance , develops standards , and promotes their use .

the under secretary would also assess acquisition of new biodetection systems in the context of detection system sensitivity and specificity .

h.r .

4034 would also require the under secretary to assess whether the development of technological screening capabilities for biological agents , pandemic influenza , and other infectious diseases should be undertaken by the directorate of science and technology to support entry and exit screening at ports of entry and for other homeland security purposes .

h.r .

3410 , the critical infrastructure protection act , would direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to conduct r&d to mitigate the consequences of electromagnetic pulse ( emp ) events .

these activities would include analyzing the risks to critical infrastructures ; determining those critical national security assets and vital critical infrastructures at risk ; evaluating emergency planning and response technologies ; analyzing available technology options to improve critical infrastructure resiliency ; and the capability of critical infrastructure to restore and recover following an emp event .

h.r .

2952 , the critical infrastructure research and development advancement act of 2013 , would require the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to submit to congress a strategic plan for federal physical security and cybersecurity technology research and development efforts for protecting critical infrastructure .

the dhs would submit updates every two years .

the under secretary for science and technology would coordinate with the under secretary for the national protection and programs directorate and consult with other stakeholders when developing this strategy .

the act would also require the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to submit to congress a study on dhs use of public - private r&d consortiums for accelerating technology development for critical infrastructure protection .

the dhs would submit updates every two years .

in addition , the act would direct the secretary of homeland security , through the under secretary for science and technology , to establish a technology clearinghouse for rapidly sharing proven technology solutions for protecting critical infrastructure .

the gao would be directed to evaluate the effectiveness of this clearinghouse within two years of its establishment .

h.r .

2872 , the border enforcement , security , and technology act of 2013 , would , among other provisions , direct the secretary of homeland security to develop a comprehensive plan for the technology for the security of the u.s. international borders .

as part of this plan , the secretary would be required to describe how the u.s. customs and border protection commissioner and the commandant u.s. coast guard commandant are working , or are expected to work , with the under secretary for science and technology to identify and test new technology .

h.r .

2719 , the transportation security acquisition reform act , would , among other provisions , direct the administrator of the transportation security administration ( tsa ) to develop a strategic multiyear technology acquisition plan in consultation with the under secretary for management , the chief information officer , and the under secretary for science and technology .

in addition , the act would require tsa to establish and document a set of formal baseline requirements prior to implementing a security - related technology acquisition .

the act would direct these baseline requirements to include the estimated costs ( including lifecycle costs ) , schedule , and performance milestones for the planned duration of the acquisition ; and identify the acquisition risks and a plan for mitigating these risks .

the act would direct the tsa administrator to consult with the under secretary for science and technology to ensure that achieving these performance milestones is technologically feasible and to develop plan for testing and evaluating the acquired technologies against the performance requirements .

h.r .

2691 and s. 1303 would repeal existing provisions in p.l .

110-329 , consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 , and p.l .

112-74 , consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , that require the administrator of the general services administration to sell through public sale all property and assets supporting the plum island animal disease center following the determination by the secretary of homeland security to locate the national bio - and agro - defense facility at a site other than plum island , new york .

s. 744 , the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act , as passed by the senate , would , among other provisions , require the department of defense's assistant secretary of defense for research and engineering to collaborate with the under secretary for science and technology to identify equipment and technology used by the department of defense that could be used by u.s. customs and border protection to improve the security of the southern border by detecting border tunnels ; detecting the use of ultralight aircraft ; enhancing wide aerial surveillance ; and otherwise improving the enforcement of such border .

 table a - 1 shows budget authority for the s&t directorate , reduced by applicable rescissions and sequestration .

it does not reflect transfers of appropriated funds not included in appropriations reports or funds appropriated to other dhs components subsequently that were provided to the s&t directorate to support component research needs .

note also that , the s&t directorate may not have obligated the entire amounts in the year of their appropriation .

as a result , data on obligations or outlays would differ from the amounts in the table .

