many americans view health care for their children and themselves as one of their top concerns .

the adverse consequences of going without health insurance may include unmet health and dental needs , lower receipt of preventive services , avoidable hospitalizations , increased likelihood of receiving expensive emergency room care , and reduced likelihood that the doctor is familiar with the patient's medical history .

from a public health perspective , early and frequent monitoring of children's health is a key component to ensuring the appropriate growth and development of children .

from a family perspective , health insurance coverage can reduce parental financial and emotional stress .

child support is the cash payment that noncustodial parents are obligated to pay to custodial parents for the financial support of their children .

child support payments enable parents who do not live with their children to fulfill their financial obligation to their children by contributing to the payment of childrearing costs .

ensuring that children get health care is one of the basic responsibilities of the child support enforcement ( cse ) program .

operating under federal and state statutes and regulations , state and local child support agencies are required to ensure that health care costs , generally referred to as medical support , are included in every child support order .

these costs may include payment of medical , dental , prescription and other health care expenses for children and provisions to cover health insurance costs as well as cash payments for unreimbursed medical expenses .

state child support guidelines , as well as state law and guidance , operationalize what constitutes medical support in a particular state .

this broad definition of medical support is relatively recent .

originally , federal requirements for child support orders focused on reimbursement for medicaid expenses and employer - related health insurance available to the noncustodial parent .

beginning in 1977 , congress has tried to offset some of the state costs associated with the medicaid program ( title xix of the social security act ) by allowing states to require medicaid recipients to assign their child support rights to the state and allowing the state to pursue private health insurance coverage and / or noncustodial parents for reimbursement of the cost of medicaid benefits provided to the child .

the underlying assumption was that children enrolled in public health coverage ( i.e. , medicaid ) might obtain employer - based coverage ( to offset the cost of medicaid ) through the noncustodial parent .

beginning in 1984 , mandatory assignment became law .

in 1984 , federal law required that state cse agencies petition for the inclusion of medical support as part of any child support order whenever health care coverage was available to the noncustodial parent at reasonable cost .

a 1993 amendment to the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) required employer - sponsored group health plans to extend health care coverage to the children of a parent / employee who is divorced , separated , or never married when ordered to do so by the state cse agency via a qualified medical child support order ( qmcso ) .

the 1996 welfare reform law further strengthened medical support by stipulating that all orders enforced by the state cse agency must include a provision for health care coverage .

the 1996 law also directed the cse agency to notify the noncustodial parent's employer of the employee's medical child support obligation .

to help obtain health care coverage for children , a 1998 law authorized the creation of the national medical support notice ( nmsn ) , a standardized form that is the exclusive document which must be used by all state cse agencies .

an appropriately completed nmsn is considered to be a "qualified medical child support order," and as such must be honored by the noncustodial parent's group health plan .

this legislation also required the establishment of a medical support working group to make further recommendations to the secretaries of labor and health and human services on how to improve medical support and to submit those recommendations to congress .

as evidenced in this brief history , since 1984 , congress has tried to increase provision of private health care coverage for children whose noncustodial parent has access to employer - based or group health insurance that is provided at a reasonable cost .

this strategy was seen as a way to make noncustodial parents responsible for their children and lessen taxpayer burden by shifting the cost of providing health care to children from the taxpayers back to the noncustodial parents .

for a detailed legislative history of provisions related to medical child support , see appendix a .

in 2006 , federal law defined the term "medical support" and required that states have procedures under which all child support orders that are enforced by cse agencies must include a provision for medical support for the child to be provided by either or both parents .

federal law further stipulated that cse agencies may enforce medical support against a custodial parent if health care coverage is available to the custodial parent at a reasonable cost .

medical support adds complexity to the cse program , in part , because the provision of medical child support can be imposed on either the noncustodial parent , the custodial parent , or both parents .

medical child support may be a significant additional expense for noncustodial parents .

in addition to the child support payment , noncustodial parents may be legally liable for paying health insurance premium costs , co - payments , deductibles , and / or unreimbursed medical expenses .

high health insurance premiums may negatively impact how much disposable income the noncustodial parent has available to meet his or her financial child support order .

if the premium is high , cash support may be substantially reduced , leaving the custodial parent without enough money to take care of the child's food , clothing , and shelter needs .

health care coverage of children and medical child support are not synonymous .

a child could be covered by a custodial parent's health insurance plan and the child support order may not contain any provision for medical support from the noncustodial parent .

conversely , a child may be receiving cash medical support but not be insured .

based on information from the federal office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , in the future , the establishment and enforcement of medical child support may become a cse program performance measure , however , more needs to be done before that can occur .

thus , even though states submit medical support data , the information is not subject to an audit to determine if it is "complete and reliable. .

also , because medical support establishment allows states to initiate legal medical support orders before determining whether or not the health insurance is affordable / reasonable , state cse agencies are severely hampered , if not totally stymied , in successfully enforcing medical child support orders .

data from ocse indicate that there has been some improvement in the establishment of medical child support but considerably less improvement in the enforcement of medical child support .

according to ocse data , in fy2011 , 81% of child support cases that had a child support order included medical child support .

in comparison , in fy1995 , 61% of child support cases that had a child support order included medical child support .

in contrast , the enforcement of medical support orders continues to be problematic .

in fy2011 , the medical support order was complied with in only 33% of the cases in which medical support had been ordered .

 ( see appendix b. ) .

the comparable figure in fy1995 was the same , 33% .

the cse program has at its disposal a wide variety of methods by which to obtain child support obligations .

collection methods used by state cse agencies include income withholding , intercept of federal and state income tax refunds , intercept of unemployment compensation , liens against property , reporting child support obligations to credit bureaus , intercept of lottery winnings , sending insurance settlement information to cse agencies , authority to withhold or suspend driver's licenses , professional licenses , and recreational and sporting licenses of persons who owe past - due support , authority to seize assets of debtor parents held by public or private retirement funds and financial institutions , and authority for the secretary of state to deny , revoke , or restrict passports of debtor parents .

also included in their available methods to collect child support obligations , states use the threat of jail and actual incarceration .

efforts to improve the establishment and enforcement of medical child support have a better chance of success if analyzed in the context of factors such as high health care costs , a decline in employer - provided health insurance coverage , an increase in the share of health insurance costs borne by employees , and a significant number of noncustodial parents who have low or moderate incomes .

moreover , it is important to recognize , as mentioned earlier , that cash support and medical support are not always compatible .

for example , if premiums , co - payments , and deductibles for health insurance and medical care owed by noncustodial parents rise , equity might suggest that the cash child support payment of noncustodial parents be reduced to reflect their payment of these medical costs .

custodial parents may then have less income to provide for the basic food , clothing , and shelter needs of their children .

conversely , if medical child support is not available , the family would be more likely to be financially disadvantaged by routine health care needs of children and could face dire economic circumstances if a child becomes seriously ill .

however , it must be recognized that there is a lot of overlap between cash support and medical support .

according to some cse administrators , a primary reason for upward modifications of child support awards is care needed for a child with special needs .

many states combine any cash medical support payment to the custodial parent with the regular child support order as a single payment .

some states order that the parents will split all medical costs leaving it to the parents to work it out between themselves .

additionally some experts argue that routine medical expenses , including health insurance costs , are in fact rolled into the expenditures data used to calculate the cost of raising a child upon which child support guidelines are based .

the public and policymakers generally agree that establishment and enforcement of medical support promotes equity in allocating childrearing costs between custodial and noncustodial parents , and usually saves federal and state dollars .

in 2010 , health reform legislation , p.l .

111-148 ( the patient protection and affordable care act ; aca ) , as amended by p.l .

111-152 ( the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ; hcera ) was enacted .

the primary goal of the aca is to increase access to health insurance for the millions of americans without coverage .

the aca expands federal private health insurance market requirements , and requires the creation of health insurance exchanges to provide individuals and small employers with access to insurance .

it also expands medicaid coverage at state option .

the aca has at least one shared goal with the cse program in that both are attempting to ensure that children have health care coverage .

current federal law requires every child support order established by a state cse agency to include a provision for medical child support .

states are required to include provisions for medical child support in their child support guidelines , and the cse program is required to pursue private health care coverage when such coverage is available through a noncustodial parent's employer at a "reasonable" cost .

a court or administrative agency may require an employee to provide health insurance for his / her children .

they may also require an employee to purchase family coverage if child - only coverage is not available .

courts require coverage if it is available at a reasonable cost to an employee through the employer or other group health insurance ( for example , a union ) .

employers are required to honor medical support orders established under state law .

the cost of private health insurance or cash medical support is considered reasonable if the cost to the parent responsible for providing medical support does not exceed 5% of his or her gross income or , at state option , a reasonable alternative income - based numeric standard defined in state law , regulations , or court ruling .

in applying the 5% or alternative state standard for the cost of private health insurance , the amount is the cost of adding the child ( ren ) to the existing coverage or the difference between self - only and family coverage .

for example , if a noncustodial parent is required to purchase family coverage in order to cover the requisite child ( ren ) , the entire cost of the family coverage is not taken into account in calculating the 5% of the gross income amount .

federal law mandates that health insurance coverage for children be enforced , where appropriate , through the use of the national medical support notice ( nmsn ) .

to ensure that children receive health care coverage when it is available and required as part of a child support order , state cse agencies send the nmsn to employers .

the notice is designed to simplify the work of employers and plan administrators by providing uniform documents requesting information about health care coverage .

states now are able to enforce such orders against both custodial and noncustodial parents .

if health insurance is not available , states can pursue the joint sharing of expenses ( i.e. , cost - sharing ) associated with the child's medical care .

providing for children's health care is a stated purpose of the cse program .

by connecting children to coverage through either of their parents' employers , medicaid , chip , health insurance exchanges ( beginning in 2014 ) , or other options — the cse program can assure that children will have continuous , stable access to health care as they grow up , and that the resources of both parents are being used most effectively for the child .

to recap , medical child support can take several forms .

states generally seek medical child support as sequenced below .

the noncustodial or custodial parent may be ordered to provide health insurance if it is available at reasonable cost through the parent's employer .

the noncustodial parent may be ordered to pay for other private health insurance ( health care coverage ) premiums .

the noncustodial parent may be ordered to reimburse the custodial parent for all or a portion of the costs of health insurance obtained by the custodial parent ( on behalf of the child ( ren ) ) .

if neither parent is able to obtain health insurance at a reasonable cost , the custodial parent may be ordered to apply on behalf of the child to a government - funded medical program such as medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

the cost of any medicaid expenses or chip coverage ( including premiums , co - pays , or coinsurance costs ) may be added to the noncustodial parent's monthly child support payment .

both parents may be required to pay a percentage of "out - of - pocket" medical expenses that are not covered through insurance .

the percentage is determined by the financial circumstances of each parent .

if neither parent has private insurance and the children are not eligible for medicaid or chip , the court may order the noncustodial parent to provide cash medical support in addition to the monthly child support payment ; and / or the noncustodial parent may be ordered to pay additional amounts to cover a portion of ongoing medical bills or as reimbursement for uninsured medical costs .

when the noncustodial parent is ordered to pay cash medical support , generally it is included in the cash child support order and a single notice of income withholding is sent to the employer to withhold from the parent's paycheck .

if the parent is ordered to provide insurance through the employer , the employer is required to enroll the child in health insurance coverage and withhold the necessary premium payments from the parent's income .

the employer is required to send any amount withheld directly to the health care plan .

in addition , employers must promptly notify the cse agency whenever the noncustodial parent's , and , at state option , the custodial parent's employment is terminated .

conversely , state cse agencies are required to promptly notify the employer when there is no longer a current medical support order in effect .

for more than 20 years , from 1984 through 2005 , many in congress held the view that noncustodial parents with affordable private health insurance should be made to include their children in such coverage .

this was seen as the way to make noncustodial parents responsible for the health care needs of their children and lessen taxpayer burden by shifting costs from the taxpayers back to the noncustodial parents .

before 2006 , the medical child support requirement was based on the assumption that most children enrolled in public health coverage could obtain private coverage through the noncustodial parent .

however , the ability of a noncustodial parent to provide private health coverage to his or her children is largely a function of income .

in most cases , low - income noncustodial parents do not have access to employer - sponsored health insurance , and never did , and when such insurance is available , it is often not affordable or actual coverage by the provider is inaccessible or impractical because the noncustodial parent's employer - sponsored coverage relies on a local network of health care providers that are too far from his or her children .

pursuant to p.l .

111-148 ( aca , as amended ) , beginning in 2014 larger employers ( i.e. , certain employers with at least 50 full - time equivalent employees ) will be required to either offer health insurance or be subject to a penalty if one of their full - time workers receives a subsidy to buy coverage through an exchange .

it is not yet known whether these aspects of the aca will increase the number of employers who will offer private health insurance to their employees .

also , pursuant to the aca ( as amended ) , certain individuals will have guaranteed access to health coverage outside the employment setting .

it is expected that many employers will still decline to offer health insurance , and workers in those firms ( and others ) will either purchase insurance through the new exchanges or enroll themselves and their families in medicaid if they are eligible or enroll their children in chip .

in addition to small employers , beginning in 2014 , the exchanges will provide new opportunities for individuals to access private health insurance , and provide access to premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies offered through the exchanges to make coverage in the private health insurance market more affordable for families no longer eligible for medicaid .

under the aca , as amended , beginning in 2014 , individuals with household income between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level will be able to obtain federally subsidized health insurance coverage through the health insurance exchanges .

in addition , the aca currently prohibits coverage exclusions for preexisting health conditions in children under age 19 and effective january 1 , 2014 , the aca will prohibit coverage exclusions for preexisting health conditions for all individuals regardless of age .

moreover , currently , health plans that provide dependent coverage must extend that existing coverage to children under age 26 .

the aca adds more complexity to the cse program but also may lead to health care coverage for more u.s. children .

most analysts maintain that existing medical child support policies must be updated and / or revised to align with aca reforms ( and anticipated reforms ) to children's health care coverage .

there are many unanswered questions and many concerns .

the four questions raised below highlight some issues about how the aca will interact with the cse program .

although the discussion below does not answer the questions per se , it provides background and context to the four concerns .

during the debate on the original cse legislation that was enacted in 1975 , its chief sponsor , senator russell long , who at the time was the chairman of the senate finance committee , stated: should our welfare system be made to support the children whose father cavalierly abandons them — or chooses not to marry the mother in the first place ? .

is it fair to ask the american taxpayer — who works hard to support his own family and to carry his own burden — to carry the burden of the deserting father as well ? .

perhaps we cannot stop the father from abandoning his children , but we can certainly improve the system by obtaining child support from him and thereby place the burden of caring for his children on his own shoulders where it belongs .

back in the early days of the cse program , families receiving aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) benefits comprised about 85% ( fy1978 data ) of the cse caseload .

afdc families were automatically eligible for and entitled to medicaid benefits .

in fact , during that period the primary goals of the cse program were ( 1 ) to reduce public expenditures on the afdc ( and medicaid ) program by obtaining child support from noncustodial parents on a consistent and ongoing basis and ( 2 ) to help some families to remain self - sufficient and off public assistance by providing the requisite cse services .

just as the cse program expanded / revised its mission over the years from welfare cost - recovery to service delivery , the cse program , pursuant to the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ; enacted in february 2006 ) expanded its view of who should be responsible for obtaining health care for children .

the cse agency no longer focuses exclusively on the noncustodial parent , but rather considers a wider range of options .

the cse agency now examines the ability of either or both parents to secure and / or provide medical support .

medical support is generally provided in the form of private health care coverage , but it also can be in the form of cash payments .

if private health insurance is not available to either parent , medicaid and / or chip benefits are sought and either the noncustodial parent or custodial parent or both are responsible for paying any applicable co - pays and deductibles .

as noted earlier , most americans view health care for their children and for themselves as one of their top concerns .

there is evidence that health care coverage improves prenatal care ( thereby reducing infant mortality and low birth weight ) ; reduces avoidable hospitalizations of children ; and increases the probability that children will receive recommended immunizations .

it is generally agreed that access to and provision of health care improves outcomes for children .

one of the goals president obama set for health reform is provision of quality , affordable coverage to those who don't have health insurance .

by connecting children to the right coverage for them — coverage through either of their parents' employers , medicaid , chip , exchanges , or other options — the cse program can help assure that children will have continuous , stable access to health care as they grow up , and that the resources of both parents are being used most effectively for the child .

there is general agreement that new methods need to be devised to help families who say that they do not know whether their child is eligible for publicly funded health care , do not know how to apply , or find the application processes too difficult .

some experts note that sharing data among programs can cut administrative costs , strengthen programs , and help more families access the benefits for which they are eligible .

because cse data and information are often stored in disconnected systems across a multitude of data centers and because data elements are defined differently by various organizations , programs , and entities , it is often hard to exchange data and correctly understand its meaning .

according to the ocse commissioner: technology has the power to help break down silos between state health and human services programs and improve customer service .

the promise of interoperable computer systems is that families will not have to go through multiple applications , interviews , and appointments to receive services and taxpayers will save money .

according to testimony related to data standards and electronic information exchange in the cse program: sound standards establish a technological vocabulary that allows parties with various perspectives to speak the same language when discussing electronic information and data exchanges .

further , the existence of quality standards provides a level playing field for the vendors that provide software and services to the governmental entities using them .

... as the quantity and complexity of the systems we operate increases , standards can help to insure that a common vocabulary exists for all of us to use in facilitating good and efficient government .

the ocse commissioner also has stated that data exchange standardization requirements " will eventually establish a common set of data elements and definitions in a format easily exchanged between different human services systems , and in fact with any system . .

the commissioner further stated: " with interoperable systems , we may do a better job of serving the whole person and the whole family ; we may more effectively share services , streamline information and business systems , and minimize duplicative costs to build , maintain and update redundant computer systems . .

moreover , according to the commissioner: the affordable care act ( aca ) is spurring states across the nation to create new eligibility and enrollment computer systems for medicaid and health insurance exchanges .

the aca presents a unique opportunity for state health and human services programs to integrate their systems both vertically and horizontally , and bring our programs one step closer to the "no wrong door" approach to service delivery .

in the past , this was not possible due to the requirement to cost allocate federal dollars across multiple programs .

however , through december 31 , 2015 , states can design , develop and implement system modules that perform common functions across all health and human services programs with enhanced 90 / 10 federal funding if they request a federal cost allocation waiver .

the technology is here to begin to integrate health and human services systems .

linking them will accomplish two goals: improve client outcomes and enhance operational efficiency .

the purpose behind this approach is to develop a standard format so as to improve the ability of two or more systems or entities to exchange information and to correctly use the information that has been exchanged .

it is asserted that this approach together with streamlined applications , automatic enrollment , telephone interviews , e - signatures , and other efforts to share data across programs help individuals and families get the assistance and support they need quickly without the need for redundant eligibility screenings , applications , or data verification .

proponents of these methods contend that by reducing steps in the eligibility determination and recertification processes , efficiencies and administrative savings can be obtained .

as mentioned earlier , the aca ( as amended ) requires states to implement an electronic look up of eligibility information that the state may have on file from some other sources ( eg , income , citizenship status , family composition , information on file from another social welfare program such as tanf or snap , etc. ) .

with the transition to magi ( modified adjusted gross income ) and this new beneficiary - focused system , individuals will only be required to supply eligibility information that does not match that which is on record with the state , or information that is missing from the shared eligibility system .

beginning january 1 , 2014 , the aca is expected to expand health insurance coverage to millions of individuals through new health insurance exchanges and expansions in medicaid .

however , questions remain regarding how the aca will impact medical child support .

some observers contend that with its history of developing new strategies for collection of child support payments and better customer service , the cse program will successfully handle future challenges .

they suggest that the cse program may have to redefine medical support , or pursue medical support only in cases in which children receive health care from public programs such as medicaid or chip , or allow the internal revenue service to take over the enforcement of medical support .

others note that the cse program is already having a hard time successfully serving custodial parents .

they suggest that the cse program re - emphasize the need to include medical expenses in the child support order and perhaps expend any resources gained from eliminating its role in the enforcement of medical support on helping low - income noncustodial parents obtain employment so they can fulfill their child support obligations .

appendix a .

legislative history of medical child support provisions just as temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) recipients must assign their child support rights to the state , so too must medicaid recipients assign their medical support rights to the state .

the impetus for the federal government moving into the arena of financial child support was to reduce federal expenditures on the former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) entitlement program ( replaced in 1996 by the time - limited tanf block grant program ) .

similarly , the impetus for the federal government moving into the arena of medical support for those children eligible for child support was to reduce federal costs in the medicaid program .

this section of the report summarizes major medical child support provisions .

p.l .

95-142 , medicare - medicaid anti - fraud and abuse amendments ( h.r .

3 ) , enacted october 25 , 1977 the first link between child support and medical support came as an attempt to recoup the costs of medicaid provided to public assistance families under title xix of the social security act .

just two years after the creation of the child support enforcement ( cse ) ( i.e. , title iv - d of the social security act ) program , the medicare / medicaid anti - fraud and abuse amendments of 1977 established a medical support enforcement program that allowed states to require medicaid applicants to assign their rights to medical support to the state .

further , in an effort to cover children with private insurance instead of public programs , when available , it permitted cse and medicaid agencies to enter into cooperative agreements to pursue medical child support assigned to the state .

activities performed by the cse agency under a cooperative agreement with the medicaid agency must be funded by the medicaid agency .

the 1977 law also required state cse agencies to notify medicaid agencies when private family health coverage was either obtained or discontinued for a medicaid - eligible person .

p.l .

98-369 , the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( h.r .

4170 ) , enacted july 18 , 1984 this law mandated states to require that medicaid applicants assign their rights to medical support to the state ( section 1912 ( a ) of the social security act ) .

p.l .

98-378 , the child support enforcement amendments of 1984 ( h.r .

4325 ) , enacted august 16 , 1984 , and corresponding regulations section 16 of p.l .

98-378 required the hhs secretary to issue regulations requiring state cse agencies to petition for inclusion of medical support as part of any new or modified child support order whenever health care coverage is available at "reasonable cost" to the noncustodial parent of a child receiving afdc , medicaid , or foster care benefits or services .

federal regulations further stipulated that any employment - related or other group coverage was considered reasonable , under the assumption that health insurance is inexpensive to the employee / noncustodial parent .

a 1993 study by cooper and johnson that analyzed 1987 data from the center for health expenditures and insurance studies indicated that for workers with income below the poverty line and employer - provided family health insurance , 77% of the premium was paid for by the employer .

regulations on october 16 , 1985 , the office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) published regulations amending previous regulations and implementing section 16 of p.l .

98-378 .

these regulations required state cse agencies to obtain basic medical support information and provide this information to the state medicaid agency .

the purpose of medical support enforcement is to expand the number of children for whom private health insurance coverage is obtained and thereby reduce medicaid costs for both the states and the federal government .

if the custodial parent does not have satisfactory health insurance coverage , the child support agency must petition the court or administrative authority to include medical support in new or modified support orders , and to also inform the state medicaid agency of such support orders that include a medical support obligation .

the regulations also require cse agencies to enforce medical support that has been ordered by a court or administrative process .

states receive child support matching funds from the federal government at the 66% rate for required medical support activities .

before these 1985 regulations were issued , medical support activities were pursued by cse agencies only under optional cooperative agreements with medicaid agencies .

some of the functions that the cse agency performed under these agreements included receiving referrals from the medicaid agency , locating noncustodial parents , establishing paternity , determining whether the noncustodial parent had a health insurance policy or plan that covered the child , obtaining sufficient information about the health insurance policy or plan to permit the filing of a claim with the insurer , filing a claim with the insurer or transmitting the necessary information to the medicaid agency , securing health insurance coverage through court or administrative order , and recovering amounts necessary to reimburse medicaid payments .

on september 16 , 1988 , ocse issued additional regulations expanding the medical support enforcement provisions .

these regulations required the cse agency to develop criteria to identify existing child support cases that had a high potential for obtaining medical support , and to petition the court or administrative authority to modify support orders to include medical support for these cases even if no other modification was anticipated .

the cse agency was also required to provide the custodial parent with information regarding the health insurance coverage obtained by the noncustodial parent for the child .

moreover , the regulation deleted the condition that cse agencies may secure health insurance coverage under a cooperative agreement only when it did not reduce the noncustodial parent's ability to pay child support .

p.l .

101-508 , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( h.r .

5835 ) , enacted november 5 , 1990 section 4606 of p.l .

101-508 amended one provision of section 1912 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the social security act to provide an exemption from the requirement of cooperating in establishing paternity and obtaining medical support and payments for poverty - level pregnant women described in section 1902 ( l ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the act .

while poverty level pregnant women are exempt from the cooperation requirements in section 1912 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) , these individuals are required to comply with similar provisions in sections 1912 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) and ( c ) .

in order to reconcile this apparent inconsistency , the exemption in section 1912 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) has been interpreted by the federal cse agency ( ocse ) as applying only to the father of a child born out of wedlock and entities whose liability derives from the father ( eg , the father's insurer ) .

therefore , poverty - level pregnant women may not be required as a condition of medicaid eligibility to cooperate with the state in establishing paternity or in obtaining support and payments for medical care from , or derived from , the father of the child born out of wedlock .

the poverty - level pregnant woman is still required to assign her rights , and the rights of any other person eligible for medicaid for whom she can legally make an assignment , to the state for support and payment of medical care from any third party .

she must also cooperate with the state and provide information to be used in pursuing any other third party that may be liable for care and services under the plan .

p.l .

103-66 , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( h.r .

2264 ) , enacted august 10 , 1993 before late 1993 , employees covered under their employers' health care plans generally could provide coverage to children only if the children lived with them .

however , as a result of divorce proceedings , employees often lost custody of their children but were nonetheless required to provide their health care coverage .

while the employee would be obliged to follow the court's directive , the employer that sponsored the employee's health care plan was under no similar obligation .

even if the court ordered the employer to continue health care coverage for the nonresident child of their employee , the employer was under no legal obligation to do so .

aware of this situation , congress took the following legislative actions in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) : 1 .

insurers were prohibited from denying enrollment of a child under the health insurance plan of the child's parent on the grounds that ( a ) the child was born out of wedlock , ( b ) is not claimed as a dependent on the parent's federal income tax return , or ( c ) does not reside with the parent or in the insurer's service area .

2 .

in any case in which a parent is required by court order to provide health coverage for a child and the child is otherwise eligible for family coverage through the insurer , insurers and employers were required: to permit the parent , without regard to any enrollment season restrictions , to enroll the child under such family coverage , to allow the custodial parent or the medicaid agency to enroll the child in the noncustodial parent's health plan when the noncustodial parent has family coverage but fails to provide health insurance coverage for a dependent child , and with respect to employers only , not to dis - enroll the child unless there is satisfactory written evidence that the order is no longer in effect or the child is or will be enrolled in comparable health coverage through another insurer that will take effect not later than the effective date of the disenrollment .

3 .

employers doing business in the state , if they offer health insurance and if a child support order is in effect , were required to withhold from the employee's compensation the employee's share of premiums for health insurance and to pay that share to the insurer .

the hhs secretary may provide by regulation for such exceptions to this requirement ( and other requirements described above that apply to employers ) as the secretary determines necessary to ensure compliance with an order , or with the limits on withholding that are specified in section 303 ( b ) of the consumer credit protection act .

4 .

insurers were prohibited from imposing requirements on a state agency acting as an agent or assignee of an individual eligible for medicaid that are different from requirements applicable to an agent or assignee of any other individual .

5 .

insurers were required to , in the case of a child who has coverage through the insurer of a noncustodial parent: ( a ) provide the custodial parent with the information necessary for the child to obtain benefits ; ( b ) permit the custodial parent ( or provider , with the custodial parent's approval ) to submit claims for covered services without the approval of the noncustodial parent ; and ( c ) make payment on claims directly to the custodial parent , the provider , or the state agency .

6 .

the state medicaid agency was permitted to garnish the wages , salary , or other employment income of , and to withhold state tax refunds to , any person who ( 1 ) is required by court or administrative order to provide health insurance coverage to an individual eligible for medicaid ; ( 2 ) has received payment from a third party for the costs of medical services to that individual ; and ( 2 ) has not reimbursed either the individual or the provider .

the amount subject to garnishment or withholding is the amount required to reimburse the state agency for expenditures for medical services provided under the medicaid program .

claims for current or past due child support take priority over any claims for the costs of medical services .

p.l .

104-193 , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( h.r .

3734 ) , enacted august 22 , 1996 under the 1996 welfare reform legislation , the definition of "medical child support order" in the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) was expanded to clarify that any judgment , decree , or order that is issued by a court or by an administrative process has the force and effect of law .

in addition , the 1996 welfare reform law stipulated that all orders enforced by the state cse agency must include a provision for health care coverage .

if the noncustodial parent changes jobs and the new employer provides health coverage , the state must send notice of required coverage to the new employer ; the notice must serve to enroll the child in a health plan of the new employer .

 ( before enactment of p.l .

104-193 , families who were not receiving public assistance benefits could choose not to seek medical support. ) .

p.l .

105-200 , the child support performance and incentive act of 1998 ( h.r .

3130 ) , enacted july 16 , 1998 p.l .

105-200 provided a uniform manner for states to inform employers about their obligation to enroll the children of noncustodial parents in employer - sponsored health plans .

it required the cse agency to use a standardized "national medical support notice" ( developed by hhs and the department of labor ) to communicate to employers the issuance of a medical support order .

employers were required to accept the form as a "qualified medical support order" under erisa .

states were required to begin using the national medical support notice in october 2001 , although many states had to delay implementation until enactment of required state enabling legislation .

an appropriately completed national medical support notice is considered to be a "qualified medical child support order" and as such must be honored by the employer's group health plan .

p.l .

105-200 also called for the joint establishment of a medical support working group by the secretaries of hhs and labor to identify impediments to the effective enforcement of medical support by state cse agencies and to submit to the secretaries of hhs and labor a report containing recommendations addressing the identified impediments .

in consultation with state cse directors and representatives of children potentially eligible for medical support , the hhs secretary was directed to develop a performance measure based on the effectiveness of states in establishing and enforcing medical support obligations , and to make recommendations for the incorporation of the measure in a revenue neutral manner into the child support incentive payment system .

these recommendations were due no later than october 1 , 1999 .

p.l .

106-394 , the federal employees health benefits children's equity act of 2000 ( h.r .

2842 ) , enacted october 30 , 2000 p.l .

106-394 provides federal agencies authority under the federal employees health benefits children's equity act of 2000 to enroll an employee and his or her family in the federal employee health benefits program ( fehbp ) when a state court or administrative authority orders the employee to provide health insurance coverage for a child of the employee but the employee fails or refuses to provide the coverage .

federal agencies may also enforce a child support order providing for direct income assignment ( i.e. , an amount of money for medical purposes as specified in the order ) .

if the employee is not enrolled for any fehbp coverage , the agency employing office must enroll the dependents and / or the employee in the standard option of the blue cross / blue shield service benefit plan .

if the employee has a self - only enrollment in a fee - for - service plan , the agency must change the enrollment to self - and - family in the same option of the same plan .

authorized enrollment changes may be processed retroactively , if necessary , to comply with the effective date of the court or administrative order .

the federal agency employer will receive a national medical support notice from the state child support enforcement agency and will be required to notify the plan administrator to enroll the children in an insurance plan .

upon enrollment , the federal agency employer will withhold premiums from the employee's income .

this order may be subsequent to , or in conjunction with , an order to withhold a monetary child support obligation .

p.l .

109-171 , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( s. 1932 ) , enacted february 8 , 2006 , and final regulations p.l .

109-171 required child support orders enforced by the cse program to include a provision for medical child support .

it required states to consider either or both parents' access to health insurance and permits enforcement of medical child support against both parents .

p.l .

109-171 defines "medical support" to include both health insurance ( coverage under a health insurance plan , including payment of premiums , co - payments , and deductibles ) and payment for children's medical expenses .

if health insurance is not available , states may require both parents to share the cost of their children's medical expenses .

regulations on july 21 , 2008 , the administration for children and families at hhs issued final regulations related to medical child support .

the regulations include both the deficit reduction act changes and recommendations by the medical child support working group ( mcswg ) .

among other actions , the final regulations stipulate that cash medical support or private health insurance is considered reasonable in amount if the cost to the obligated parent does not exceed 5% of his or her gross income or , at state option , a reasonable alternative income - based numeric standard defined in state child support guidelines .

the final regulations also require the state cse agency to inform the medicaid agency when there is a new or modified court or administrative order for child support that includes health insurance and / or cash medical support in the case of a child who is a medicaid applicant or recipient .

also , the state cse agency is required to communicate periodically with the medicaid agency to determine if there have been lapses in medicaid coverage for medicaid applicants or recipients .

to the extent that medical support has been assigned to the state , medical support collections are forwarded to the medicaid agency for distribution in accordance with federal regulations .

otherwise , the amount is forwarded to the family .

appendix b .

medical support coverage of children the following medical support data are drawn from the cse program's annual data reports to congress .

it is the only available state data on medical child support .

states submit medical support data to the federal office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) , but the data are not subject to an audit to determine if they are complete and reliable .

also , because medical support establishment allows states to initiate legal medical support orders before determining whether the health insurance is affordable , state cse agencies are severely hampered in successfully enforcing medical child support orders in cases in which a medical support order is established but the health insurance is not considered affordable by federal / state standards .

thus , one reason why coverage may not be provided as ordered ( i.e. , why enforcement rates of medical support are low ) may be because it is not available to the obligated parent at a reasonable rate .

there is little that the cse agency can do to enforce the existing medical support order in these circumstances .

thus , the medical support data in the following two tables should be used with caution .

with regard to table b - 1 , information from the state cse programs indicates the following for fy2011: there were 15.8 million cse cases .

as mentioned earlier the services provided by the cse program include among other things , locating noncustodial parents , establishing paternity , establishing child support orders , and collecting child support payments .

there were 12.8 million child support orders established .

some of the reasons why child support orders are not established for all cases are the following: the noncustodial parent's whereabouts is unknown , paternity has not been established , and / or income and resource information concerning the noncustodial parent has not yet been determined .

there were 2.8 million arrearages - only cases in which child support orders were established .

arrearages - only cases are cases in which the noncustodial parent does not owe any current child support but still owes past - due child support ( i.e. , the noncustodial parent did not pay the entire amount of child support owed in a prior given month ) .

in accordance with cse accounting procedures , cases with arrearages only are subtracted from the number of cases with an order established in determining medical support statistics .

there were 10.0 million cases with child support orders established if the arrearages - only cases are excluded .

medical child support was ordered in 8.1 million of the 10.0 million cases in which child support was established ( 81% of the cases ) .

the medical support order was complied with in 3.3 million of those 10.0 million cases ( 33% of the cases ) .

as indicated in the body of this report , the existence of medical support ( whether or not it is complied with ) is not directly related to whether a child has health care coverage .

in many cases in which the custodial parent has private health insurance or has enrolled her or his children in a publicly - funded health care program ( such as medicaid or chip ) , there might not be a medical support order .

health insurance coverage is the primary form of medical support .

in fy2001 , 93% of medical support orders stipulated health insurance coverage .

in fy2011 , the percentage was 88% .

the information in table b - 2 is a subset of the information in table b - 1 .

the compliance rates for medical support in the form of health insurance are similar to medical support compliance in general .

in fy2011 , medical support orders that stipulated the provision of health insurance coverage applied to 55% of all cse cases that had a child support order , and as mentioned 88% of cases with a medical support order .

health insurance coverage was provided as ordered in 31% of those cases .

 ( see table b - 2 . ) .

