for several years , some members of congress have favored "comprehensive immigration reform" ( cir ) , a label that commonly refers to omnibus legislation that includes increased border security and immigration enforcement , expanded employment eligibility verification , revision of nonimmigrant visas and legal permanent immigration , and legalization for some unauthorized aliens residing in the country .

other members of congress may favor addressing these issues sequentially ( eg , by implementing enforcement provisions and perhaps reforming legal immigration prior to legalization ) , and / or may disagree with the legalization and increased legal immigration provisions that have been features of major cir bills .

still others may be interested in legislating on some elements of cir but not others .

leaders in both chambers have identified immigration as a legislative priority in the 113 th congress .

while the house committee on the judiciary has ordered reported several distinct pieces of legislation that aim to reform immigration law thus far in the 113 th congress , the debate in the senate has focused on a single cir bill: the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) .

as introduced on april 16 , 2013 , s. 744 was the product of months of negotiations among four democratic and four republican senators — the bill's original co - sponsors — a group widely described as the "gang of 8. .

the senate judiciary held three days of hearings on s. 744 in april 2013 and then marked up the bill over five days in may , favorably ordering the bill reported by a vote of 13-5 on may 21 , 2013 .

the senate judiciary committee filed its written report on s. 744 on june 7 .

the senate passed the motion to invoke cloture on s. 744 on june 11 , 2013 , by a yea - nay vote of 82-15 .

the full senate debated s. 744 for several weeks in june and considered about two dozen amendments on the floor .

some amendments were folded into other amendments , the most significant of these being the hoeven - corker - leahy amendment on border security ( s.amdt .

1183 ) , which the senate approved by a yea - nay vote of 69-29 .

on june 27 , 2013 , the senate passed s. 744 , as amended , by a yea - nay vote of 68-32 .

this report summarizes major provisions of s. 744 , as reported by the senate judiciary committee and as modified and passed on the senate floor .

crs's analysis focuses on eight major policy areas that encompass the u.s. immigration debate: comprehensive reform "triggers" and funding ; border security ; interior enforcement ; employment eligibility verification and worksite enforcement ; legalization of unauthorized aliens ; immigrant visas ; nonimmigrant visas ; and humanitarian provisions .

some members of congress have raised concerns about proposals for comprehensive immigration reform on the grounds that the "bargain" some people see at the heart of such reform — tougher enforcement on the one hand and legalization plus visa reforms on the other — may be difficult to enforce .

some argue , for example , that while supporters of the 1986 immigration reform and control act ( irca ) promised that a one - time legalization , increased border enforcement , and a prohibition against employing unauthorized workers would solve the problem of illegal migration ; some of irca's immigration enforcement provisions were incompletely implemented .

partly to allay these concerns , the first sections of s. 744 would make implementation of certain enforcement provisions pre - conditions for the bill's legalization provisions ; and s. 744 would directly appropriate funding for certain enforcement measures .

these "trigger" and funding provisions were subject to substantive changes on the senate floor .

s. 744 includes a number of sections designed to strengthen border security , including mandates for new border security strategies ; increased border security personnel , equipment , and infrastructure ; dhs waiver authority and access to certain federal lands ; provisions related to immigration - related crimes and prosecutions ; and efforts to strengthen the entry - exit system .

the bill also includes a number of provisions to strengthen oversight of border security activities .

the immigration rules established by the ina are supplemented by an enforcement regime to deter and punish violations of those rules .

violations may be subject to criminal penalties ( see "immigration - related crimes" ) , civil fines , and / or may be grounds for an alien to be removed from the country .

with respect to the latter , the ina identifies two overarching reasons aliens may be ordered removed: grounds for inadmissibility and grounds for deportability .

the standard removal process , described in ina section 240 , is a civil administrative proceeding before an immigration judge from the doj executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) .

in some cases , immigration judges may grant certain forms of relief during the removal process , though their discretion is limited with respect to certain grounds for removal .

provisions in s. 744 would amend the ina's interior enforcement provisions in several ways .

subtitle e of title iii would provide additional resources to immigration courts ( see " immigration courts " ) .

the bill would create additional grounds of inadmissibility and deportability , while also broadening judges' discretion to waive certain such grounds ( see " grounds of inadmissibility , deportability , and relief from removal " ) .

s. 744 also would encourage alternatives to detention and strengthen dhs detention standards as well as congressional oversight of immigrant detention ( see " immigrant detention " ) .

subtitle h of title iii of s. 744 establishes special procedures to protect children who are affected by immigration enforcement ( see " protection of children during immigration enforcement " ) .

and other provisions in title iii address several additional aspects of immigration enforcement within the united states ( see " additional interior enforcement provisions " ) .

since the enactment of the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) of 1986 , it has been illegal for an employer to knowingly hire , recruit or refer for a fee , or continue to employ an alien who is not authorized to be so employed .

employers are required to review documents to verify the identity and work eligibility of new employees ; and employers and employees must sign a form attesting that they have reviewed such documents ( in the case of the employer ) and are authorized to work in the united states ( in the case of the worker ) .

the law also gives immigration officers and administrative law judges ( aljs ) authority to investigate alleged violations of these provisions , and establishes civil monetary penalties for substantive and paperwork violations , as well as criminal penalties for a pattern or practice of violations .

certain employers also use e - verify , an internet - based system that checks information provided by workers during the verification process against federal databases .

section 3101 of s. 744 would strike and re - write the employment verification and worksite enforcement provisions of the ina , imposing a new requirement to be phased in over time that all employers use an electronic eligibility verification system ( evs ) similar to e - verify , and strengthening the law's compliance provisions , among other changes .

in general , civil and criminal penalties for hiring unauthorized workers would roughly double relative to their current levels .

the law also would provide for several types of enhanced penalties , including special compliance plans , property liens , and potential debarment from federal contracts .

at the same time , the bill would impose a tougher standard of proof for liability , and pre - penalty notices that only could be issued if there is reasonable cause to believe a civil violation has occurred in the past three years .

other sections of s. 744 include a number of provisions apparently designed to limit the burden on employers that would result from these changes to ina section 274a ( see " employer protections " ) , and to prevent discrimination and otherwise protect lawful workers against potential adverse effects of the new system ( see " worker protections " ) .

as noted elsewhere ( see "comprehensive immigration reform funds" ) , section 6 of s. 744 would appropriate $750 million over a six - year period for dhs to expand and implement the evs .

in addition , section 3301 would establish an interior enforcement account , and authorize $1 billion to support actions by dhs , the commissioner of social security , the attorney general , and the department of state to carry out provisions described in title iii .

included within this authorization , dhs would be authorized , within five years , to increase to 5,000 the number of uscis and ice personnel assigned to administer and enforce the laws discussed in this section .

the secretary of dhs and the commissioner of the social security administration ( ssa ) would be required to enter into a reimbursable agreement to cover the full costs of ssa's responsibilities under the evs .

dhs would be required to issue regulations to implement section 3101 no later than one year after the bill's enactment .

how to address the unauthorized alien population in the united states is a key and controversial issue in comprehensive immigration reform .

there is a fundamental split between those who want to grant legal status to unauthorized aliens in the united states and those who want unauthorized aliens to leave the country .

among those who support legalization for at least some portion of the unauthorized population , there also may be disagreement about how to treat different segments of the unauthorized population as part of a legalization process .

s. 744 proposes to establish a general legalization program for unauthorized aliens in the united states ( see "registered provisional immigrants ( rpis ) " ) , with special pathways for aliens who entered the country as children ( see "dream act" ) and for agricultural workers ( see "agricultural worker legalization" ) .

as noted elsewhere , the implementation of certain enforcement provisions under section 3 of the bill serve as pre - conditions for the bill's legalization provision ( see "triggers for legalization and adjustment to lpr status" ) .

interim final regulations to implement all of the legalization provisions discussed in this section would have to be issued no later than one year after the enactment of s. 744 and would take effect immediately upon publication .

immigrants are persons admitted as legal permanent residents ( lprs ) of the united states .

under current law , permanent admissions are subject to a complex set of numerical limits and preference categories that give priority for admission on the basis of family relationships , an offer or employment in the united states , and geographic diversity of sending countries .

these limits include an annual flexible worldwide cap of 675,000 immigrants , plus refugees and asylees .

the ina specifies that each year , countries are held to a numerical limit of 7% of the worldwide level of u.s. immigrant admissions , known as per - country limits .

the pool of people who are eligible to immigrate to the united states as lprs each year typically exceeds the worldwide level set by u.s. immigration law , and as a consequence millions of prospective lprs with approved petitions are waiting to receive a numerically limited visa ( commonly referred to as the "backlog" or "queue" ) .

the immediate relatives of u.s. citizens ( i.e. , their spouses and unmarried minor children , and the parents of adult u.s. citizens ) are admitted outside of the numerical limits and are the flexible component of the worldwide cap .

s. 744 would revise the numerical limits on legal permanent immigration and would alter the system that allocates the visas .

it would repeal the diversity visa program beginning in fy2015 , but enable those who received diversity visas for fy2013 and fy2014 to be eligible to obtain lpr status .

two new "merit - based" categories would be created ( see "merit - based track one" and "merit - based track two" ) , one of which would be designed , in part , to replace the diversity visa .

the basic worldwide limits on family - and employment - based preference ( i.e. , numerically - capped ) visas would be unchanged at 480,000 and 140,000 , respectively ; but the bill would allow the allocation of unused roll - over and recaptured visas from previous years , would eliminate the per - country ceiling for employment - based preferences , and would increase the per - country ceiling for family - based preferences from 7% to 15% , in addition to other changes to these systems ( see "family - based immigration" and employment - based immigration" ) .

s. 744 also would modify rules for investor visas ( see "investor visas" ) , and include provisions to promote immigrant integration ( see "immigrant integration" ) .

in addition , s. 744 would make numerous other revisions to lpr immigration , including new procedures for how dhs and dos manage visa backlogs , new provisions for fiancés and fiancées of lprs , changes to the petition process when the sponsoring relative dies , and changes to certain country - specific and other special immigrant visas .

nonimmigrants — such as tourists , foreign students , diplomats , temporary workers , cultural exchange participants , or intracompany business personnel — are admitted for a specific purpose and a temporary period of time .

nonimmigrants are required to leave the country when their visas expire , though certain classes of nonimmigrants are "dual intent," meaning they may adjust to lpr status if they otherwise qualify .

current law describes 24 major nonimmigrant visa categories , and over 70 specific types of nonimmigrant visas , which are often referred to by the letter that denotes their section in the statute , such as h - 2a agricultural workers , f - 1 foreign students , or j - 1 cultural exchange visitors .

s. 744 would make extensive revisions to nonimmigrant categories for professional specialty workers ( see " h - 1b professional specialty workers " ) , intra - company transferees ( see "l visa intra - company transferees" ) , and other skilled workers ( see "other skilled and professional worker visas" ) .

the bill also would reform existing lower - skilled visa categories ( see " reforms to the h - 2b program " ) and establish a new "w" temporary worker category ( see "new nonimmigrant visas for lower skilled workers" ) .

additional nonimmigrant provisions in s. 744 would be designed to promote tourism ( see "tourism related provisions" ) and would make changes to student and other nonimmigrant visas ( see " other nonimmigrant visa changes " ) .

noncitizens' eligibility for major federal benefits largely depends on their immigration status and how long they have lived and worked in the united states .

eligibility rules differ for federal public benefits , including federal means - tested benefits .

under section 403 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora , p.l .

104-193 ) , federal means - tested benefits have been defined by regulation to include supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , medicaid , and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that the changes to immigration resulting from s. 744 as passed by the senate would result in a net increase of 9.6 million lprs in the first decade after enactment .

although cbo has observed the long - standing convention of not incorporating macroeconomic effects in cost estimates , cbo and the joint committee on taxation "relaxed that assumption by incorporating in this cost estimate their projections of the direct effects of the act on the u.s. population , employment , and taxable compensation. .

the increase in the number of legal residents would boost federal revenues , according to cbo , mostly because of the larger size of the labor force .

cbo further estimates that the number of legal residents would boost direct spending for federal benefit programs and notes that under s. 744 direct spending for enforcement and other purposes would also increase .

as a consequence , cbo estimates that enacting s. 744 as passed by the senate would "lead to a net savings of about $135 billion over the 2014-2023 period. .

