on september 21 , 1996 , congress passed p.l .

104-199 , the defense of marriage act ( doma ) .

section 2 of the law states that no state , territory , or possession of the united states "shall be required to give effect to any public act , record , or judicial proceeding of any other state , territory , possession , or tribe respecting a relationship between persons of the same sex that is treated as a marriage under the laws of such other state , territory , possession , or tribe , or a right or claim arising from such relationship. .

section 3 of the law defines "marriage" for federal purposes as "only a legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife," and specifies that spouse "refers only to a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife. .

on november 4 , 2008 , california citizens passed proposition 8 , adding new section 7.5 to article i of the california constitution that reads "only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in california. .

numerous legal challenges have been made to these laws , including petitions of certiorari that have been granted by the united states supreme court in two cases .

this collection of resources is intended to assist in responding to a broad range of research questions and requests for assistance related to the same - sex marriage law , and its consequent litigation before the supreme court .

h.r .

3396 was introduced in the house of representatives on may 7 , 1996 .

the bill was approved by the judiciary committee on june 12 , 1996 , and the house as a whole on july 12 , 1996 .

the legislation passed the senate on september 10 , 1996 .

it was signed by the president on september 21 , 1996 , and designated p.l .

104-199 .

below are links to selected legislative history documents from the 104 th congress on the defense of marriage act .

in march 2000 , california citizens passed proposition 22 , adding section 308.5 to the family code , which reads "only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in california. .

on may 15 , 2008 , the california supreme court found the statute to be unconstitutional and issued their opinion in re marriage cases , 183 p. 3d 384 ( cal .

2008 ) .

on november 4 , 2008 , california citizens passed proposition 8 , which added new section 7.5 to article i of the california constitution , and reads "only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in california. .

below are links to selected resources from the california secretary of state that offer history and further information on california proposition 22 and proposition 8 .

in addition to the cases above , information is provided on five other cases in which a petition for a writ of certiorari has been filed and that contain legal arguments related to the same - sex marriage question .

the following are selected links to statutes , laws , and cases that are relevant to the issues before the court .

listed below are existing crs products on the defense of marriage act , litigation , and related policy issues .

additional titles are available on the crs.gov website , http: / / www.crs.gov , by searching or browsing the civil rights and discrimination issues in focus page .

listed below are useful secondary sources related to same - sex marriage .

please note , crs has not verified the information in these resources .

in researching these cases , those less accustomed with court proceedings may encounter unfamiliar terms .

below are definitions , taken from black's law dictionary , ninth edition , for some common words used in litigation .

crs legal , policy , and research expert .

