supreme court justice louis brandeis famously praised the division of sovereign powers included within america's constitutional structure for its capacity to encourage states to "serve as a laboratory ; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country. .

this legislative freedom is constrained , however , by various constitutional restrictions including the supremacy clause , which provides that federal law "shall be the supreme law of the land. .

pursuant to this established principle of federal legal preeminence , any state law that conflicts with federal law is generally considered preempted and therefore void .

although simple in theory , the task of determining whether a state law is "in conflict" with federal law can be incredibly complex in practice .

the ongoing national debate over marijuana provides a clear example of the confusion associated with the states' ability to pursue policies that deviate from those advanced by the federal government .

in addition to the 20 states and the district of columbia that currently exempt qualified users of medicinal marijuana from penalties imposed under state law , colorado and washington in late 2012 became the first states to legalize , regulate , and tax small amounts of marijuana for personal ( i.e. , nonmedicinal ) use by individuals over the age of 21 .

these broad legalization initiatives stand in stark contrast to federal law , which makes the cultivation , distribution , or possession of any amount of marijuana — for any purpose other than bona fide , federally approved scientific research — a criminal offense .

therefore , the possession , cultivation , or distribution of marijuana remains a federal crime within colorado , washington , and every other state .

as a result , individuals who grow , possess , use , sell , transport , or distribute marijuana , even when done in a manner consistent with state law or pursuant to a state - issued license , are nonetheless in violation of the federal controlled substances act ( csa ) and remain subject to federal criminal prosecution or other consequences under federal law .

given the federal government's continued ability to enforce its own prohibition , it cannot be said that the washington and colorado laws create a right to use marijuana .

nor does compliance with state law provide a defense to a prosecution brought under federal law .

nevertheless , president obama expressed to barbara walters on abc's nightline program in a december 2012 television interview that in the hierarchy of federal drug enforcement priorities , his administration has "bigger fish to fry" than arresting recreational marijuana users in jurisdictions where such use is authorized by state law .

his personal views on this topic were later reflected in an august 2013 memorandum authored by the deputy attorney general , which instructed all federal prosecutors to use their "limited investigative and prosecutorial resources" toward certain specified marijuana - related criminal activities that the obama administration wants most to prevent , such as the distribution of marijuana to minors , the growing of marijuana on public lands , and the flow of revenue from marijuana sales to criminal enterprises , gangs , and cartels .

the memorandum implied that the federal government's drug enforcement priorities would likely not include prosecuting individuals or organizations engaged in marijuana activities that are conducted in clear compliance with state laws that permit and regulate them .

the memorandum noted , however , that "congress has determined that marijuana is a dangerous drug" that remains illegal under federal law .

the memorandum is an example of the doctrine of prosecutorial discretion , which gives the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) great leeway in choosing whether , and to what extent , to bring criminal prosecutions for violations of the controlled substances act .

however , a new administration in the white house could easily change this federal approach toward marijuana .

approved by a majority of washington voters in november 2012 , washington initiative 502 legalizes marijuana possession by amending state law to provide that the possession of small amounts of marijuana "is not a violation of this section , this chapter , or any other provision of washington law. .

under the initiative , individuals over the age of 21 may possess up to one ounce of dried marijuana , 16 ounces of marijuana infused product in solid form , or 72 ounces of marijuana infused product in liquid form .

however , marijuana must be used in private , as it is unlawful to "open a package containing marijuana ... or consume marijuana ... in view of the general public. .

in addition to legalizing possession , the initiative provides that the "possession , delivery , distribution , and sale" by a validly licensed producer , processor , or retailer , in accordance with the newly established regulatory scheme administered by the state liquor control board ( lcb ) , "shall not be a criminal or civil offense under washington state law. .

the initiative establishes a three - tiered production , processing , and retail licensing system that permits the state to retain regulatory control over the commercial life cycle of marijuana .

qualified individuals must obtain a producer's license to grow or cultivate marijuana , a processor's license to process , package , and label the drug , or a retail license to sell marijuana to the general public .

the initiative establishes various restrictions and requirements for obtaining the proper license and directs the state lcb to adopt procedures for the issuance of such licenses .

on october 16 , 2013 , the lcb adopted detailed rules for implementing initiative 502 .

these rules describe the marijuana license qualifications and application process , application fees , marijuana packaging and labeling restrictions , recordkeeping and security requirements for marijuana facilities , and reasonable time , place , and manner advertising restrictions .

according to the adopted rules , washington will impose an excise tax of 25% of the selling price on each marijuana sale within the established distribution system .

the state excise tax will , therefore , be imposed on three separate transactions: the sale of marijuana from producer to processor , from processor to retailer , and from retailer to consumer .

all collected taxes are deposited into the dedicated marijuana fund and distributed , mostly to social and health services , as outlined in the initiative .

the initiative also specifically provides that operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of marijuana remains a crime .

as of the date of this report , recreational marijuana retail stores have yet to open in washington , although the lcb has received well over 3,000 applications to grow , process , or sell marijuana .

the lcb has estimated that the application review process may take approximately 90 days to complete and that the state may begin issuing licenses by the end of february 2014 .

unlike the relatively specific initiative 502 , colorado amendment 64 provides only a general framework for the legalization , regulation , and taxation of marijuana in colorado — leaving regulatory implementation to the colorado department of revenue .

in november 2012 , colorado voters approved an amendment to the colorado constitution to ensure that it "shall not be an offense under colorado law or the law of any locality within colorado" for an individual 21 years of age or older to possess , use , display , purchase , consume , or transport one ounce of marijuana ; or possess , grow , process , or transport up to six marijuana plants .

unlike initiative 502 , which permits only state - licensed facilities to grow marijuana , amendment 64 allows any individual over the age of 21 to grow small amounts of marijuana ( up to six plants ) for personal use .

marijuana may not , however , be consumed "openly and publicly or in a manner that endangers others. .

in addition , the amendment also provides that it shall not be unlawful for a marijuana - related facility to purchase , manufacture , cultivate , process , transport , or sell larger quantities of marijuana so long as the facility obtains a current and valid state - issued license .

however , the amendment expressly permits local governments within colorado to regulate or prohibit the operation of such facilities .

by comparison , washington's initiative 502 does not expressly allow washington cities to ban marijuana stores from opening within their borders , and there is uncertainty about the degree to which such local prohibitions or moratoriums on the operation of recreational marijuana businesses may be enforced .

amendment 64 appears to envision a three - tier distribution and regulatory system , similar to that established in washington , involving the licensing of marijuana cultivation facilities , marijuana product manufacturing facilities , and retail marijuana stores .

in december 2012 , governor john hickenlooper established the amendment 64 implementation task force ( task force ) to "identify the legal , policy and procedural issues that need to be resolved , and to offer suggestions and proposals ... that need to be taken" to effectively implement amendment 64 .

the task force issued a final report on march 13 , 2013 , consisting of 58 recommendations .

of those recommendations , the most significant include establishing a "vertical integration" model in which "cultivation , processing and manufacturing , and retail sales must be a common enterprise under common ownership" ; imposing the required 15% excise tax while preserving the option for a future marijuana sales tax ; restricting commercial licenses to grow , process , or sell marijuana to state residents only ; and permitting both residents and nonresidents to purchase marijuana , but imposing more restrictive limits on the quantity of marijuana that may be purchased by out - of - state consumers ( a quarter ounce versus an ounce for individuals with a colorado state - issued identification card ) .

to implement amendment 64 , the colorado general assembly passed three bills that were signed into law by governor hickenlooper on may 28 , 2013 .

on september 9 , 2013 , the colorado department of revenue and state licensing authority adopted regulations to implement licensing qualifications and procedures for retail marijuana facilities .

the regulations establish procedures for the issuance , renewal , suspension , and revocation of licenses ; provide a schedule of licensing and renewal fees ; and specify requirements for licensees to follow regarding physical security , video surveillance , labeling , health and safety precautions , and product advertising .

on november 5 , 2013 , colorado voters approved a 25% tax on retail marijuana ( a 15% excise tax that would raise revenues to be used for public school capital construction , and an additional 10% sales tax that would generate revenues to fund the enforcement of the retail marijuana regulations ) .

on december 23 , 2013 , the colorado marijuana enforcement division issued its first recreational marijuana licenses to 348 businesses ( 136 retail stores , 31 product companies , 178 growing facilities , and 3 testing laboratories ) .

while these businesses have been granted state approval to produce and sell marijuana , they may also have to gain the licensing approval from local governments prior to their operation .

on january 1 , 2014 , 40 licensed retail marijuana stores opened their doors to sell marijuana to anyone 21 years of age or over .

congress enacted the controlled substances act ( csa ) as title ii of the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 .

the purpose of the csa is to regulate and facilitate the manufacture , distribution , and use of controlled substances for legitimate medical , scientific , research , and industrial purposes , and to prevent these substances from being diverted for illegal purposes .

the csa places various plants , drugs , and chemicals ( such as narcotics , stimulants , depressants , hallucinogens , and anabolic steroids ) into one of five schedules based on the substance's medical use , potential for abuse , and safety or dependence liability ; schedule i substances are deemed to have no currently accepted medical use in treatment and can only be used in very limited circumstances , whereas substances classified in schedules ii , iii , iv , and v have recognized medical uses and may be manufactured , distributed , and used in accordance with the csa .

the csa requires persons who handle controlled substances ( such as drug manufacturers , wholesale distributors , doctors , hospitals , pharmacies , and scientific researchers ) to register with the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) in the u.s. department of justice , the federal agency that administers and enforces the csa .

such registrants are subject to strict requirements regarding drug security , recordkeeping , reporting and production quotas , in order to minimize theft and diversion .

federal civil and criminal penalties are available for anyone who manufactures , distributes , imports , or possesses controlled substances in violation of the csa ( both "regulatory" offenses as well as illicit drug trafficking and possession ) .

because controlled substances classified as schedule i drugs have "a high potential for abuse" with "no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the united states" and lack "accepted safety for use of the drug [] under medical supervisions," they may not be dispensed under a prescription , and such substances may only be used for bona fide , federal government - approved research studies .

under the csa , only dea - licensed doctors are allowed to prescribe controlled substances listed in schedules ii - v to patients .

federal regulations stipulate that a lawful prescription for a controlled substance may only be "issued for a legitimate medical purpose by an individual practitioner acting in the usual course of his professional practice. .

the csa establishes an administrative mechanism for substances to be controlled ( added to a schedule ) ; decontrolled ( removed from the scheduling framework altogether ) ; and rescheduled or transferred from one schedule to another .

federal rulemaking proceedings to add , delete , or change the schedule of a drug or substance may be initiated by the dea , the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , or by petition by any interested person .

congress may also change the scheduling status of a drug or substance through legislation .

when congress enacted the csa in 1970 , marijuana was classified as a schedule i drug .

today , marijuana is still categorized as a schedule i controlled substance and is therefore subject to the most severe restrictions contained within the csa .

pursuant to the csa , the unauthorized cultivation , distribution , or possession of marijuana is a federal crime .

although various factors contribute to the ultimate sentence received , the mere possession of marijuana generally constitutes a misdemeanor subject to up to one year imprisonment and a minimum fine of $1,000 .

a violation of the federal "simple possession" statute that occurs after a single prior conviction under any federal or state drug law triggers a mandatory minimum fine of $2,500 and a minimum imprisonment term of 15 days ( up to a maximum of two years ) ; if the defendant has multiple prior drug offense convictions at the time of his or her federal simple possession offense , the sentencing court must impose a mandatory minimum fine of $5,000 and a mandatory minimum imprisonment term of 90 days ( up to a maximum term of three years ) .

on the other hand , the cultivation or distribution of marijuana , or the possession of marijuana with the intent to distribute is subject to more severe penalties .

such conduct generally constitutes a felony subject to as much as five years imprisonment and a fine of up to $250,000 .

the colorado and washington laws , which legalize , regulate , and tax an activity the federal government expressly prohibits , appear to be logically inconsistent with established federal policy and are therefore likely subject to a legal challenge under the constitutional doctrine of preemption .

the principal that states cannot enact laws that contradict federal law is grounded in the supremacy clause of article vi , cl .

2 , which states that "[t]he constitution , and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof ; and all treaties made ... under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land. .

the supremacy clause , therefore , "elevates" the u.s. constitution , federal statutes , federal regulations , and treaties above the laws of the states .

as a result , where federal and state law are in conflict , the state law is generally preempted , leaving it void and without effect .

the supreme court has established three general classes of preemption: express preemption , conflict preemption , and field preemption .

express preemption exists where the language of a federal statute explicitly states the degree to which related state laws are superseded by federal law .

in contrast , where congress does not articulate its view as to a statute's intended impact on state laws , a court may imply preemption if there is evidence that congress intended to supplant state authority .

preemption is generally implied in two situations .

first , under field preemption , a state law is preempted where a "scheme of federal regulation is so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that congress left no room for the states to supplement it.... " second , under conflict preemption , a state law is preempted "where compliance with both federal law and state regulations is a physical impossibility ... or where state law stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress. .

regardless of the type of preemption at play , the task of evaluating the preemptive effect of a federal law is "one of determining congressional intent. .

by making its intent clear , congress may choose to preempt all related state laws , no state laws , or only select state laws .

the united states is a party to various treaties that impose international obligations relating to the control of marijuana .

these treaties generally seek to curb the use of controlled substances while carving out exceptions for "medicinal and scientific" uses .

the principle governing treaty in international drug control , which has been agreed to by more than 180 nations , is the single convention on narcotic drugs ( single convention ) .

the single convention imposes restrictions on the manufacturing , distribution , and trade in narcotic drugs by establishing a multi - schedule classification structure that applies varying controls for each schedule .

this framework later served as the blueprint for the csa and other foreign drug control statutes .

"cannabis" is listed as a schedule i substance under the single convention and is therefore subject to the agreement's most restrictive controls .

for example , parties must "take such legislative and administrative measures as may be necessary ... to limit exclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production , manufacture , export , import , distribution of , trade in , use and possession of drugs" ; limit the quantity of the drug manufactured and imported to "the quantity consumed ... for medical and scientific purposes" ; and furnish the international narcotics control board with information , estimates , and statistics related to the consumption and production of the drug .

in addition to the single convention , the 1971 convention on psychotropic substances requires that specific controls be placed by parties upon thc , the physiologically active chemical in marijuana , while the 1988 united nations convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances requires parties to establish criminal penalties for the possession , purchase , or cultivation of marijuana for nonmedicinal consumption , but only to the extent that such action is consistent with the "constitutional principles and basic concepts of [the country's] legal system. .

both the u.s. drug enforcement agency ( dea ) and the u.s. department of state have determined that in order to comply with these international obligations , it is necessary that marijuana remain on either schedule i or schedule ii of the federal csa .

the dea , for example , has cited the nation's obligations under the single convention as the legal justification for denying rulemaking petitions requesting that the attorney general exercise his authority under the csa to remove marijuana entirely from control , or to transfer marijuana to schedule iii or lower .

the legalization measures enacted by washington and colorado would appear to be inconsistent with the obligations imposed upon the united states under existing international drug control treaties .

however , existing jurisprudence suggests that a reviewing court may not view these treaty obligations , in and of themselves , as sufficient to preempt and invalidate the state laws .

it is well established that treaties , like federal statutes , may preempt conflicting state laws .

the supremacy clause expressly provides that in addition to federal law , "all treaties made ... under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land. .

therefore , a state law is generally preempted to the same degree whether it is in conflict with a federal statute or an international treaty obligation .

however , not all treaties are accorded "automatic" preemptive effect .

only where a treaty "constitute[s] binding federal law," without the "aid of any [implementing] legislative provision," does it qualify as the "supreme law of the land" for preemption purposes .

such treaties are known as "self - executing" treaties — meaning an international agreement with "automatic domestic effect as federal law upon ratification. .

the supreme court recently clarified the distinction between the preemptive effect of self - executing and non - self - executing treaties in medellin v. texas .

medellin involved an evaluation of whether a decision of the international court of justice ( icj ) — and a series of underlying international agreements that required compliance with icj decisions — constituted enforceable federal law with the authority to preempt texas procedural court rules .

in holding that the state court rules were not preempted , the court noted that it had "long recognized the distinction between treaties that automatically have effect as domestic law , and those that ... do not by themselves function as binding federal law. .

although the icj decision had clearly represented an "international obligation," it did not "of its own force constitute binding federal law that preempts state restrictions. .

like the icj decision at issue in medellin , neither the single convention nor the other international drug control treaties appear to be "self - executing. .

each treaty requires the signatory nation to give legal effect to the goals of the treaty through domestic implementing legislation .

the provisions of the treaties do not themselves establish binding domestic law .

the united states , for example , implemented the obligations of these treaties through the csa .

because these treaties do not create binding law "of [their] own force," it would appear unlikely that a u.s. court would accord the treaties direct preemptive effect .

indeed , in county of san diego , the california court explicitly rejected treaty preemption arguments on the grounds that the single convention is non - self - executing .

thus it would appear unlikely that the washington and colorado laws would be found to be preempted by existing international obligations .

the department of justice ( doj ) may respond in several different ways to state efforts to allow marijuana use .

first , doj could prioritize the prosecution of certain criminal activities involving marijuana over activities that are conducted in clear compliance with state law .

the doctrine of prosecutorial discretion gives doj considerable leeway in deciding whether , and to what extent , to bring criminal prosecutions for violations of the csa .

in addition , doj may utilize the csa forfeiture provision to deter certain activities without actually engaging in criminal prosecutions .

finally , doj may ask the federal judiciary to directly invalidate state marijuana laws or regulatory schemes by filing a civil lawsuit .

given the obama administration's informal statements and current approach to medical marijuana , it would appear unlikely that doj is going to expend significant resources to investigate and prosecute individuals who merely possess and use less than one ounce of marijuana , in private , pursuant to washington or colorado law .

however , even if the probability of becoming the subject of a federal criminal prosecution for a violation of the csa appears remote , there does exist a number of other consequences under federal law that are triggered by the mere use of marijuana , even absent an arrest or conviction .

perhaps most prominent among these concerns is the possibility that marijuana users may lose their ability to purchase and possess a firearm , be barred from living in public housing , or find themselves subject to employment consequences in the workplace .

under the gun control act , it is unlawful to possess , ship , transport , receive , or dispose of any firearm or ammunition to any person "who is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance" as defined by the csa .

federal regulation defines an "unlawful user" or addict of a controlled substance as one who "has lost the power of self - control with reference to the controlled substance ; and any person who is a current user of a controlled substance in a manner other than as prescribed by a licensed physician. .

furthermore , a person may be considered an unlawful user even if he is not using the substance at the precise time the person seeks to acquire a firearm or receives or possesses a firearm .

however , after state laws regarding medical marijuana were enacted , the bureau of alcohol , tobacco firearms , and explosives ( atf ) issued an open notice stating that "any person who uses or is addicted to marijuana , regardless of whether his or her state has passed legislation authorizing marijuana use for medicinal purposes , is an unlawful user of or addicted to a controlled substance , and is prohibited by federal law from possessing firearms or ammunition. .

these individuals are to answer "yes" when asked on the firearms transfer form if they are unlawful users of a controlled substance .

with the legalization of marijuana for recreational purposes in colorado and washington , it seems likely the atf will take the same approach and consider a recreational user of marijuana to be a prohibited possessor of firearms regardless of whether the use is lawful under state provisions .

in addition to potentially losing the ability to purchase and possess a firearm , federal law also establishes that "illegal drug users" are ineligible for federally assisted housing .

42 u.s.c .

§§13661 and 13662 require public housing agencies and owners of federally assisted housing to establish standards that would allow the agency or owner to prohibit admission to , or terminate the tenancy or assistance of , any applicant or tenant who is an illegal drug user .

an agency or an owner can take these actions if a determination is made , pursuant to the standards established , that an individual is "illegally using a controlled substance," or if there is reasonable cause to believe that an individual has a "pattern of illegal use" of a controlled substance that could "interfere with the health , safety , or right to a peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents. .

under federal law , marijuana remains a controlled substance , thus , it would appear that any individual who the housing authority reasonably believes is using marijuana could be denied access to , or evicted from , federally assisted housing .

with respect to medical marijuana , the department of housing and urban development previously concluded that public housing agencies or owners "must deny admission " to applicants who are using medical marijuana , but "have statutorily - authorized discretion with respect to evicting or refraining from evicting current residents on account of their use of medical marijuana. .

some employers may face the loss of federal funding or could be subject to administrative fines if they do not maintain and enforce policies aimed at achieving a drug - free , safe workplace .

the federal drug - free workplace act of 1988 ( dfwa ) imposes a drug - free workplace requirement on any entity that receives federal contracts with a value of more than $100,000 or that receives any federal grant .

dfwa requires these entities to make ongoing , good faith efforts to comply with the drug - free workplace requirement in order to qualify , and remain eligible , for federal funds .

employees who work for federal contractors and grantees could potentially be subject to employer discipline or even termination if they use marijuana while on the job or show up for work under the influence of marijuana , even if the marijuana use is permitted by state law , as such usage may create risks to others' safety .

 ( similarly , the drug - free schools and communities act amendment of 1989 renders any institution of higher education ineligible for federal funding if it fails to establish and implement a program to prevent the abuse of illicit drugs by students and employees on campus grounds. ) .

in addition , employers under the jurisdiction of the occupational safety and health administration have a general duty to provide to their employees a safe workplace under the occupational safety and health act .

an employee who uses marijuana at work may be considered a workplace hazard if he or she poses a danger to other workers ; employers thus risk administrative fines if they do not enforce policies that seek to avoid such a hazard .

several bills concerning marijuana have been introduced that reflect different approaches in response to the state legalization initiatives .

h.r .

499 , ending federal marijuana prohibition act of 2013 .

this bill would direct the attorney general to issue a final order , within 60 days of the bill's enactment , that entirely removes marijuana from any csa schedule .

in addition , the bill would amend the csa by adding a new section 103 that declares that no provision of the csa shall apply to marijuana , with the following new exception: shipping or transporting marijuana from anywhere outside a jurisdiction of the united states into such a jurisdiction where marijuana use , possession , or sale is prohibited .

the bill would make conforming amendments to the csa as well as other sections of the u.s. code to expressly remove the word "marijuana" or "marihuana" from various penalty , enforcement , and definition provisions .

the bill also would amend the federal alcohol administration act to create a new section entitled "unlawful businesses without marijuana permit. .

this section would make it unlawful to engage in importing , shipping , or selling marijuana in interstate or foreign commerce , or cultivating , producing , manufacturing , packaging , or warehousing marijuana , without a permit issued by the secretary of the treasury .

the criminal fine for persons engaging in such activity without a permit would be not more than $1,000 , although the secretary would be allowed to collect a payment from the violator of up to $500 in lieu of referring the violation to the attorney general for prosecution .

the secretary would have to follow specific eligibility criteria set forth in the bill in selecting applicants for a marijuana business permit and the secretary would also be required to establish a reasonable permit fee to cover the cost of implementing and overseeing all aspects of federal regulation of marijuana .

finally , the bill would grant the food and drug administration the same authorities with respect to marijuana as it has with respect to alcohol , and would transfer all current functions of the dea administrator relating to marijuana enforcement to the director of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives .

h.r .

501 , marijuana tax equity act of 2013 .

this bill would amend the internal revenue code to impose an excise tax on the sale of marijuana by the producer or importer of the drug , equivalent to 50% of the price for which it was sold .

in addition , the bill would require anyone engaged in a "marijuana enterprise" to pay an occupational tax in the amount of $1,000 per year ( for producers , importers , or manufacturers of marijuana ) , or $500 per year ( for distributors , retailers , or anyone who transports , stores , or displays marijuana products ) .

the bill would require all individuals , prior to commencing business as a marijuana enterprise , to obtain a permit from the secretary of the treasury .

finally , the bill would impose civil and criminal penalties for violation of the duty to pay the new taxes regarding marijuana as well as engaging in business as a marijuana enterprise without obtaining the requisite permit .

h.r .

689 , states' medical marijuana patient protection act .

this bill would direct the secretary of health and human services , in cooperation with the national academy of sciences' institute of medicine , to submit to the dea administrator a recommendation on the scheduling of marijuana within the csa , although the bill precludes the secretary from selecting either schedule i or ii .

the secretary would be required to issue such recommendation within 180 days of the enactment of the bill , and the dea administrator would need to issue a proposed rulemaking for the rescheduling of marijuana in accordance with the recommendation within a year of enactment of the bill .

the legislation declares that no provision of the csa , nor any provision of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , shall prohibit or otherwise restrict in a state where the medical use of marijuana is lawful under state law , the production , prescription , transportation , distribution , possession , or use of marijuana for medical use .

finally , the bill would require the attorney general , within 180 days of the bill's enactment , to transfer control over access to marijuana for research purposes ( currently the responsibility of the national institute on drug abuse , a component of the national institutes of health , u.s. department of health and human services ) to an executive branch entity "that is not focused on researching the addictive properties of substances. .

the bill would require such entity to "take appropriate actions to ensure that an adequate supply of marijuana is available for therapeutic and medicinal research. .

h.r .

710 , truth in trials act .

this bill would amend the federal criminal code ( title 18 of the u.s. code ) to provide an affirmative defense for conduct regarding the medical use of marijuana in a prosecution or proceeding for any marijuana - related offense under any federal law .

individuals asserting such defense must establish , by a preponderance of the evidence , that their marijuana - related activities were conducted in compliance with state law regarding medical use of marijuana .

the bill would require that any property seized by the government in connection with such prosecution or proceeding be returned to the owner within 10 days of the court finding that the owner has established a valid affirmative defense .

finally , the bill would permit a court to hold liable for the marijuana - related offense a defendant who has engaged primarily , but not exclusively , in medical marijuana activities , only with respect to the amount of marijuana that was used for nonmedical purposes .

h.r .

784 , states' medical marijuana property rights protection act .

this bill would amend the civil forfeiture provisions of the csa to provide that no real property may be subject to civil forfeiture to the united states due to medical marijuana - related activities that are performed in compliance with state law .

h.r .

964 , respect states' and citizens' rights act of 2013 .

this bill would amend the csa's preemption provision , section 708 ( codified at 21 u.s.c .

§903 ) , to provide a specific rule of construction pertaining to state marijuana laws: that no provision of the csa shall be construed as — ( 1 ) indicating an intent on the part of congress to occupy the field in which that provision operates , including criminal penalties , to the exclusion of state law regarding marijuana , or ( 2 ) preempting any such state law .

h.r .

1523 , respect state marijuana laws act of 2013 .

this bill would amend federal law to provide that no provision of the csa related to marijuana may be applied to any person acting in compliance with state laws relating to marijuana .

h.r .

1635 , national commission on federal marijuana policy act of 2013 .

this bill would establish a federal commission to undertake a comprehensive review of current federal policies toward marijuana .

h.r .

2652 , marijuana businesses access to banking act of 2013 .

this bill would provide legal immunity from federal criminal prosecution to banks and credit unions that provide financial services to marijuana - related businesses that are operating pursuant to state law .

