many adults in the united states have low levels of literacy or numeracy , or limited english language proficiency .

under the authorization of the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) , the federal government has made grants to states to provide services to improve these skills among adults who are not enrolled in school .

commonly called "adult education" efforts , these investments provide educational services to adults at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training .

adult education services are typically provided by local entities using a combination of federal and non - federal funds .

students include those seeking to develop basic skills , those seeking to obtain a secondary credential , and english language learners of various educational backgrounds .

curricula vary based on student needs and objectives .

according to the most recent annual data , the average adult education student received 124 hours of instruction .

adult education instructors are a combination of full - time , part - time , and volunteer personnel .

aefla programs are administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) through its office of vocational and adult education ( ovae ) .

in fy2013 , appropriations under the act were $575 million .

of this appropriation , $554 million was distributed to the states via formula grants .

this report will provide background information on aefla and the activities it funds .

the report begins with a description of the law itself .

this description focuses on aefla's largest component , the state grants program .

the second half of the report uses program data to describe the implementation of the state grants program , including the data on providers and participants .

aefla was enacted as title ii of the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) .

it replaced the national literacy act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-73 ) and the adult education act of 1966 ( p.l .

89-750 ) .

aefla authorized such sums as necessary to carry out its functions from fy1999 through fy20003 .

when the program was not reauthorized , the general education provisions act ( gepa ) automatically extended aefla authorization for one year .

since the expiration of this extension , the program has continued to be funded through the annual appropriations process .

aefla reauthorization has been debated in the context of broader efforts to reauthorize wia .

as discussed in the prior section , aefla specifies certain requirements for state grants ( and local subgrants ) but leaves many decisions to the states and localities .

this section will use program data from the nrs to illustrate the nature of states' and localities' adult education services , providers , students , and outcomes .

nrs data are typically reported by program year ( py ) , which runs nine months behind the fiscal year ( eg , py2011-2012 was from july 1 , 2011 , to june 30 , 2012 ) .

as such , the data discussed in this section will not align precisely with fiscal year information discussed elsewhere in this report .

when interpreting the data in this section , it is important to note that many states contribute beyond their aefla - required match .

localities and private entities may also contribute to adult education activities , and federal funds subsequently account for only a minority of the funds used to provide local adult education services .

aefla - funded adult education services are typically administered at the local level .

nrs data ( and most other adult education literature ) divides these services into three primary categories .

adult basic education ( abe ) includes instruction for adults whose literacy skills are below the high school level .

in py2011-2012 , about 47% of adult education students were enrolled in abe classes .

adult secondary education ( ase ) includes instruction for adults whose literacy skills are approximately at the high school level .

this includes adults who are seeking to pass the general education development ( ged ) test or obtain a high school credential .

in py2011-2012 , about 13% of adult education students were enrolled in ase courses .

english literacy ( el ) is instruction for adults who are not proficient in the english language .

in py2011-2012 , about 40% of adult education students were enrolled in el courses .

states have diverse adult education populations and there are large variations among the states in terms of enrollment levels in each program .

for example , in py2011-2012 , nevada reported that 80% of its adult education students were enrolled in el courses while louisiana reported that 81% of its adult education students were enrolled in abe courses .

eligible providers of aefla - funded services include both public and private entities .

table 1 presents data on the allotment of federal aefla funds and state funds to eligible providers in py2011-2012 .

local education agencies ( typically school districts ) were the largest recipients of both federal and state adult education funding .

table 1 may exclude some non - federal , non - state contributions to adult education activities such as local funding and in - kind contributions .

comprehensive estimates of non - federal effort are available from each state's annual financial status report ( fsr ) .

states' final fsr reports for the 2011-2012 program year will be available after september 2013 .

aggregated data on non - federal effort from prior years' fsrs are not readily available .

aefla services are provided by a combination of paid staff and volunteers .

table 2 presents data on state and local adult education personnel in py2011-2012 .

local teachers were the largest personnel group and almost 85% of this group was either part - time or volunteers .

as is the case with other program components , the characteristics of each state's adult education personnel varied by state .

for example , nearly 50% of kentucky's teachers are full - time while more than 70% of the teachers in pennsylvania are volunteers .

data on the demographics and other characteristics of aefla participants are available from nrs .

table 3 presents data on the approximately 2 million individuals that participated in adult education programs in py2011-2012 .

the characteristics of adult education participants vary by the type of services .

for example , the ase population tended to be younger ( 57% under the age of 25 ) and have a higher concentration of white students ( 48% ) than the overall adult education population .

conversely , the el population tended to be older ( 84% age 25 or over ) and have a higher concentration of hispanic or latino students ( 65% ) than the overall adult education population .

aefla requires grantees to track the nature and duration of their services as well as student outcomes .

data on educational gains are available for all participants .

data on other outcomes ( such as entering employment or postsecondary education ) are more limited .

 table 4 presents data on participants' hours of attendance and educational progress .

educational progress is defined as completing a level of curriculum within the abe , ase , or el tracks .

the abe program has four levels , the ase program has two , and the el program has six .

progress is determined through a pre - test administered to a participant at intake and subsequent post - tests at specified intervals .

in addition to educational gains , aefla requires states to track participant outcomes regarding employment , the completion of a secondary degree , and entrance into postsecondary education .

unlike the fairly comprehensive data on demographics and educational progress , data on these post - school outcomes are somewhat limited .

these data are limited by two primary factors: follow - up outcomes are only tracked when a client states an objective beyond education .

otherwise , only the default "educational progress" indicator is tracked .

as table 5 shows , a relatively small portion of aefla participants state a follow - up objective .

participants may decline to state an objective beyond educational progress for a variety of reasons .

they may have already attained a goal ( for example , table 3 in a prior section shows that 32% of aefla participants were employed at intake ) , educational progress may be their only goal , or they may simply choose not to state a follow - up objective .

in some cases , follow - up outcomes may be tracked with surveys that have varied response rates .

coupled with the fact that only a subset of the population's follow - up outcomes are tracked , this may result in follow - up outcome data based on only a small number of participants .

due to these limitations , the available data on follow - up measures in table 5 should be interpreted with caution .

while the available data can provide some insight into the subsequent outcomes for some aefla participants , using these data to evaluate program efficacy may be difficult .

appendix a. aefla funding , fy1999-fy2013 appendix b. aefla grants to states and outlying areas , fy2011-201 .

