the adoption incentive program ( section 473a of the social security act ) provides federal payments to state child welfare agencies that increase adoptions of children who are in need of new permanent families .

generally , these are children for whom reuniting with their biological parents is not possible and who would otherwise be expected to remain in public foster care until they "age out" ( i.e. , reach the state age of majority or the age at which state custody of children in foster care is ended ) .

the first adoption incentive payments were made to states in fy1999 based on improvement in the numbers of adoptions completed in fy1998 , and the most recent were announced in late fy2013 ( august 2013 ) based on improvements in the numbers of adoptions completed in fy2012 .

since the inception of the program , states ( including the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico ) have collectively received close to $424 million in federal incentive payments for increased adoptions .

the adoption incentive program was most recently extended through fy2013 by the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) .

however , as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , congress extended states' eligibility to earn adoption incentive payments for an additional year and appropriated $37.9 million to make those payments .

legislation to reauthorize and extend the adoption incentive payments program through fy2016 has passed the full house ( h.r .

3205 ) and was approved in the senate finance committee ( title i of s. 1870 ) .

title ii of h.r .

4980 , introduced on june 26 , 2014 , draws on language in both of those legislative proposals .

in addition to extending funding authority for incentive payments through fy2016 , title ii of h.r .

4980 would make changes to the incentive structure established in the 2008 law — including by changing the award categories to focus more on permanency for children 9 years of age or older , establishing incentive payments for states that appropriately move children from foster care to legal guardianship , determining improvements in state performance based on the rate ( or percentage ) of children leaving foster care to adoption or guardianship ( rather than the number ) , and putting additional focus on achieving permanence through adoption or guardianship for older children .

apart from reauthorizing the adoption incentive program , the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 made several other changes to federal law , which title ii of h.r .

4980 would amend or otherwise address .

specifically , the bill would extend $15 million in annual mandatory funding for family connection grants for one year ( fy2014 ) ; that grant program was first established and funded in the 2008 law ; adjust eligibility criteria for title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance ( which was first established in the 2008 law ) to ensure continuous program eligibility for a child who must go to live with a "successor guardian" due to the incapacitation or death of his / her relative guardians ; seek to further ensure siblings have the opportunity to live together while in foster care , by specifying that a 2008 requirement for state agencies to identify and give notice to grandparents and other relatives of children entering foster care includes identifying and providing notice to any parent of a sibling of a child entering care ( provided that parent has custody of the sibling ) ; and require additional reporting by states to ensure they spend any savings resulting from the expanded federal support for title iv - e adoption assistance provided for in the 2008 law , and require that no less than 30% of any identified savings be used by the state to provide post - adoption or post - guardianship services and services to ensure safety and well - being of children who might otherwise enter foster care .

this report begins by describing in greater detail the legislation under consideration in the 113 th congress that would reauthorize and extend the adoption incentive payments program and make additional child welfare - related changes described above .

 ( appendix a includes a table comparing current law with several reauthorization proposals , including title ii of h.r .

4980 . ) .

it also discusses hearings and other legislative actions taken in this congress as part of the reauthorization effort .

additionally , the report provides background related to the adoption incentive program , including a discussion of the long - standing congressional interest in domestic adoption , the significant increases in adoption from foster care that have occurred since the mid - 1990s , and the adoption incentive payments program as it has functioned since the program's 2008 reauthorization .

throughout this report some unique terms related to adoption , foster child adoptions , or the adoption incentive program are used ( eg , "special needs" and "adoption rate" ) .

while each of these terms is explained in the body of the report , for ease of reference they are also included in a "glossary of terms" provided in appendix b to this report .

on june 26 , 2014 , representative camp , with representatives levin , reichert , and doggett , introduced the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( h.r .

4980 ) .

the bill's introduction was jointly announced by representatives camp and levin , along with senators wyden and hatch , and was described as "bipartisan legislation [that] reflects agreements reached between the house and senate negotiators. .

title ii of h.r .

4980 draws on provisions included in both the promoting adoptions and legal guardianships for children in foster care act ( h.r .

3205 , introduced by representative camp , with representatives levin , reichert , and doggett ) , which was passed by the house in october 2013 , and title i of the supporting at - risk children act ( s. 1870 ) , which was approved by the senate finance committee in december 2013 .

 ( the title i provisions of s. 1870 were also introduced in s. 1876 , the strengthening and finding families for children act , which was introduced by senator baucus , with senators hatch , wyden , rockefeller , grassley , and casey. ) .

h.r .

3205 and s. 1870 , in turn , drew on other introduced bills , which sought to extend adoption incentive payments and / or make other amendments to child welfare law .

in the 113 th congress , these bills included the guardians for children act ( h.r .

2979 , introduced by representative doggett , with representatives danny k. davis , bass , lewis , rangel , mcdermott , and blumenauer ) ; investing in permanency for youth in foster care act ( h.r .

3124 , introduced by representative danny k. davis ) ; removing barriers to adoption and supporting families act of 2013 ( s. 1511 , introduced by senator rockefeller , with senator casey ) ; supporting adoptive families act ( s. 1527 , introduced by senator klobuchar , with senators landrieu and blunt / h.r .

3423 introduced by representative langevin , with representatives wittman , frederica wilson , sean patrick maloney , norton , bass , and grimm ) ; and the sibling connections act ( s. 1786 , introduced by senator grassley , with senator kaine ) .

this section describes title ii provisions of the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( h.r .

4980 ) .

for a comparison of these title ii provisions to current law and provisions included in h.r .

3205 and s. 1870 / s. 1876 , see appendix a .

the remainder of this report reviews past congressional interest in use of adoption to move children from foster care to permanency , including the creation of the adoption incentive payments program in 1997 legislation ( asfa , p.l .

105-89 ) , before discussing this program as it has operated since its 2008 reauthorization ( fostering connections , p.l .

110-351 ) .

promoting the use of adoptions to ensure children who would otherwise remain in foster care have a permanent family has been a driving purpose of the adoption incentive program since its creation .

the program has also sought to provide special incentives to states for adoptions of children who are considered harder to place in adoptive homes , including children with special needs and older children .

established by asfa in 1997 ( at section 473a of the social security act ) , the adoption incentive program has been amended and extended twice: first , by the adoption promotion act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-145 ) , and , more recently , by the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) .

each reauthorization of the adoption incentive program has made some changes to the incentive structure used to determine awards , including the categories for which awards may be earned , the "baselines" used to determine improvement , and / or the amount of the individual incentive awards .

the current incentive structure is described below .

 ( appendix d includes a table that shows development of the incentive structure across program reauthorizations. ) .

under current law , states earn adoption incentive funds in four ways .

specifically , states may earn incentive payments for an increase in the number of children adopted out of foster care overall ; number of children adopted at age 9 or older ; number of children adopted with special needs and who are under the age of 9 ; or rate at which children were adopted from foster care .

whether a specific state has increased the number of adoptions is determined by comparing the number of adoptions that the state finalized during the fiscal year to the number of such adoptions it finalized in fy2007 ( the "baseline" year ) .

a state is determined to have increased its rate of adoption if the percentage of children adopted from foster care ( as a share of the number of all children in foster care in the prior year ) is greater than it was in fy2002 , or in any succeeding fiscal year prior to the year for which the award is being determined .

an eligible state earns $4,000 for each foster child adopted above its baseline number of foster child adoptions and $8,000 for each older child ( age 9 or above ) adoption above its older child adoption baseline .

if a state earns an award in either of those categories — or if it improved its adoption rate — it also earned $4,000 for each adoption of a special needs child ( under age 9 ) that was above its baseline number of such adoptions .

finally , for an improvement in its rate of adoption , a state is eligible for additional incentive funds of $1,000 multiplied by the increased number of adoptions achieved by the state that are attributed to its improved adoption rate .

however , increases due to improved adoption rates may only be paid if sufficient program funding is available after all awards for increases in the number of adoptions have been made .

any state ( includes the 50 states , district of columbia , and puerto rico ) operating a title iv - e program may be eligible to earn adoption incentive payments provided awards are authorized for that year .

the program law ( section 473a of the social security act ) provides states may only earn awards for adoptions finalized in any of fy2008-fy2012 and it authorizes funds for that purpose through fy2013 .

however , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) provides that states may continue to be eligible to earn adoption incentive payments for adoptions completed in fy2013 and it provides fy2014 funds ( $37.9 million ) to make those incentive payments .

further , to be eligible for adoption incentive payments , the state must provide — via the adoption and foster care analysis reporting system ( afcars ) — the necessary data to calculate the incentive amounts .

the state must also assure that it provides health insurance coverage to any adoptive child for whom the state determined the child has special needs — including those eligible for ongoing title iv - e adoption assistance and those with special needs who are not eligible for this assistance .

in addition , no state may receive an award for an increase in the number of special needs adoptions of children under the age of 9 , unless that state , in that same year , also shows an increase in of the number of foster child or older child adoptions ( compared to what the state achieved in fy2007 ) , or an increase in the state's rate of foster child adoption ( compared to the rate it achieved in fy2002 , or any higher rate achieved in a prior subsequent year ) .

the first adoption incentive awards were paid in fy1999 for adoptions finalized in fy1998 and the most recent were initially paid in fy2013 for adoptions finalized in fy2012 .

during the life of the program , all 50 states , the district of columbia and puerto rico have earned adoption incentive payments in one or more years and more than $423 million has been awarded to all states through fy2012 .

discretionary funding was authorized for the program through fy2013 at the annual level of $43 million .

actual appropriation levels have varied but in recent years have been less than $40 million .

for fy2013 , congress provided $37.2 million ( after sequestration ) and for fy2014 it provided $37.9 million .

table 1 summarizes the appropriations provided and awards made by fiscal year for which the funds were initially appropriated and the fiscal year for which the incentive funds were earned .

for numerous years , not all of the funding shown as the award amount for a given year was actually paid to states at a single time or in a single fiscal year .

in years when funds are not sufficient to pay all incentive payment amounts earned ( based on numbers of adoptions ) , hhs prorates the award amounts for the initial payment ( as provided for by statute ) and subsequently it awards remaining earned incentives ( for improved numbers of adoptions ) when additional appropriations are provided .

for example , when hhs made the initial award for adoptions completed in fy2012 , it had just $32.5 million available , or about 74% of the full amount states earned during the year for increasing the numbers of children adopted .

accordingly , each state that earned such an award received 74% of that total amount in september 2013 .

subsequently , congress provided additional program appropriations ( as part of p.l .

113-76 ) and hhs awarded the remaining amount ( 26% , or about $11.4 million ) to states .

under the incentive structure used to make awards for adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 , states were eligible to receive $212 million and received a total of $202 million in adoption incentive payments .

forty - five states were paid adoption incentive payments in one or more award category for adoptions finalized in any of fy2008-fy2012 .

among the seven states that were not paid an incentive for adoptions finalized in those years , five ( massachusetts , new jersey , ohio , and vermont ) actually increased their rate of adoption in one or more of those award years and therefore were eligible for an adoption incentive payment , but did not receive an award due to the program funding level .

additionally , one state ( new york ) increased the number of special needs ( under age 9 ) adoptions in some of those years .

however , because it did not earn an incentive in any of the other categories ( foster child , older child , or adoption rate ) , it was not eligible for incentive funds for those increases .

the remaining two states ( district of columbia and iowa ) did not increase the number of adoptions achieved or improve their rates of adoption in any of the five years .

table 2 shows the total amounts paid to states under the current incentive structure by award year and incentive category .

states did not necessarily receive all of these incentive payments in a single fiscal year .

further , there were insufficient program funds available to make incentive payments for improved adoption rates in most years .

therefore , the total amount of incentive payments that states were eligible to receive for adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 is about $10 million more than the total amount they were expected to receive .

states earned incentive payments of $94.7 million ( 45% of the total incentive funds they were eligible to receive ) for increasing their number of foster child adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 .

that award category is the broadest — applying to children adopted from foster care generally .

states may earn $4,000 for every adoption of a foster child in the given award year that is above the number of foster child adoptions the state completed in fy2007 ( the baseline year ) .

fifteen states finalized more foster child adoptions in each of fy2008-fy2012 than they did in fy2007 , and they earned foster child adoption incentive payments in each of these five years .

a little more than half of the states ( 27 ) earned incentive payments for increases in foster child adoptions in at least one or more ( but not all five ) of those years , and 10 states did not improve on their fy2007 record in any of these five years .

twenty - seven percent ( $56.7 million ) of the total incentive dollars states were eligible to receive for adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 were tied to increases in the number of children who were adopted at 9 years of age or older .

adoptions of older children are less common than are adoptions of those who are younger .

however , states may earn the largest award amount for increases in this incentive category .

specifically , states may earn $8,000 for every adoption of an "older child" in the given award year that is above the number of older child adoptions the state completed in fy2007 ( the baseline year ) .

twelve states earned incentive payments for increasing their numbers of older child adoptions in each of fy2008-fy2012 and , a little more than half of the states ( 27 ) did so in at least one ( but not all five ) of those years .

thirteen states did not increase their number of older child adoptions ( above their fy2007 level in the state ) in any of those five years .

twenty - three percent ( $49.5 million ) of the incentive payments states were eligible to receive for adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 were linked to increases in the number of adoptions of children who were determined to have special needs and who were under the age of nine .

states are only eligible to earn incentive payments in this category if they have earned an award in at least one other incentive category during the same fiscal year ( i.e. , they increased older child or foster child adoptions or they improved their rate of adoption ) .

for eligible states , the award amount is $4,000 for every adoption of a special needs child under 9 years of age that is above the state's baseline number of such adoptions ( i.e. , above the number of such adoptions it achieved in fy2007 ) .

for adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 , 10 states increased their number of special needs ( under age 9 ) adoptions above their baseline , but were not eligible in one or more years when this occurred because they did not earn an incentive payment in any other adoption incentive category in that same year .

overall , 10 states increased the number of special needs ( under age 9 ) adoptions finalized in each of those five years ( compared to fy2007 ) ; more than half of the states ( 30 ) did so in at least one ( but not all ) of the five years ( fy2008-fy2012 ) ; and 12 states did not increase the number of these adoptions ( above their fy2007 level ) in any of those five years .

finally , the total incentive amount a state is eligible to receive in a year is increased if the state improves its rate of adoption .

however , this increased incentive payment is only authorized to be paid to states if sufficient appropriations remain available after awards are made for increases in the number of adoptions .

for adoptions finalized in fy2008-fy2012 , states were collectively eligible for $11.5 million in incentive payments for improved adoption rates ( 5% of incentive payments states were eligible for across all four award categories ) .

however , there were sufficient appropriations to award just $1.7 million ( 15% ) of the total amount .

a state's adoption rate is equal to the total number of foster child adoptions it completed in the fiscal year for every 100 children that were in its foster care caseload on the last day of the preceding fiscal year .

an award for an increased rate of adoption can ensure that an incentive may be earned by a state that continues to appropriately move children from foster care to adoption even as the total number of children in foster care declines .

in those states , the total number of children for whom adoption is the desired or appropriate permanency outcome is also likely to decline .

to be counted as having an improved adoption rate , a state was required to exceed the highest rate of adoptions it had achieved in any year ( beginning with fy2002 ) that came before the year for which the awards were being calculated .

a state that improved its adoption rate was eligible for $1,000 award for each adoption calculated to have been achieved due to the higher rate of adoptions .

the large majority of states ( 44 ) improved on their initial adoption rate baseline in one or more years from fy2008-fy2012 .

in fy2008 , on average , states finalized roughly 11 adoptions for every 100 children who were in foster care ; the comparable number for fy2012 was 13 adoptions for every 100 children in foster care .

states may spend adoption incentive funds anytime within a 24-month period , beginning with the month in which the funds are awarded to a state .

the statute permits states to spend these incentive dollars on any service authorized to be provided to children and families under title iv - b or title iv - e of the social security act .

those parts of the law authorize a broad range of child welfare - related activities , including activities to prevent child abuse or neglect and / or provide services to enable a child to remain in his / her own home ; investigation of alleged child abuse or neglect and placement of children in foster care if necessary ; provision of services to reunite a child in foster care with his / her parents and for services to maintain the reunification ; finding a new permanent home for children who may not be reunited with their parents , including through adoption or guardianship ; provision of post - permanency services ; and services to assist a youth in foster care to make a successful transition to adulthood .

a state may not count its spending of adoption incentive funds toward meeting any of the "matching" requirements included in the programs authorized in title iv - e and title iv - b of the social security act .

 ( programs under those parts of the law generally require states to supply between 20% and 50% of the total program funding out of their non - federal , state or local , dollars. ) .

many states report spending incentive funds on adoption - related purposes , including post - adoption support services ( eg , support for adoptive parent mentors or adoptive family support groups , respite care , casework and supports for adoptive families of children at risk of re - entering foster care ) ; recruitment of adoptive homes ( eg , support for online adoption exchange or photo - listing , development of promotional materials , child - specific recruitment efforts ) ; and training or conferences to improve adoption casework .

other adoption - related services or supports funded with adoption incentive awards ( in a smaller number of states ) included provision of monthly adoption assistance payments , purchase of new equipment or provision of other resources to improve processing and archiving of adoption records , support for new or improved adoption home studies , and attention to inter - jurisdictional adoption placement .

some states used adoption incentive funds for foster care - related activities ( eg , training or recruitment of foster parents — alone or in combination with adoptive parents and foster and / or adoptive parent supports ) .

others referenced support for permanency efforts more generally ( i.e. , incorporating guardianship or reunification ) .

at least one state reported using these incentive funds for foster care maintenance payments .

finally , a few states described use of adoption incentive funds for services to families and children remaining in the home ( eg , alternative response and direct child protection services ) .

appendix a .

comparison of current law and selected reauthorization proposals appendix b. glossary of terms adoption rate — the number of children in foster care who are adopted during a fiscal year for every 100 children who were in foster care on the last day of the previous fiscal year .

adoption rate baseline — highest ever adoption rate achieved by the state for any fiscal year that is before the fiscal year for which the adoption incentive rate award is being determined , beginning with fy2002 .

another planned permanent living arrangement ( appla ) — each child in foster care must have a permanency goal — that is a plan for leaving foster care to a permanent home .

a hearing to determine ( or re - determine ) that permanency goal must be held no later than 12 months after a child enters foster care , and every 12 months thereafter while the child remains in foster care .

if at this hearing it is determined that the child's plan for permanency may not be any of reuniting with his / her parents , placement for adoption , placement with a legal guardian , or going to live with a fit and willing relative , then a child's plan for exiting care may be "another planned permanent living arrangement. .

baseline ( as used in the adoption incentive program ) — the standard against which state performance is measured to determine whether , in a given year , the state has increased its number of adoptions or improved its adoption rate .

a baseline is specific to the state , and is based on a state's past performance .

 ( the four specific baselines used in the current adoption incentive program are defined individually in this glossary. ) .

foster child adoption — the finalized adoption of a child who , at the time of adoptive placement , was in public foster care under the placement and care responsibility of the state child welfare agency .

foster child adoption baseline — the number of foster child adoptions in the state in fy2007 as reported by the state via the adoption and foster care analysis reporting system ( afcars ) .

guardianship — a judicially created legal relationship between child and caretaker which is intended to be permanent and self - sustaining as evidenced by the transfer to the caretaker of the following parental rights with respect to the child: protection , education , care and control of the person , custody of the person , and decision - making .

older child adoption — the finalized adoption of a child who is nine years of age or older and who , at the time of the adoptive placement was in public foster care or was the subject of a title iv - e adoption assistance agreement between the state child welfare agency and the child's adoptive parents .

older child adoption baseline — the number of older child adoptions in the state in fy2007 as reported by the state via afcars .

special needs adoption — the adoption of a child whom the state has determined ( 1 ) cannot be returned to his or her parents and ( 2 ) is unlikely to be adopted without assistance because of a particular factor or condition ( eg , child's age ; membership in a sibling group ; minority race / ethnicity ; medical or physical condition ; or emotional , mental or behavioral disability ) .

additionally , unless this is not in the best interest of the child , the state must have made reasonable efforts to place the child for adoption without providing assistance .

 ( a state is required to enter into a title iv - e adoption assistance agreement with the adoptive parents of any child it finds to have special needs. ) .

special needs ( under age 9 ) adoption — the finalized adoption of a child who is eight years of age or younger and who at the time of the adoptive placement was the subject of a title iv - e adoption assistance agreement between the state child welfare agency and the child's adoptive parents .

special needs ( under age 9 ) adoption baseline — the number of special needs ( under age 9 ) adoptions in the state in fy2007 as reported by the state via afcars .

termination of parental rights ( tpr ) — the legal severing ( in a state court / court of competent jurisdiction ) of the parent - child relationship .

 ( typically this severs the rights and responsibilities of a biological parent to his / her child .

in the case of a previously adopted child however , it is the severing of the rights and responsibilities of the adoptive parent. ) .

waiting for adoption ( as counted by hhs , children's bureau ) — a child who is in foster care and who has a case plan goal of adoption and / or to whom all parental rights have been terminated .

except that any youth age 16 or older and to whom all parental rights have been terminated is excluded if that youth has a case plan goal of "emancipation. .

appendix c. trends in adoptions with public child welfare agency involvement table c - 1 shows , by fiscal year , the number of adoptions in which the public child welfare agency was involved , the number of children in foster care ( under the responsibility of the public child welfare agency ) on the last day of the fiscal year , and the rate of adoptions .

all children who leave public foster care for adoption are adopted with public child welfare agency involvement and they represent the very large number of children shown in the adoption column .

a small number of children who do not enter foster care may also be adopted with public child welfare agency involvement and that number is also included in the number shown in the adoptions column .

appendix d. adoption incentive payments at each reauthorization of the adoption incentive program , congress has adjusted the incentive structure .

new award categories and adjustments to the baselines have placed greater emphasis on adoption of harder to place children , helped to ensure that earning an incentive was possible even as caseloads declined , and protected the value of the incentive payments from erosion by inflation .

appendix e. children in foster care and waiting for adoption by stat .

