in september 2012 , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the food and drug administration ( fda ) , the tennessee department of health , and other state health departments began investigating a rare , non - contagious outbreak of fungal meningitis .

as of june 3 , 2013 , 20 states had reported 745 infections ( including fungal meningitis and other conditions ) , and 58 deaths were traced to injections of contaminated , preservative - free methylprednisone acetate produced by the new england compounding center ( necc ) .

necc , which self - identified as a compounding pharmacy – not a manufacturer – and was licensed by the state of massachusetts , produced large volumes of drugs that were shipped across state lines to health care providers .

unlike traditional pharmacy practices , necc produced drugs without individual prescriptions and made copies of existing commercially - manufactured drugs .

these serious adverse events drew attention to compounded drugs ( cds ) .

six congressional hearings were held in 2012-2013 to understand the factors that led to these adverse events and ways to prevent future such incidents ; these hearings are listed in appendix b .

in these hearings members of congress and stakeholders raised questions regarding how best to improve the safety of cds while maintaining patient access to needed drugs .

issues raised at these hearings include the following: ( 1 ) what are cds ; ( 2 ) how are cds made and by whom ; ( 3 ) what is the role of cds in health care delivery ; ( 4 ) what are the federal and state roles in oversight of cds ; ( 5 ) how safe are cds , and ( 6 ) what steps could be taken to prevent adverse events from cds .

this report provides background information about these issues that may be used to inform the policy discussion as congress considers legislation .

this report focuses on ( 1 ) available background information on cds and compounding pharmacies ; ( 2 ) changes in the role of cds in healthcare delivery ; ( 3 ) factors leading to an increase of compounding ; ( 4 ) safety of cds , including a table of selected publicly available adverse events ; and ( 5 ) a brief summary of policy issues raised to date .

this report includes material on cds for human patients and does not include a discussion of veterinary drug compounding or the compounding of dietary supplements .

issues of public health and safety of cds are tied to the regulation and oversight of cds .

this report includes brief information on federal , state , and professional efforts to increase the safety of cds .

information on the federal regulation of cds is addressed in other crs reports: crs report r40503 , fda's authority to regulate drug compounding: a legal analysis , by jennifer staman , and crs report r43038 , federal authority to regulate the compounding of human drugs , by [author name scrubbed] .

information on the regulation of commercially manufactured drugs can be found in crs report r41983 , how fda approves drugs and regulates their safety and effectiveness , by [author name scrubbed] .

compounding has been traditionally defined as a process where a pharmacist or a physician combines , mixes , or alters ingredients to create a medication tailored to the needs of an individual patient .

traditionally cds are made in response to an individual prescription from a licensed health provider in the context of a pharmacist's and health care provider's professional relationship with a specific patient .

cds provide alternatives to standard commercially - manufactured drugs when such drugs do not meet the unique medical needs of a patient ( eg , due to a need for an allergen - free drug , weight - based dosing , or alternate modes of delivery ) , or are unavailable due to discontinuation , unavailability , or shortages .

shortages of sterile generic drugs and hospital outsourcing are cited as causes of increased the reliance of health care providers on cds .

some have suggested that certain activities not traditionally associated with compounding be considered compounding .

such activities include the large - scale production of drugs to ease certain drug shortages , to meet outsourcing needs of hospitals , and to supply physician - administered drugs .

non - traditional compounding may include ( 1 ) the production and shipping of large volume of drugs across state lines ; ( 2 ) production of drugs that are copies of fda - approved commercially available drugs ; ( 3 ) production of drugs outside of a personal relationship with a patient and without a prescription for an individual patient to receive a compounded version ; and ( 4 ) providing products to third parties , such as hospitals , clinics , physician offices , and home health providers .

these activities may be considered more akin to manufacturing than traditional compounding , which is considered part of the traditional practice of pharmacy .

in this report , references to these types of activities will be called "non - traditional compounding. .

this report will be updated as necessary .

drug compounding has historically been the focus of state governments through their regulation of pharmacies .

recently questions have arisen regarding the extent the federal government can regulate the practice of compounding through the ffdca .

this section discusses federal and state authorities , as well as industry self - regulation .

some believe that the number and types of cds and other products ( iv and parenteral nutrition ) are increasing , coinciding with increasing demand for certain compounded products due to a variety of reasons , including ( 1 ) an increase in hospital outsourcing of cds ; ( 2 ) drug shortages , unavailability , and discontinuation of fda - approved drugs ; ( 3 ) interest in individualized products by physicians and consumers ; and ( 4 ) an increased interest by pharmacists in new markets .

as noted earlier , the exact number of business facilities engaged in non - traditional compounding is unclear .

in 2013 , the fda inspected non - traditional compounding facilities that were engaged in sterile compounding and lists 39 facilities that it inspected located around the country .

some of these facilities , such as central admixture pharmacy services and pharmedium services have multiple locations .

press and other sources indicate growth of centralized compounding facilities that provide outsourcing and related activities to pharmacies and hospitals .

some of these compounding facilities include compounding pharmacies , central fill pharmacies , and outsourcing pharmacies .

some states , but not all , permit certain types of consolidated services , such as "shared services" or "central fill iv pharmacies," which make products for distribution among a variety of providers .

for example , med prep consulting , inc. lists itself as a state - licensed central fill pharmacy and provides products to other pharmacies .

consumers , pharmacists , pharmacy compounders , hospitals , congress , and state and federal regulators all have a stake in access to , and safety of , needed drugs .

increasing demand for cds by patients and providers , drug shortages , consolidation of hospital services and other factors have led to changes in health delivery .

the potential risks to public health of product failures have increased as non - traditional compounding has expanded .

given the expansion of sterile compounding , balancing patient access to cds with patient safety has become more complex .

thus , some stakeholders believe that changes in business trends , such as drug shortages and outsourcing of compounding , must be taken into consideration in considering changes in professional standards and federal and state oversight and regulation of cd .

three issues have emerged in the congressional hearings about cds and in legislation introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congress ( see table a - 1 ) : ( 1 ) adverse event reporting , ( 2 ) labeling , and ( 3 ) modifying federal oversight of non - traditional compounding .

these issues will be discussed in the following section .

there is a lack of publically available information on the number and types of adverse events involving compounded drugs , as there is no requirement that compounders report adverse events to federal authorities , and state requirements vary .

adverse event reporting is not required by federal regulators for producers of cds as it is for prescription , non - prescription drugs , and dietary supplements .

without knowing the total number of compounded products made , as well as the total number of adverse events , it is difficult to ascertain the overall safety of cds or to understand the benefits and risks of using cds .

the publicly - available information on cds is published by public health authorities , fda inspections of facilities listed on websites , records of state licensing boards , and reports in professional journals documenting adverse events .

adverse events can be voluntarily reported to the fda medwatch database , but without mandatory reporting , the completeness of the information cannot be ascertained .

labeling specifying that a drug or another product is compounded is not a universal requirement .

due to the complexity of the supply chain and the growth of non - traditional compounding , patients and providers may not realize that a drug has been compounded .

unlike traditional compounding where a patient is given a prescription by a physician for a cd , non - traditional cds are not necessarily identified as compounded .

given the potential benefits and risks of cds , an argument could be made for providing patients this information as part of informed consent for medical treatment .

informed consent for treatment is an ethical and a legal requirement to ensure that a patient fully understands the potential risks and benefits of a medical procedure .

cds and other compounded solutions pose potential risks and benefits that may be different from commercially - manufactured products .

informed consent is based on a patient's knowledge and understanding of a medical procedure ; as most patients assume that drugs are commercially - manufactured , this additional information could be seen as necessary to the ethical pursuit of informed patient consent .

policymakers have raised questions regarding how best to improve the safety of cds while maintaining patient access to needed medications , including the need for new legislation and increased accountability .

in testimony to congress , fda administrators have expressed reservations about non - traditional compounding activities that are akin to manufacturing ( i.e. , non - traditional compounding ) and their potential risks to public safety .

the fda recommends increased federal oversight of sterile compounding and certain other high - risk activities .

attempts to clarify federal authority over non - traditional compounding is represented in certain elements of bipartisan legislation of the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) and in legislation introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congress .

these proposals all include increased clarity in the federal oversight role for compounding drugs .

for example , a provision in the draft help legislation would create new authorities for fda oversight of "compounding manufacturers" ( i.e. , non - traditional compounders ) ( see table a - 1 ) .

some members of congress argue that new fda authorities should await better implementation of existing authorities .

for example , a house committee on energy and commerce report questions whether a lack of enforcement by fda and state authorities of certain vendors is an issue .

the report cites safety violations at necc in prior years , which do not appear to have been resolved despite fda involvement .

some in the compounding pharmacy industry believe that the current safety issues are isolated to certain vendors and that compounding , in general , is not unsafe .

some compounding associations have reservations about the fda having new authorities ; others support increased fda oversight .

many acknowledge that compounded health care products have become more complex and health delivery more complicated .

in a recent report , the association of health - system pharmacists ( ahsp ) and american hospital association ( aha ) noted that there was general support from stakeholders in these associations for ( 1 ) fda oversight of certain non - traditional compounding pharmacies ( eg , providing a cd without a prescription and shipped over state lines ) ; ( 2 ) improved communication between state and federal regulators ; ( 3 ) a list of "do - not - compound" cds ; and ( 4 ) improved access to usp compounding monographs that provide guidance to compounders on making certain cds .

appendix a .

legislation introduced in the 113 th congress affecting drug compounding the following table summarizes selected provisions of the two pieces of legislation on compounding introduced to date in the 113 th congress .

it includes provisions that address issues discussed in this report , but it does not provide a full summary of the legislation .

appendix b .

congressional hearings on cds 2012-2013 ( in reverse chronological order ) "examining drug compounding," hearing of the subcommittee on health of the committee on energy and commerce , u.s. house of representatives , may 23 , 2013 .

executive session , s. 959 pharmaceutical compounding quality and accountability act , hearing of the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , u.s. senate , may 22 , 2013 .

ordered to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute favorably .

"pharmaceutical compounding: proposed legislative solution," hearing of the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , u.s. senate , may 9 , 2013 .

"a continuing investigation into the fungal meningitis outbreak and whether it could have been prevented ? .

" , hearing of the subcommittee on oversight and investigations , committee on energy and commerce , u.s. house of representatives , april 26 , 2013 .

"pharmacy compounding: implications of the 2012 meningitis outbreak," hearing of the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , u.s. senate , november 15 , 2012 .

"the fungal meningitis outbreak: could it have been prevented ? .

" , hearing of the subcommittee on oversight and investigations , committee on energy and commerce , u.s. house of representatives , november 14 , 2012 .

source : house committee on energy and commerce: http: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings ; senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions: : http: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / .

appendix c. selected adverse events involving compounded drugs and solution .

