since 2007 , the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) has amended certain national standards for traffic signs .

among the new standards were a measurable standard for the minimum level of nighttime visibility of traffic signs and a change in the lettering of street signs .

these new standards were the subject of some confusion and controversy .

some state and local agencies complained that the new standards would be relatively costly to comply with during a period when state and local finances are strained .

some agencies also confused the new nighttime visibility maintenance standard , which originally included deadlines by which agencies had to comply with the new standard , with the new sign - lettering standard , which did not have compliance deadlines .

in response to the criticism , fhwa eliminated some of the nighttime visibility maintenance standard compliance deadlines .

this report provides background for the nighttime visibility maintenance standard and addresses some of the issues that have been raised about this standard .

in 2007 , fhwa updated the manual of uniform traffic control devices standard governing the maintenance of the nighttime visibility ( retroreflectivity ) of traffic signs ( ยง2a.08 ) .

retroreflectivity refers to the reflection of light back from an object .

with respect to traffic signs , this involves reflecting the light from car headlights so that the sign is visible to drivers at night .

the 2007 amendment set a minimum level of retroreflectivity for signs and required state agencies to adopt a method to ensure that signs met that minimum .

because of its safety significance , this standard was given a deadline for compliance .

separately , in the 2009 edition of the mutcd , fhwa updated the standard concerning the sign lettering style for names of places , streets , and highways ( ยง2d.05 ) .

formerly , names on signs could either be in all capital letters or have only the first letter capitalized .

the new standard eliminated the option of using only uppercase letters .

this standard did not have a deadline for compliance .

the lettering standard applies only to signs with names of places , streets , and highways .

this change was made because drivers often have only a brief time to read these signs , and studies indicate that mixed - case lettering is easier to read .

state and local transportation agencies are required to implement the new lettering style only as they install new signs or replace existing signs .

some press reports have given the impression that the federal government is requiring communities to immediately begin replacing all street signs just to comply with the new lettering style standard , but this is incorrect .

dot amended the compliance deadlines for the retroreflectivity maintenance standard ( and numerous other mutcd standards with compliance deadlines ) in a may 2012 federal register notice .

dot extended the deadline for highway agencies to implement an assessment or management method for ensuring that their signs comply with the retroreflectivity standard to may 2014 , and limited the scope of that required assessment to regulatory and warning signs , rather than all street signs .

dot also eliminated the compliance deadlines for replacement of signs that are identified as not meeting the minimum retroreflectivity level standards .

communities are still required to replace any signs that do not meet the standards .

dot said it changed the deadlines to reduce the costs and impacts of the compliance deadlines on state and local highway agencies .

it noted that the original deadlines had been based on standard useful - life cycles for signs , but that varying environmental conditions meant that the actual useful life of signs varied in different areas of the country .

