on march 12 , 2013 , representative paul ryan , the chairman of the house budget committee , released the chairman's mark of the fy2014 house budget resolution .

additional detail on budgetary objectives and justifications was provided in chairman ryan's report entitled the path to prosperity: a responsible balanced budget , issued the same day .

the house budget committee considered the chairman's mark on march 13 , 2013 , and voted 22-17 to report the budget resolution to the full house .

h.con.res .

25 was introduced in the house march 15 , 2013 , and was accompanied by the house budget committee report ( h.rept .

113-17 ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) did not provide an analysis of the long - term effects of the proposed fy2014 budget , as they had in prior years .

the house agreed to h.con.res .

25 on march 21 , 2013 , by a vote of 221 to 207 .

the house budget resolution sets general budgetary parameters .

among other things , it expresses the desired levels of spending for government health programs over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) , creates four health care - related reserve funds , and presents a policy statement regarding assumptions about future medicare reforms .

the budget resolution includes instructions for reconciliation to eight committees , which are each instructed to develop and report legislation that would achieve a certain dollar amount of deficit reduction .

a budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy and does not provide levels of spending for specific agencies or programs ; it is not a law and is not signed by the president .

rather , a budget resolution provides the framework for the consideration of other legislation .

while the house budget resolution suggests and assumes certain health care - related policy changes , separate legislation would need to be developed by the committees of jurisdiction , passed by congress , and signed by the president in order for such changes to be made to these federally funded health care programs .

in general , the budget proposal , as outlined in chairman ryan's path to prosperity report and in the committee report , suggests a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs ; the repeal of many of the provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , p.l .

111-152 ) , including those that establish insurance exchanges ; and changes to tort law governing medical malpractice .

this crs report provides a synopsis of the health care related changes in chairman ryan's fy2014 budget proposal .

this summary is based on the text of the concurrent resolution , the committee report , and the fy2014 path to prosperity report .

the collective details are referred to in this report as the "budget proposal" or chairman ryan's proposal .

crs provided similar summaries of the health care changes suggested in the fy2013 and fy2012 house budget proposals .

medicare is the nation's federal insurance program that pays for covered health services for most persons 65 years old and older and for most permanently disabled individuals under the age of 65 .

in fy2013 , the program will cover an estimated 52 million persons at an estimated total cost of $598 billion .

cbo estimates that federal medicare spending ( after deduction of beneficiary premiums and other offsetting receipts ) will be about $508 billion in fy2013 , accounting for about 14% of total federal spending and 3% of gdp .

medicare is an entitlement program , which means that it is required to pay for covered services provided to eligible persons so long as specific criteria are met .

spending under the program ( except for a portion of the administrative costs ) is considered mandatory spending and is not subject to the appropriations process .

the medicare program has four parts , each responsible for paying for different benefits , subject to different eligibility criteria and financing mechanisms .

medicare part a covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing care , some home health and hospice care .

part a services are paid for out of the hospital insurance trust fund ( hi ) which is mainly funded by a dedicated payroll tax of 2.9% of earnings of current workers , shared equally between employers and workers .

part b covers physician services , outpatient services , medical equipment , ambulance services , laboratory tests , and some home health services ; and part d covers outpatient prescription drugs .

parts b and d benefits are paid for out of the supplementary insurance trust fund ( smi ) , which is primarily funded through beneficiary premiums and federal general revenues .

high - income beneficiaries pay higher premiums for parts b and d , and certain low - income beneficiaries may receive assistance from medicare and / or medicaid with premiums and cost - sharing .

part c , called medicare advantage , is a private health plan option for beneficiaries that covers all part a and b services , except hospice , and is funded through both the hi and smi trust funds .

under traditional medicare , parts a and b , services are generally paid directly by the government on a "fee - for - service" basis , using different prospective payment systems or fee schedules .

under parts c and d , private insurers are paid a monthly "capitated" amount to provide coverage to enrollees .

premium amounts may vary depending on which plan the enrollee selects .

the capitated payment is adjusted to reflect the higher relative costs of sicker beneficiaries .

since its enactment in 1965 , the medicare program has undergone considerable change .

because of its rapid growth , both in terms of aggregate dollars and as a share of the federal budget , the medicare program has been a major focus of deficit reduction legislation passed by congress .

with a few exceptions , reductions in program spending have been achieved largely through freezes or reductions in payments to providers , primarily hospitals and physicians , and by making changes to beneficiary premiums and other cost - sharing requirements .

most recently , the aca made numerous changes to the medicare program that modify provider reimbursements , provide incentives to improve the quality and efficiency of care , and enhance certain medicare benefits .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports .

medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states .

in fy2014 , the medicaid program will cover an estimated 71 million people at any point during the fiscal year , and federal medicaid payments to states are estimated to reach $297 billion in fy2014 .

federal medicaid spending is expected to reach about 1.8% of gdp in fy2014 .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered .

aca makes changes along these dimensions for the medicaid program .

some of the changes are mandatory for states , and others may be implemented at state option .

the path to prosperity and the accompanying legislative language proposes to make two significant programmatic changes to the medicaid program .

the proposal would repeal certain medicaid provisions in aca and convert medicaid into a block grant program .

in addition to these programmatic changes , the budget proposal suggests significant reductions to the federal medicaid funding .

approximately 197 million people in the united states had private health insurance coverage in 2011 .

workers and their families often receive health insurance as a benefit from their employers .

some individuals and families purchase private insurance on their own , where premiums and benefits may be based on health status and other distinguishing characteristics .

reflecting the attributes of these different "customers" for insurance ( larger firms , smaller firms , and individuals ) , the private health insurance market is made up of three different segments: the large group market , the small group market , and the nongroup ( individual ) market .

each of these market segments offers distinct insurance products , and each is subject to different regulatory standards .

traditionally , the primary regulators of private insurance have been the states .

however , overlapping federal requirements complicate the regulation of this industry and enforcement of insurance standards .

aca's private market provisions were designed to expand federal standards applicable to the private health insurance market , and increase access to coverage , such as establishment grants for the creation of state - based exchanges to offer private health insurance options to individuals and small employers .

the law also increases access to health insurance coverage by subsidizing private insurance premiums and cost - sharing for certain lower - income individuals enrolled in exchange plans , among other provisions .

these costs are projected to be offset by reduced spending for public coverage , and by increased taxes and other revenues .

aca creates several programs to increase access and funding for targeted groups , including establishment of temporary high - risk pools for uninsured individuals with preexisting conditions , and funding for non - profit organizations offering coverage to small businesses and individuals .

other private insurance provisions include those that build on the state - based regulatory system , such as the review of proposed increases of health insurance premiums , and programs to mitigate risk across health plans ( such as risk adjustment and reinsurance ) .

medical liability insurance provides a certain level of financial protection to medical professionals against claims of medical malpractice .

over the past several decades , medical liability insurance has experienced three "crisis" periods , characterized by sharp increases in insurance premiums , difficulties in finding liability insurance in some regions and among some specialties , and reports of health care providers leaving areas or retiring following insurance difficulties .

while the overall medical liability insurance market is not currently exhibiting the same level of crisis as in previous time periods , affordability and availability problems persist .

in addition , concern about medical liability may lead to increased use of tests and procedures to protect against future lawsuits ( "defensive medicine" ) , which may affect health care costs .

the malpractice system also experiences issues with equity and access .

for example , some observers have criticized the current system's performance with respect to compensating patients who have been harmed by malpractice , deterring substandard medical care , and promoting patient safety .

according to the path to prosperity and committee report , the budget proposal assumes reforms to tort law governing medical malpractice , including limits on awards for noneconomic and punitive damages .

the path to prosperity report also suggests the following reforms to make health care more patient - centered: allowing individuals to buy health insurance across state lines , expanding the availability of consumer - directed health plans , and allowing employers to provide workers the option to use their employer's health coverage contribution toward other coverage options .

