federal rulemaking is an important mechanism through which the federal government implements policy .

federal agencies issue regulations pursuant to statutory authority granted by congress .

therefore , congress may have an interest in performing oversight of those regulations , and measuring federal regulatory activity can be a useful way for congress to conduct that oversight .

the number of federal rules issued annually and the total number of pages in the federal register are often referred to as measures of the total federal regulatory burden .

certain methods of quantifying regulatory activity , however , may provide an imperfect portrayal of the total federal rulemaking burden .

for example , the number of final rules published each year is generally in the range of 2,500-4,500 , according to the office of the federal register .

while some of those rules may have substantial economic , legal , or policy effects , many of them are routine in nature and impose minimal regulatory burden , if any .

the federal register provides documentation of the government's regulatory and other actions , and some scholars , commentators , and public officials have used the total number of federal register pages each year as a measure for the total amount of regulatory activity .

because the federal register has been in print since the 1930s , the number of pages can be useful for cross - time comparisons .

however , the total number of federal register pages may not be an accurate way to measure regulatory activity for several reasons .

for example , the federal register contains many other items , not all of which are related to regulations .

this report serves to inform the congressional debate over rulemaking by analyzing different ways to measure federal rulemaking activity .

the report begins with a brief overview of how agencies issue rules , identifying the most significant statutory requirements , executive orders , and guidance documents that comprise the rulemaking process .

the report then provides data on and analysis of the total number of rules issued each year , as well as information on other types of rules , such as "major" rules , "significant" rules , and "economically significant" rules .

these categories have been created by various statutes and executive orders containing requirements that may be triggered if a regulation falls into one of the categories .

for example , if a rule is designated "economically significant" under executive order ( e.o. ) .

12866 , the issuing agency is generally required to perform a cost - benefit analysis and submit the rule for review to omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) .

when available , data are provided on each type of rule .

finally , the report presents data on the number of pages and documents in the federal register each year and analyzes the content of the federal register .

when congress enacts legislation , it frequently delegates rulemaking authority to federal agencies .

regulations issued by agencies are often the means through which specific requirements are then established .

regulations must be issued pursuant to statutory authority , and the process under which agencies issue regulations is governed by numerous statutory requirements and executive orders .

in addition , omb has issued guidance to agencies detailing how some of those requirements should be met .

this section of the report briefly describes the significant statutory and executive requirements and guidance documents .

 table 1 presents the approximate number of rules by year since 1976 , the first year for which the office of the federal register has data available .

the number provided in the table for each year is the number of documents published in the final rules section of the federal register .

although the number of regulations issued each year is generally in the thousands , many of those regulations deal with routine matters .

for example , a rule issued on april 2 , 2013 , by the u.s. coast guard provided notice of a "temporary deviation from the operating schedule that governs the third street drawbridge across the china basin , mile 0.0 , at san francisco , ca .

the deviation is necessary to allow the public to cross the bridge to participate in the scheduled cyclesf , a community event. .

because the change is considered a rule but only has a temporary effect , it does not make any changes to the code of federal regulations ( c.f.r .

 ) , which is the comprehensive codification of permanent rules and regulations .

captured under the definition of a rulemaking in the apa , such items are published in the "rules and regulations" section of the federal register .

the number of regulations issued each year includes both new regulations as well as deregulatory actions .

under the apa , a "rulemaking" is defined as "the agency process for formulating , amending , or repealing a rule," which means that agencies must undertake a regulatory action whenever they are issuing a new rule , changing an existing rule , or eliminating a rule .

therefore , not all of the regulations counted in the table above are necessarily new regulatory actions issued by agencies .

some of them could be minor amendments , including technical corrections without substantive change , or they could even include regulatory actions in which agencies are getting rid of regulations or attempting to make regulations less burdensome on the public .

as mentioned above , the cra was enacted in 1996 and established procedures for the congressional review of agency regulations .

under the cra , each federal agency is required to send its covered final rules to gao and to both houses of congress before the rules can take effect .

section 804 ( 2 ) of the cra also created a category of rules called "major" rules , which are those that the office of information and regulatory affairs administrator determines has resulted in or is likely to result in ( a ) an annual effect on the economy of $100,000,000 or more ; ( b ) a major increase in costs or prices for consumers , individual industries , federal , state , or local government agencies , or geographic regions ; or ( c ) significant adverse effects on competition , employment , investment , productivity , innovation , or on the ability of united states - based enterprises to compete with foreign - based enterprises in domestic and export markets .

the term does not include any rule promulgated under the telecommunications act of 1996 and the amendments made by that act .

the cra contains two requirements for major rules .

first , agencies are generally required to delay the effective dates of "major" rules until 60 days after the rule is submitted to congress or published in the federal register , whichever is later .

second , the comptroller general must provide a report on each major rule to the appropriate congressional committees of jurisdiction within 15 days of when a rule is submitted or published .

the report must include a summary of the agency's compliance with various rulemaking requirements ( such as regulatory impact analyses that agencies may be required to perform while undergoing a rulemaking action ) .

these reports are posted on gao's website .

table 2 presents the total number of major rules published during each calendar year since 1997 , as reported by gao .

rules in the gao database are those that have been submitted to gao under the cra ( 5 u.s.c .

§801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) ) .

data begin in 1997 because the cra was enacted in 1996 , making 1997 the first full year for which data are available .

a 2011 crs report examined the 100 major rules published in 2010 and concluded that rules are determined to be "major" for a variety of reasons , not just due to compliance costs .

for example , 37 of the rules appeared to be major because they involved transfers of funds from one party to another , most commonly the transfer of federal funds through programs such as grants , medicare or medicaid funds , special pay for members of the military , and crop subsidy payments .

ten other rules appeared to be major because they prompted consumer spending or because they established fees for the reimbursement of particular federal functions ( eg , issuance of passports and oversight of the nuclear power industry ) .

thirty - nine rules appeared to be major because they were expected to result in at least $100 million in annual benefits , costs , or both .

the definition of a "significant" rule , found in e.o .

12866 , is a rule that is likely to ( 1 ) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy , a sector of the economy , productivity , competition , jobs , the environment , public health or safety , or state , local , or tribal governments or communities ; ( 2 ) create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency ; ( 3 ) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements , grants , user fees , or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof ; or ( 4 ) raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates , the president's priorities , or the principles set forth in this executive order .

under e.o .

12866 , agencies ( other than independent regulatory agencies ) are required to submit rules to oira for centralized review that are identified by agencies or determined by oira to be "significant. .

the agency must provide specific information to oira , including the text of the action ; a detailed description of the need for the action ; an explanation of how the action will meet that need ; an assessment of the potential costs and benefits of the regulatory action ; and an assessment of how the regulation "promotes the president's priorities and avoids undue interference with state , local , and tribal governments. .

while the number of major rules is accessible on gao's federal rules database , the number of significant rules issued each year is not readily available .

no requirement currently exists for agencies or other entities to keep track of how many significant rules are issued each year .

however , data are available for the number of reviews at oira each year , because oira logs on its website each rule it receives for review under e.o .

12866 .

the number of "significant" rules reviewed each year is not the same as the number of "significant" rules issued each year — for example , a rule could be reviewed at oira late in one calendar year but not actually issued until the next calendar year .

in addition , because oira reviews proposed and final rules , the total number of reviews is much higher than final rules issued each year .

however , the number of reviews at oira each year may give some idea of annual regulatory activity .

table 3 lists the total number of reviews at oira annually from 1994 to 2015 , including prerules , proposed rules , interim final rules , final rules , and notices .

data begin in calendar year 1994 because e.o .

12866 was issued near the end of 1993 .

"economically significant" rules are those rules that fall into category ( 1 ) of "significant" rules , or those that may ( 1 ) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy , a sector of the economy , productivity , competition , jobs , the environment , public health or safety , or state , local , or tribal governments or communities .

for rules that are considered "economically significant," agencies are required to complete a detailed cost - benefit analysis under section 6 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( c ) of e.o .

12866 .

although the definition of an "economically significant" rule is very similar to the definition of a major rule , the definition of a major rule is a bit broader .

both definitions have a similar $100 million threshold , but the definition of major rule also includes other categories ( see section entitled " "major" rules " above ) .

as stated in omb's guidance on implementing the congressional review act , the main difference is that some additional rules may be captured by the cra definition that are not considered "economically significant" under e.o .

12866 , notably those rules that would have a significant adverse effect on the ability of united states - based enterprises to compete with foreign - based enterprises in domestic and export markets .

table 4 lists the total number of "economically significant" reviews and non - "economically significant" reviews by oira each calendar year from 1994 to 2015 .

the table refers to reviews , not just rules , because oira also reviews some agency guidance documents .

in some cases , agencies may submit a single rule to oira for review more than one time in a year .

finally , table 5 lists the average review times for "economically significant" and non - "economically significant" reviews from 1994 to 2015 .

under e.o .

12866 , oira has the responsibility to meet certain timelines for review of regulatory actions .

for notices of inquiry , advanced notices of proposed rulemaking , or other "preliminary" regulatory actions , oira must respond to the agency within 10 working days .

for other regulatory actions such as proposed and final rules , oira has 90 calendar days in which to review rules .

however , there are no consequences in the order if oira fails to meet the deadline for review .

in general , since 1996 , the average time to review "economically significant" rules has been shorter than for non - "economically significant" rules .

one possible explanation for this trend is that "economically significant" rules might be of higher salience and political importance , therefore warranting higher priority from oira .

another potential reason is that oira frequently engages in informal reviews , collaborating with the regulatory agency in advance of the official receipt of the rule .

as a result , much of the work that goes into reviewing economically significant rules may take place in advance .

as described above , under the apa , agencies are generally required to undergo some basic steps when issuing a rule .

those steps include the publication of a proposed rule in the federal register ; the opportunity for interested persons to submit comments on the proposed rule ; publication of a final rule that includes a "concise general statement" of the "basis and purpose" of the rule ; and at least a 30-day waiting period before the rule can take effect .

the apa allows for an exception to two of these requirements if an agency has "good cause": the agency can issue a rule without notice and comment , or it can waive the 30-day waiting period before the rule can take effect .

the agency must give supporting reasons for invoking the good cause exception , and its use of good cause is subject to judicial review .

proper use of the good cause exception must reflect that following the typical notice - and - comment procedures are "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. .

under the apa , agencies are required to publish proposed and final rules in the federal register .

agencies also publish other items related to regulations in the federal register , such as notices of meetings and the extension of comment periods , as well as many other items related to non - regulatory governmental activities .

because the federal register provides documentation of the government's regulatory and other actions , some scholars , commentators , and public officials have used the total number of federal register pages each year , which has increased substantially since its creation , as a proxy measure for the total amount of regulatory activity .

the number of pages in the federal register , however , may not be an accurate proxy for regulatory activity or measure of regulatory burden for several reasons .

this section discusses the history and content of the federal register and why it may not provide an accurate measure of regulatory activity .

the federal register act created the federal register in 1935 as a result of the increasing number of administrative actions , laws , and regulations associated with the new deal .

during the new deal , the role of federal agencies changed substantially — as one scholar noted , the federal government was entering new realms of public policy as a result of laws passed under the new deal , such as agriculture , assistance for the aged and disadvantaged , housing and home ownership , and banking and securities .

many statutes that congress passed granted rulemaking authority to these new federal agencies .

to create a centralized mechanism for documenting the increasing number of rules and administrative actions , congress created the federal register .

since the 1930s , the federal register has been the vehicle for notifying the public of the federal government's actions .

as noted above , the number of pages in the federal register may be only a rough approximation of regulatory activity each year for several reasons .

first , the section of the federal register devoted to publishing final rules is relatively small , because the federal register documents other non - regulatory activities as well .

for example , in 2015 , approximately 30% of the total pages were in the "rules and regulations" section , which is where final rules are published .

the other portions of the federal register are used for such items as presidential documents , proposed rules , notices , and corrections .

other than the proposed rules , these additional sections typically have little , if anything , to do with federal regulations .

over 1,000 pages each year are blank pages or skips , which are designed to leave room for other materials and to maintain the integrity of the individual sections .

second , while the federal register provides a compilation of governmental activity that occurs each year , including new regulations that are issued , many of the final rules are amending rules that have been previously issued and therefore may not accurately be considered to be new rules .

similarly , as mentioned above , if an agency eliminates an already existing rule , this is considered a "rulemaking" action under the apa and would be published in the rules and regulations section of the federal register , even if it is a deregulatory action .

third , when agencies publish proposed and final rules in the federal register , they include a preamble along with the text of the rule .

the preamble often includes such information as statements of the statutory authority for the rule ; information and history which the agency deems to be relevant ; a discussion of the comments received during the comment period ; an explanation of the agency's final decision ; and in some cases , information about certain analyses that may have been required during the rulemaking process .

it is possible , therefore , that the actual regulatory text provided in a rule could be relatively small compared to the size of the entire rulemaking document in the federal register .

for example , a rule issued on january 25 , 2013 , by the department of health and human services pursuant to the affordable care act modifying health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) and other regulations was 137 pages in total .

of the 137 pages , 121 pages comprised the preamble and 16 pages actually amended the code of federal regulations .

much of the preamble discussed the comments received following the nprm , as well as estimates of costs and benefits and a list of the associated information collections .

finally , the number of pages in the federal register may also not be an accurate reflection of the amount of regulatory burden that stems from a rule .

for example , a short rule could impose a very large burden on a large number of regulated entities .

on the other hand , a lengthy rule could contain less burdensome requirements but greater detail and only apply to a small number of entities .

because the preamble to the rule contains detailed information about the rule itself and the agency's response to the comments it received , the number of pages of a particular rule in the federal register could be related to other factors such as a large number of comments received or an in - depth cost - benefit analysis completed by an agency .

figure 1 documents the change in the number of pages in the federal register over time .

as the data show , the number of pages has increased since publication of the federal register began .

the number of pages reached a peak in 1980 at 87,012 pages ; decreased to 47,418 pages in 1986 ; then increased again and has been approximately between 65,000 and 85,000 pages for the past two decades .

table 6 provides a more detailed examination of the total page count provided in figure 1 and provides information on the number of pages in each rulemaking section in the federal register .

in addition , table 6 provides data on the number of rulemaking documents in each section of the federal register .

data were obtained from the office of the federal register and , at the time of writing of this report , were available from 1976 through 2015 .

the number of documents published in the proposed rule and final rule sections of the federal register can be useful for cross - year comparisons .

however , as mentioned above , not all of the documents in each of these sections are rules , so these data may not provide a precise count of how many rules are issued each year or of the total regulatory burden each year .

other types of documents may also be included in the proposed and final rules sections of the federal register , as mentioned above .

for example , on august 6 , 2012 , in the final rules section , the federal motor carrier safety administration issued a two - page "notice of public listening sessions and extension of comment period. .

because this action was related to a regulation , the document was published in the final rules section , but the document itself is not a regulation .

finally , as previous mentioned in this report , under the apa's definition of "rulemaking," an amendment or repeal of a rule is considered a rule .

therefore , some of the pages and documents counted below could be reducing the burden associated with a previously issued rule by amending or repealing the rule .

