most people in the united states ( and other developed nations ) have rejected the shakespearean maxim , "neither a borrower nor a lender be. .

many people use loans to finance at least part of their education and job training during their youth , use mortgages to finance at least part of their home while starting a family , invest in stocks and bonds during middle age , and rely on the returns to the value of their stocks , bonds , and homes to at least partially pay for retirement during old age .

business firms , municipalities , and sovereign governments also rely on the financial system to help build the productive capital necessary for a well - functioning society and to foster economic growth .

financial regulatory policies are of interest to congress because of the repercussions for individual constituents , the financing of firms and governments , and long - run economic growth .

this report provides a framework to help answer the question , "who regulates whom in u.s. financial markets , and how ? .

at the federal level , the answer often depends on first identifying both the policy problem and the proposed solution .

for example , there are federal regulatory overlaps in which one agency can oversee a firm because of the firm's charter , a second agency regulates some of the activities that the firm is engaging in , but a third agency controls a government initiative to resolve or alleviate a problem related to the firm or its activities .

on the other hand , there are regulatory gaps in which some of the firms participating in a financial activity do not have regulated charters , and the activity believed to be causing a problem does not have a regulator .

thus , answering "who regulates whom" requires first identifying the problem to be regulated , and how .

this report provides an analysis of financial regulatory policy .

it is not intended as a roadmap of legal jurisdiction ; rather , it helps to match financial regulatory agencies to financial regulatory policies based on the kinds of financial difficulties that they generally address .

many of these difficulties are related to what economists call market failures , which can be loosely described as instances in which market prices and participants do not fully take into account all of the costs and benefits of their actions .

table 1 presents a list of financial regulators .

in the united states , it may be useful to distinguish between regulators that generally focus on prudence ( i.e. , monitoring and regulating the risks that a specific firm engages in ) and regulators that generally focus on disclosure ( i.e. , monitoring and regulating the information that firms and exchanges provide to potential market participants ) .

four federal agencies have prudential authority to examine banks , thrifts , and credit unions .

two agencies oversee markets for financial contracts ( securities and derivatives ) .

the agencies listed in the "other" category regulate housing government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) and consumer financial products , respectively .

the entities listed in the coordinating forum category are made up of the other financial regulators with related duties or functions and facilitate communication and coordination among member agencies .

two agencies either regulate an activity regardless of the type of institution that engages in it or provide prudential regulation to nonbanks .

the agencies are discussed in more detail below .

the policy problems and regulatory approaches of the agencies listed in table 1 vary considerably .

before providing a detailed analysis of each agency , it may be useful to consider how the agencies are related to each other and briefly sketch the types of policies they generally pursue .

the prudential bank regulators and the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) examine firms with specific charters and monitor and limit the risks that their chartered firms engage in .

securities and derivatives regulators monitor exchanges that host the trading of financial contracts , oversee the disclosures that market participants provide , and enforce rules against deceptive or manipulative trading practices .

unlike prudential bank regulators , securities regulators generally do not monitor the composition of assets and liabilities of the firms participating in their markets ( although they may require collateral or margin to be posted for some activities , and they may monitor the financial condition of exchanges ) .

these and other general differences may exist because of the various missions and risks to financial stability that the agencies address .

a specific event in the financial industry is often regulated by multiple agencies because firms subject to institution - based regulation often conduct financial transactions that are subject to activity - based regulation .

jpmorgan's losses in derivatives markets in 2012 may provide a helpful illustration .

jpmorgan's depository bank subsidiary had a risk management unit called cio .

this unit had significant losses on trades related to complex derivatives ( called the london whale trades at the time ) , which jpmorgan asserted were designed to guard against systemic risk .

when revelations of the losses became public , and people wanted to know who jpmorgan's regulator was , the answer was that there were many regulators related to jpmorgan's london whale trades , depending upon which aspect of the event a person was interested in .

the regulatory policy areas of agencies related to jpmorgan's derivatives trades are presented in figure 1 .

as a bank , jpmorgan's risk management was subject to prudential regulation by the occ at the depository level , and by the federal reserve on a consolidated basis at the holding company level .

as a public company , jpmorgan's disclosures of the trades to its stockholders were regulated by the sec .

as a participant in derivatives markets , jpmorgan's transactions were subject to cftc regulation .

as an insured depository institution , jpmorgan's safety and soundness was also subject to the fdic .

table 2 compares the general policy options and approaches of the banking regulators to the securities market regulators , which is drawn from banking regulation versus securities regulation , by franklin allen and richard herring .

the table lists many of the categories of regulations that are often considered for banks and securities markets .

it does not mean that each category is in place at all times ; for example , there have been times during which the united states has restricted interest payments on bank deposits , and times when the united states has not .

many of these categories of policy options are discussed in more detail in later sections of this report .

in allen's and herring's view , banking regulatory policies and securities regulatory policies are directed at fundamentally different problems .

they view bank regulation as being directed at systemic risk , which may be loosely defined as risk faced by the financial system as a whole , distinct from the costs and benefits faced by the failure or losses of a single firm or a price movement in a single market .

in contrast , they attribute many of the securities market regulator's policies to investor protection and efficiency enhancement ( including aligning corporate management with stockholder interests ) .

therefore , it may be useful to compare the general policy problems of banking and securities markets .

this report is organized as follows .

the first section briefly discusses several policy problems associated with financial intermediation .

the second section describes various modes of financial regulation to address these concerns and includes a table identifying the major federal regulators and the types of institutions and markets they supervise .

the table also identifies certain emergency authorities available to the regulators , including those that relate to systemic financial disturbances .

the third section focuses on the regulation of firms with bank charters .

the fourth section focuses on the regulation of financial trading markets , especially securities and derivatives .

the fifth section focuses on certain other financial regulators and markets that either do not easily fit into banking or securities or markets that do not have a dedicated regulator .

the appendices topics include organizational differences among financial firms , the rating system that regulators use to evaluate the health of banks , the regulatory structure prior to the dodd - frank act , a list of common acronyms , and a glossary of common financial terms .

ultimately , the function of the financial system is to coordinate the flow of resources from savers to borrowers , and back again .

two common methods to provide this financial intermediation include ( 1 ) firms that directly gather funds from savers to directly lend to borrowers ( banks , for example ) and ( 2 ) markets that facilitate the trading of financial obligations ( securities and derivatives exchanges , for example ) .

the range of financial obligations includes , but is not limited to , debts — repayment of principal and interest , equities — share in ownership and returns , hybrids — mixture of debt and equity features , insurance — payment contingent on occurrence of a future event , swaps — promises to exchange one type of stream of payment for another , and forwards — promises for future delivery at a particular place and time .

although there are many ways to organize a firm that offers bank - like services , and there are many types of contracts that combine elements of bank - like loans with securities contracts , the regulation of the financial system in the united states has historically focused on distinguishing banks , securities markets , and insurance .

the analytical tradition in the united states has been to distinguish commercial banking from investment banking .

commercial banks accept customer deposits and offer commercial loans .

investment banks underwrite and register new securities and market them to individual or institutional investors .

investment banks also provide brokerage services , advice on corporate financing and proprietary trading , and assistance to merger and acquisition proposals .

although insurance issues are beyond the scope of this report , banking and securities markets are discussed briefly below .

the regulatory missions of individual agencies vary , sometimes as a result of historical accident .

some agencies have powers over particular firms , but not over all of the other participants in the market that the firm might participate in .

other regulators have authority over markets or activities , and this authority applies to a variety of the firms that participate .

as a result , a single firm might have to answer to both the regulator of its charter and to the regulator of a particular activity ( i.e. , regulatory overlap ) .

however , there may also be instances in which a corner of the financial system has neither a regulator of the specific firms , nor a regulator of the particular activities ( i.e. , regulatory gap ) .

this section of the report summarizes several categories of regulation , provides a table of specific financial regulators in the united states and their policy spheres , and describes the basic regulatory approach for banks ( prudence ) and securities markets ( disclosure ) .

in general , the term bank will be used in this section to refer to firms ( or subsidiaries ) with bank , thrift , or credit union charters .

banking regulators in the united states attempt to address many of the general policy problems described in the introduction by focusing on the health of chartered banks .

bank charters limit the range of permissible activities and affiliations of banks .

bank regulators employ examiners to monitor and evaluate the financial health of the banks they regulate .

furthermore , deposit insurance and a system to coordinate bank reserves and provide emergency lending is available to participating banks .

the primary prudential regulator of a given bank depends on its charter ; however , other policies ( such as lending to a troubled bank or resolving a failed bank ) are applied by a single agency regardless of the charter .

activity - based regulation applies to chartered banks — thus the sec retains its authority for communications between publicly traded banks and their stockholders , and the cfpb regulates many classes of loans that banks make to consumers .

as listed in table 1 , four prudential regulators coordinate the examinations policies of depositories through the federal financial institution examinations council ( ffiec ) in order to prevent inconsistencies in the stringency of regulatory oversight .

a bank or thrift may organize itself with a depository subsidiary owned by a larger holding company , in which case the holding company may have a different primary regulator than the depository subsidiary .

the occ regulates depository banks and thrifts that have a federal charter ( subsidiaries if in a holding company structure ) .

the fdic regulates banks with a state charter that are not members of the federal reserve system ( subsidiaries if in a holding company structure ) .

the ncua regulates credit unions that have a federal charter .

in addition to these federal regulators , state governments have their own agencies to administer state banking laws .

the federal reserve regulates state - chartered member banks ( subsidiaries ) and holding companies of banks and thrifts .

the conference of state bank supervisors ( csbs ) serves as a forum for state banking agencies , but is not itself a regulator .

state banking supervisors choose a nonvoting representative to serve the fsoc in an advisory capacity .

many prudential regulations are of degree , not of kind .

that is , there are many categories of activities that banks may participate in , but they must either limit their concentration or offset related risks in another manner .

for example , banks may offer 30-year fixed - rate mortgages ; but , an individual bank may have to manage its resulting interest rate risk by offering other loans with shorter maturities or by acquiring derivatives that hedge interest rate risk .

as a result , prudential regulation is not always about catching lawbreakers or policing legal violations , but is often about monitoring the risks that banks engage in or the procedures bank managers have in place to control risk .

even banks that have not violated any statute may be required to adjust their lending or other business practices in response to the regulator's evaluation of risks in current conditions .

this section describes five prominent elements of bank regulation that each primary prudential regulator supervises for its chartered firms: ( 1 ) safety and soundness , ( 2 ) capital requirements , ( 3 ) asset management , ( 4 ) consumer compliance , and ( 5 ) community reinvestment .

in many cases the primary prudential regulator will not be the sole policymaker or regulatory authority for these issues .

for example , rules for capital requirements and safety and soundness may be coordinated with other bank regulators , and banks may have to comply with consumer regulations issued by the cfpb in addition to satisfying their own primary prudential regulator .

there may not be a clear delineation between each regulatory element ; for example , adequate procedures for asset management might be important to maintain safety and soundness .

appendix c includes a discussion of the official ratings system that regulators apply to covered firms .

regulators of financial trading attempt to address many economic policy problems .

as discussed in the introductory sections , financial markets may not be level playing fields — some people with access to confidential information may have a trading advantage .

furthermore , the people who issue and market new securities ( or derivatives ) may have the incentive to withhold or mischaracterize some of the information they have about the securities or derivatives being offered .

even if these market facilitators provide full information , the outcome might still be less than optimal if other market participants simply believe that material information is not being disclosed or that insiders are behaving strategically .

as a result , much of the regulation of securities and derivatives markets has focused on resolving conflicts of interest and requiring full disclosure of material information , unlike bank regulation that tends to focus on prudence .

in addition , much securities market regulation has been applied through enforcement against after - the - fact violations , rather than as prospective examinations of covered firms .

the sec was created as an independent agency in 1934 to enforce newly written federal securities laws ( p.l .

73-291 , 48 stat .

881 ) .

although the sec is concerned with ensuring the safety and soundness of the firms it regulates , its primary concern is maintaining fair and orderly markets and protecting investors from fraud .

the sec generally does not have the authority to limit risks taken by non - bank financial institutions or the ability to prop up a failing firm , with some exceptions .

two types of firms come under the sec's jurisdiction: ( 1 ) all corporations that sell securities to the public and ( 2 ) securities broker / dealers and other securities markets intermediaries .

firms that sell securities — stocks and bonds — to the public are required to register with the sec .

registration entails the publication of detailed information about the firm , its management , the intended uses for the funds raised through the sale of securities , and the risks to investors .

the initial registration disclosures must be kept current through the filing of periodic financial statements: annual and quarterly reports ( as well as special reports when there is a material change in the firm's financial condition or prospects ) .

beyond these disclosure requirements , and certain other rules that apply to corporate governance , the sec does not have any direct regulatory control over publicly traded firms .

bank regulators are expected to identify unsafe and unsound banking practices in the institutions they supervise and have the power to intervene and prevent banks from taking excessive risks .

the sec has no comparable authority ; the securities laws simply require that risks be disclosed to investors .

registration with the sec , in other words , is in no sense a government endorsement that a security is a good or safe investment .

to enable investors to make informed investment choices , the sec has statutory authority over financial accounting standards .

all publicly traded firms are required to use generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) , which are formulated by the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) , the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) , and the sec itself .

besides publicly traded corporations , a number of securities market participants are also required to register with the sec ( or with one of the industry self - regulatory organizations that the sec oversees ) .

these include stock exchanges , securities brokerages ( and numerous classes of their personnel ) , mutual funds , auditors , investment advisers , and others .

to maintain their registered status , all these entities must comply with rules meant to protect investors' interests , prevent fraud , and promote fair and orderly markets .

the area of sec supervision most analogous to banking regulation is broker / dealer regulation .

several provisions of law and regulation protect brokerage customers from losses arising from brokerage firm failure .

the securities investor protection corporation ( sipc ) , created by congress in 1970 , operates an insurance scheme funded by assessments on broker / dealers ( and with a backup line of credit with the u.s. treasury ) .

sipc guarantees customer accounts up to $500,000 for losses arising from brokerage failure or fraud ( but not market losses ) .

unlike the fdic , however , sipc does not examine broker / dealers and has no regulatory powers .

since 1975 , the sec has enforced a net capital rule applicable to all registered broker / dealers .

the rule requires broker / dealers to maintain an excess of capital above mere solvency , to ensure that a failing firm stops trading while it still has assets to meet customer claims .

net capital levels are calculated in a manner similar to the risk - based capital requirements under the basel accords , but the sec has its own set of risk weightings , which it calls "haircuts. .

the riskier the asset , the greater the haircut .

although the net capital rule appears to be similar in its effects to the banking agencies' risk - based capital requirements , there are significant differences .

the sec has no authority to intervene in a broker / dealer's business if it takes excessive risks that might cause net capital to drop below the required level .

rather , the net capital rule is often described as a liquidation rule — not meant to prevent failures but to minimize the impact on customers .

moreover , the sec has no authority comparable to the banking regulators' prompt corrective action powers: it cannot preemptively seize a troubled broker / dealer or compel it to merge with a sound firm .

the differences between bank and securities regulation with respect to safety and soundness came into sharp focus with the collapse of bear stearns , one of the five largest investment banks , in march 2008 .

the sec monitored bear stearns' financial condition until shortly before the collapse ( which was precipitated by the refusal of other market participants to extend short - term credit to bear stearns ) , and it believed that the firm had sufficient levels of capital and liquidity .

when bankruptcy suddenly loomed , it was the federal reserve that stepped in to broker the sale of bear stearns to jp morgan chase by agreeing to purchase $30 billion of "toxic" bear stearns assets .

the bear stearns situation highlighted several apparent anomalies in the u.s. regulatory structure .

the sec lacked safety and soundness powers over the institutions it supervised , and the fed was forced to commit funds to an investment bank over which it had no regulatory jurisdiction .

the anomaly became even more pronounced when the fed subsequently established a lending facility to provide short - term credit to other investment banks .

the bear stearns collapse showed the inability of the sec to respond to a brokerage failure with systemic risk implications .

there is more to the story , however , than the differences between bank regulation and the sec's net capital rule .

in 2004 , the sec devised a voluntary supervisory scheme for the largest investment banks , called the consolidated supervised entities ( cse ) program .

the cse firms were all registered broker / dealers , but were also large holding companies with extensive operations carried on outside the broker / dealer unit .

thus , the sec had no capital requirement that applied to the entire investment bank .

under cse , this was to change: as a substitute for the net capital rule , the firms agreed to abide by the basel risk - based standard and maintain that level of capital at the holding company level .

on a voluntary basis , the firms agreed to grant the sec the authority to examine and monitor their compliance , above and beyond the sec's explicit statutory authority .

whatever the intent of the cse program , it did not succeed in preventing excessive risk - taking by the participants .

by the end of september 2008 , all five cse investment banks had either failed ( lehman brothers ) , merged to prevent failure ( merrill lynch and bear stearns ) , or applied for bank holding company status ( morgan stanley and goldman sachs ) .

on september 26 , 2008 , sec chairman cox announced the end of the cse program , declaring that "[t]he last six months have made it abundantly clear that voluntary regulation does not work .

when congress passed the gramm - leach - bliley act , it created a significant regulatory gap by failing to give to the sec or any agency the authority to regulate large investment bank holding companies. .

with the dodd - frank act , congress eliminated the investment bank holding company framework in section 17 of the securities exchange act of 1934 .

section 618 of dodd - frank permits a securities holding company to be subject to consolidated supervision and submit to federal reserve regulation .

under title i of dodd - frank , any securities firm that is deemed by the fsoc to be systemically significant will automatically come under the consolidated supervision of the federal reserve .

other provisions of dodd - frank , however , gave the sec new responsibilities that have aspects of safety and soundness regulation .

under section 731 , the sec sets capital requirements for major security - based swap participants and security - based swap dealers .

section 956 gives the sec new authority to prohibit compensation structures in broker / dealers and investment advisory firms that create inappropriate risks .

the cftc was created in 1974 to regulate commodities futures and options markets , which at the time were poised to expand beyond their traditional base in agricultural commodities to encompass contracts based on financial variables , such as interest rates and stock indexes .

the cftc's mission is to prevent excessive speculation , manipulation of commodity prices , and fraud .

like the sec , the cftc oversees industry self - regulatory organizations ( sros ) — the futures exchanges and the national futures association — and requires the registration of a range of industry firms and personnel , including futures commission merchants ( brokers ) , floor traders , commodity pool operators , and commodity trading advisers .

the dodd - frank act greatly expanded the cftc's jurisdiction by eliminating exemptions for certain over - the - counter derivatives .

as a result , swap dealers , major swap participants , swap clearing organizations , swap execution facilities , and swap data repositories are required to register with the cftc .

these entities are subject to business conduct standards contained in statute or promulgated as cftc rules .

like the sec , the cftc does not directly regulate the safety and soundness of individual firms , with the exception of newly regulated swap dealers and major swap participants , for whom it sets capital standards pursuant to dodd - frank .

the fhfa was created in 2008 by the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) to consolidate and strengthen regulation of a group of housing finance - related government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) : fannie mae , freddie mac , and the federal home loan banks .

the fhfa succeeded the office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) and the federal housing finance board ( fhfb ) .

fhfa authority includes both the safety and soundness authority of the former ofheo and the housing mission goals for the gses that had been administered by hud .

the impetus to create the fhfa came from concerns about risk — including systemic risk — arising from the rapid growth of the gses , particularly fannie and freddie .

these two gses were profit - seeking , shareholder - owned corporations that took advantage of their government - sponsored status to accumulate undiversified investment portfolios of more than $1.5 trillion , consisting almost exclusively of home mortgages ( and securities and derivatives based on those mortgages ) .

the fhfa was given enhanced safety and soundness powers resembling those of the federal bank regulators .

these powers included the ability to set capital standards , order the enterprises to cease any activity or divest any asset that posed a threat to financial soundness , and replace management and assume control of the firms that became seriously undercapitalized .

one of the fhfa's first actions was to place both fannie and freddie in "voluntary" conservatorship .

fannie and freddie continue to operate , under an agreement with the u.s. treasury .

the treasury provided capital to the two firms , by means of preferred stock purchases , to ensure that each remains solvent .

in return , the government received warrants equivalent to a 79.9% equity ownership position in the firms .

treasury also sweeps the firms' retained earnings above a certain level of net worth .

title x of dodd - frank created the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) to bring the consumer protection regulation of depository and non - depository financial institutions into closer alignment .

the bureau is an independent entity within the federal reserve with authority over an array of consumer financial products and services ( including deposit taking , mortgages , credit cards and other extensions of credit , loan servicing , check guaranteeing , collection of consumer report data , debt collection , real estate settlement , money transmitting , and financial data processing ) .

cfpb serves as the primary federal consumer financial protection supervisor and enforcer of federal consumer protection laws over many of the institutions that offer these products and services .

however , the bureau's regulatory authority varies based on institution size and type .

regulatory authority differs for ( 1 ) depository institutions with more than $10 billion in assets , ( 2 ) depository institutions with $10 billion or less in assets , and ( 3 ) non - depositories .

the dodd - frank act also explicitly exempts a number of different entities and consumer financial activities from the bureau's supervisory and enforcement authority .

among the exempt entities are merchants , retailers , or sellers of nonfinancial goods or services , to the extent that they extend credit directly to consumers exclusively for the purpose of enabling consumers to purchase such nonfinancial goods or services ; automobile dealers ; real estate brokers and agents ; financial intermediaries registered with the sec or cftc ; insurance companies ; and depository institutions with $10 billion or less in assets .

the need for coordination and data sharing among regulators has led to the formation of innumerable interagency task forces to study particular market episodes and make recommendations to congress .

three interagency organizations have permanent status .

title i of the dodd - frank act created the fsoc on the date of enactment .

the council is chaired by the secretary of the treasury , and the other voting members consist of the heads of the federal reserve , fdic , occ , ncua , sec , cftc , fhfa , cfpb , and a member with insurance expertise appointed by the president .

nonvoting members , serving in an advisory capacity , include the director of the office of financial research ( created by title i to support the fsoc ) , the head of the federal insurance office ( created by title v of dodd - frank ) , a state banking supervisor , a state insurance commissioner , and a state securities commissioner .

if an agency is headed by a board or a commission , only the chair serves in the fsoc , not the entire board or commission .

the fsoc is tasked with identifying risks to financial stability and responding to emerging systemic risks , while minimizing moral hazard arising from expectations that firms or their counterparties will be rescued from failure .

the fsoc's duties include collecting information on financial firms from regulators and through the office of financial research ; monitoring the financial system to identify potential systemic risks ; proposing regulatory changes to congress to promote stability , competitiveness , and efficiency ; facilitating information sharing and coordination among financial regulators ; making regulatory recommendations to financial regulators , including "new or heightened standards and safeguards" ; identifying gaps in regulation that could pose systemic risk ; reviewing and commenting on new or existing accounting standards issued by any standard - setting body ; and providing a forum for the resolution of jurisdictional disputes among council members .

the fsoc may not impose any resolution on disagreeing members , however .

the council is required to provide an annual report and testimony to congress .

in contrast to some proposals to create a systemic risk regulator , the dodd - frank act does not give the council authority ( beyond the existing authority of its individual members ) to eliminate emerging threats or close regulatory gaps it identifies .

in most cases , the council can only make regulatory recommendations — it cannot impose change .

although the fsoc does not have direct supervisory authority over any financial institution , it plays an important role in regulation , because firms that it designates as systemically important come under a consolidated supervisory regime that may be considerably more stringent than the standards that apply to non - systemic firms .

the fsoc is also required to approve ( by a two - thirds vote ) decisions by the federal reserve to shut down systemically significant financial firms that pose a severe threat to financial stability .

the federal financial institutions examination council ( ffiec ) was created by legislation in 1979 as a formal interagency body to coordinate federal regulation of lending institutions .

through the ffiec , the federal banking regulators issue a single set of reporting forms for covered institutions .

the ffiec also attempts to harmonize auditing principles and supervisory decisions .

the ffiec is made up of the federal reserve , occ , fdic , ncua , and cfpb .

except for the cfpb , the member agencies of the ffiec are primary prudential regulators of depository institutions with specific charters as described above and employ examiners to enforce safety and soundness regulations for lending institutions .

the examination powers of the cfpb for compliance with consumer protection rules varies across institutions , many of which may not have bank charters .

federal financial institution examiners evaluate the risks of covered institutions .

the specific safety and soundness concerns common to the ffiec agencies can be found in the examiner's handbook to monitor lenders .

each subject area of the handbook can be updated separately .

examples of safety and soundness subject areas include important indicators of risk , such as capital adequacy , asset quality , liquidity , and sensitivity to market risk .

the president's working group on financial markets ( pwg ) was created by president reagan through executive order in 1988 .

the pwg includes the secretary of the treasury and the chairmen of the federal reserve , the sec , and the cftc .

it is not a formal agency subject to congressional oversight , although each member is subject to senate confirmation at the time of appointment .

the impetus for the creation of the pwg was the stock market crash of october 1987 , and specifically the role that the stock index futures markets ( under cftc jurisdiction ) played in creating panic in the stock market ( regulated by sec ) .

studies conducted by the sec , the cftc , a blue - ribbon panel appointed by the president ( the presidential task force on market mechanisms , or brady commission ) , and the stock and futures exchanges reached strikingly different conclusions ; the task of the pwg was to review the studies and issue a further report .

the pwg provides interagency coordination and information sharing and studies entities and products that raise intermarket regulatory issues , such as hedge funds and otc derivatives .

for example , in march 2008 , the pwg issued a policy statement on the ongoing financial crisis .

another example is the october 2010 pwg report called for changes to address systemic risk and reduce the susceptibility of money market mutual funds ( mmfs ) to runs .

the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) is authorized to set capital classification standards for the federal home loan banks , fannie mae , and freddie mac that reflect the differences in operations between the banks and the latter two gses .

the law defines several capital classifications and prescribes regulatory actions to be taken as a gse's condition worsens .

limitations are placed on a gse if it does not meet certain capital standards .

no growth in total assets is permitted for an undercapitalized gse , unless ( 1 ) fhfa has accepted the gse's capital restoration plan , ( 2 ) an increase in assets is consistent with the plan , and ( 3 ) the ratios of both total capital to assets and tangible equity to assets are increasing .

an undercapitalized entity is subject to heightened scrutiny and supervision .

if a regulated entity is significantly undercapitalized , fhfa must take one or more of the following actions: elect new directors , dismiss directors or executives , and hire qualified executive officers , or other actions .

without prior written approval , executives of a significantly undercapitalized regulated entity may not receive bonuses or pay raises .

in addition , fhfa may appoint a receiver or conservator for several specified causes related to financial difficulty or violations of law or regulation .

when a gse becomes critically undercapitalized , receivership or conservatorship provisions apply .

for example , fhfa must appoint itself as the receiver if a regulated entity's assets are ( and have been for 60 days ) less than its obligations to its creditors , or if the regulated entity has ( for 60 days ) not been generally paying its debts as they come due .

although both gses were technically adequately capitalized according to the march 2008 fhfa report , both firms were experiencing losses large enough to threaten continued solvency .

in july 2008 , congress empowered treasury to provide financial assistance to the gses , and the fhfa appointed itself conservator for both fannie and freddie in september 2008 , before either gse had failed to make timely payments on debt obligations .

fhfa may downgrade the capital classification of a regulated entity ( 1 ) whose conduct could rapidly deplete core or total capital , or ( in the case of fannie or freddie ) whose mortgage assets have declined significantly in value , ( 2 ) that is determined ( after notice and opportunity for a hearing ) to be in an unsafe or unsound condition , or ( 3 ) that is engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice .

the sec's net capital rule , set out in 17 cfr 240.15c3-1 , imposes an "aggregate indebtedness standard. .

no broker / dealer shall permit its aggregate indebtedness to all other persons to exceed 1500% of its net capital ( or 800% of its net capital for 12 months after commencing business as a broker or dealer ) .

the 1500% ( or 15-to - 1 ) ratio of debt to liquid capital , is arithmetically equivalent to a 6⅔% capital requirement .

to calculate liquid capital , sec rules require that securities and other assets be given a "haircut" from their current market values ( or face value , in the case of bonds ) , to cover the risk that the asset's value might decline before it could be sold .

the haircut concept — the riskier the asset , the greater the haircut — is essentially the same as the standardized risk weights in the basel accords .

for example , u.s. treasury securities might have a lower haircut than municipal securities , which might have a lower haircut than corporate bonds , which in turn might have a lower haircut than common stock .

certain assets , such as unsecured receivables or securities for which no ready market exists , receive a haircut of 100% .

the dodd - frank act requires the sec to set capital standards for major security - based swap dealers and major security - based swap participants .

futures commission merchants ( or fcms , the futures equivalent of a securities broker / dealer ) are subject to adjusted net capital requirements .

authority to enforce the capital rules is delegated by the cftc to the national futures association ( nfa ) , a self - regulatory organization created by congress .

each nfa member that is required to be registered with the cftc as a futures commission merchant ( member fcm ) must maintain "adjusted net capital" ( as defined in cftc regulation 1.17 ) equal to or in excess of the greatest of ( i ) $500,000 ; ( ii ) for member fcms with less than $2,000,000 in adjusted net capital , $6,000 for each remote location operated ; ( iii ) for member fcms with less than $2,000,000 in adjusted net capital , $3,000 for each associated person ; ( iv ) for securities brokers and dealers , the amount of net capital specified by sec regulations ; ( v ) 8% of domestic and foreign domiciled customer and 4% of non - customer ( excluding proprietary ) risk maintenance margin / performance bond requirements for all domestic and foreign futures and options on futures contracts excluding the risk margin associated with naked long option positions ; ( vi ) for member fcms with an affiliate that engages in foreign exchange ( fx ) transactions and that is authorized to engage in those transactions solely by virtue of its affiliation with a registered fcm , $7,500,000 ; or ( vii ) for member fcms that are counterparties to fx options , $5,000,000 , except that fx dealer members must meet the higher requirement in financial requirements section 11 .

the dodd - frank act defines several categories of major derivatives participants and requires the cftc to set capital standards for major security - based swap dealers and major security - based swap participants .

buying and selling currencies is essential to foreign trade , and the exchange rate has major implications for a country's macroeconomic policy .

although the united states allows its currency to float , the foreign exchange market is not completely free because of the actions of central banks .

for example , the central banks of other countries may seek to peg their currency to the dollar .

the market is one of the largest in the world , with average daily foreign exchange turnover in excess of $4 trillion .

federal reserve monetary policies affect the value of the dollar ( even if the fed does not intentionally target the value of the dollar ) , but no agency is granted sole authority to regulate the mechanics of foreign exchange trading , except to the extent foreign exchange futures are offered on regulated exchanges .

trading in currencies takes place between large global banks , central banks , hedge funds and other currency speculators , commercial firms involved in imports and exports , fund managers , and retail brokers .

currency trading is largely conducted in the over - the - counter market .

like the foreign exchange market , there is no central exchange for the resale market for u.s. treasuries , but there are a number of proprietary , computer - based transaction systems .

treasury securities were exempted from sec regulation by the original securities laws of the 1930s and under the volcker rule in the dodd - frank act .

in 1993 , following a successful corner of a treasury bond auction by salomon brothers , congress passed the government securities act amendments ( p.l .

103-202 ) , which required brokers and dealers in government securities that were not already registered with the sec to register as government securities dealers .

 ( existing broker / dealer registrants were simply required to notify the sec that they were in the government securities business. ) .

nevertheless , the government securities market remains much more lightly regulated than the corporate securities markets .

the primary market in treasury securities , in which new debt instruments are sold to fund government operations , is monitored by the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) .

a principal channel for the distribution of new treasuries is a group of firms called primary dealers , who purchase securities at auction for their own accounts and for their customers .

the primary dealers are 19 commercial and investment banks , both foreign and domestic .

the primary dealer list is maintained by the frbny , which also issues a list of practices that it expects primary dealers to comply with .

frbny conducts auctions for the treasury , but its relationship to the dealers is commercial , rather than providing prudential regulation .

the new york fed does , however , collect certain data about primary dealers' transactions in government securities .

in march 2008 , as part of its multifaceted attempt to supply liquidity to the financial system , the federal reserve established a primary dealer credit facility , to make short - term loans against a variety of collateral ( including asset - backed and mortgage - backed securities ) to the primary dealers .

this step attracted attention in part because the primary dealer group included investment banking firms of which the fed had no regulatory authority .

the securities laws mandate registration of , and extensive disclosures by , public securities issuers , but also provide for private sales of securities , which are not subject to disclosure requirements .

private placements of securities may only be offered to limited numbers of "accredited investors" who meet certain asset tests .

 ( most purchasers are life insurers and other institutional investors. ) .

there are also restrictions on the resale of private securities .

the size of the private placement market is subject to considerable variation from year to year , but at times the value of securities sold privately exceeds what is sold into the public market .

in recent decades , venture capitalists and private equity firms have come to play important roles in corporate finance .

the former typically purchase interests in private firms , which may be sold later to the public , while the latter often purchase all the stock of publicly traded companies and take them private .

appendix a .

capital requirements: provisions in dodd - frank the dodd - frank act includes numerous provisions that seek to strengthen capital requirements of banks and to extend capital regulatory approaches to certain non - bank financial firms and markets .

the general thrust of these provisions is that systemically significant firms , derivatives trading platforms , and other financial market utilities should be required to hold extra capital to compensate for the risk that their failure might pose to the system at large .

title i requires banking regulators to establish minimum risk - based capital requirements and leverage requirements on a consolidated basis for depository institutions , depository holding companies , and firms designated by the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) as systemically significant .

these requirements must be no lower than those that were set for depository institutions as of the date of enactment ( july 2010 ) .

one example of the effect of this provision is that bank holding companies will no longer be able to include trust - preferred securities in tier i capital .

these requirements are phased in over time , and certain small firms are exempted .

section 115 ( c ) requires the financial stability oversight council to study the feasibility of implementing a contingent capital requirement for systemically significant firms .

contingent capital is debt that can be converted into equity by the issuing firm under certain circumstances .

following the study , if the fsoc recommends , the fed may impose contingent capital requirements on systemically significant firms .

section 165 ( j ) requires the federal reserve to impose leverage limits on bank holding companies with assets over $50 billion and on the systemically important non - bank financial companies that it will supervise .

when this section is implemented , such firms will be required to maintain a debt - to - equity ratio of no more than 15-to - 1 .

title vi requires the federal banking regulators to make capital "requirements countercyclical , so that the amount of capital required to be maintained … increases in times of economic expansion and decreases in times of economic contraction , consistent with … safety and soundness. .

appendix b .

forms of banking organizations the structure of banks can be complex .

currently , the regulator of a particular activity of a bank or its subsidiary depends in part on the activity of the subsidiary or its charter , as described previously .

the following flow charts provide simplified representations of various bank structures .

in some cases , the umbrella bank and its subsidiaries may have different regulators .

appendix c. bank ratings: ufirs and camels federal bank regulators conduct confidential assessments of covered banks .

the federal financial institutions examination council ( ffiec ) helps coordinate the ratings system used by bank examiners so that there is some consistency to the examinations , although the ratings do take into account differences in bank size , sophistication , complexity of activities , and risk profile .

the ffiec adopted the uniform financial institutions rating system ( ufirs ) in 1979 .

the system was revised in 1996 and is often referred to as the camels rating system .

camels stands for c apital adequacy , a sset quality , m anagement , e arnings , l iquidity , and s ensitivity to market risk .

these are measures used to evaluate the safety and soundness of banks .

a description of the camels system is found in the comptrollers handbook: bank supervision process , provided by the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) .

market factors can affect more than one category in the camels ratings .

capital adequacy this component assesses the level of capital held by the institution in relation to the risks that it takes .

capital adequacy can be affected by a number of factors , including changes in credit risk , market risk , and the institution's financial condition .

increases in problem assets would require increased capital .

capital adequacy is also supposed to reflect potential risks even if they are technically off of the bank's balance sheet .

asset quality asset quality refers to existing and potential credit risk associated with a bank's portfolio .

like capital adequacy , this component is supposed to reflect risk even if it is not technically on the bank's balance sheet .

asset quality can include changes in loan default rates , investment performance , exposure to counterparty risk , and all other risks that may affect the value or marketability of an institution's assets .

management capability the governance of the bank , including management and board of directors , is assessed in relation to the nature and scope of the bank's activities .

this rating is affected by the level and quality of management oversight .

it also includes legal compliance , responsiveness to auditor recommendations , and similar issues .

earnings quantity and quality the rating of a bank's earnings takes into account current earnings and the sustainability of future earnings .

earnings that rely on favorable tax effects and nonrecurring events receive lower ratings .

similarly , inadequate controls for expenses can reduce the rating for earnings .

difficulties in forecasting and managing risks can also reduce the earnings rating .

liquidity liquidity includes the ability of a bank to meet its expected funding needs .

for a given institution size and complexity , this factor assesses the ability of the firm to fulfill its financial obligations in a timely manner .

liquidity refers to the ability to meet short - term funding needs without incurring excessive losses , which might occur if assets had to be sold at a steep discount in a time - pressure situation ( or "fire sale" ) .

liquidity also includes assessments of specific financial categories , such as the trend and stability of deposits , and the expected ability to securitize and sell pools of assets .

sensitivity to market risk market risk includes potential changes in the prices of financial assets , such as movements in interest rates , foreign exchange rates , commodity prices , and stock prices .

the nature and scope of a bank's activities can affect the markets that it is exposed to ; therefore , market risk is closely related to the other camels factors .

this rating takes into account management's ability to identify and manage the risks that can arise from the bank's trading activities in financial markets .

it also takes into account interest rate risk from nontrading positions , such as any duration mismatch in loans held to maturity .

appendix d. regulatory structure before the dodd - frank act appendix e. acronyms appendix f. glossary of terms this glossary has been compiled from several earlier crs reports , the cftc and sifma websites , and other sources .

affiliate — a corporate relationship of control .

two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another , or when both are controlled by a third ( holding ) company .

 ( see "subsidiary." ) .

all subsidiaries are affiliates , but affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries .

agency relationship — a business relationship of two parties in which one represents the other in transactions with third parties .

the agent negotiates on behalf of the party actually at risk , who is known as the "principal. .

a commission goes to the agent who does not take on the risk of the transaction ; the profit or loss goes to the principal .

asset - backed security — a bond that represents a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets .

the holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt .

 ( see "securitization." ) .

mortgage - backed securities and asset backed commercial paper are examples of this .

bank holding company — a business incorporated under state law , which controls through equity ownership ( "holds" ) one or more banks and , often , other affiliates in financial services as allowed by its regulator , the federal reserve .

on the federal level , these businesses are regulated through the bank holding company act .

bank holding company act — the federal statute under which the federal reserve regulates bank holding companies and financial holding companies ( fhc ) .

besides the permissible financial activities enumerated in the gramm - leach - bliley act ( p.l .

106-102 ) , the law provides a mechanism between the federal reserve and the department of the treasury to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for fhcs .

basel accords — international banking agreements coordinated through the basel committee on bank supervision ( bcbs ) , which provides recommendations on banking regulations among participating countries .

blue s ky l aws — state statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities .

broker / dealer — an individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers .

broker / dealers are registered with the securities and exchange commission .

bubble — self - reinforcing process in which the price of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period , often followed by a rapid price decline .

speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity ( in the case of futures , "to take positions" ) before the price trend ends , and an even greater rush to sell the commodity ( unwind positions ) when prices reverse .

capital requirements — capital is the owners' stake in an enterprise .

it is a critical line of defense when losses occur , both in banking and nonbanking enterprises .

capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them .

in the case of banking institutions experiencing problems , capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds .

charter conversion — banking institutions may , with the approval of their regulators , switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution , national or state charter , and to stockholder ownership from depositor ownership .

various regulatory conditions may encourage switching .

clearing organization — an entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled .

a clearing organization may be a division or affiliate of a particular exchange , or a freestanding entity .

also called a clearing house , multilateral clearing organization , or clearing association .

collateralized debt obligation ( cdo ) — a bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset - backed securities .

c ollateralized mortgage obligation ( cmo ) — a multiclass bond backed by a pool of mortgage pass - through securities or mortgage loans .

commercial bank — a deposit - taking institution that can make commercial loans , accept checking accounts , and whose deposits are insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation .

national banks are chartered by the office of the comptroller of the currency ; state banks , by the individual states .

commodity futures modernization act of 2000 ( cfma ; p.l .

106-554 , 114 stat .

2763 ) — overhauled the commodity exchange act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading , and established a broad statutory exemption from regulation for otc derivatives .

largely repealed by the dodd - frank act .

community financial institution — as provided for in the gramm - leach - bliley act , a member of the federal home loan bank system whose deposits are insured under the federal deposit insurance act and which has assets of less than $500 million ( calculated according to provisions in the law , and in succeeding years to be adjusted for inflation ) .

such institutions may become members without meeting requirements with regard to the percentage of total assets that must be in residential mortgage loans and may borrow from the federal home loan banks for small business and agriculture .

conservatorship — when an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the intent to restoring it to an ongoing business .

counterparty — the opposite party in a bilateral agreement , contract , or transaction , such as a swap .

credit default swap ( cds ) — a tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event , such as default on a debt obligation , bankruptcy , or credit rating downgrade .

credit risk — the risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan in full , or that a derivatives counterparty will default .

credit union — a nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds ( such as employment , labor union membership , or residence in the same neighborhood ) .

may be state or nationally chartered .

credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction balances in the form of share accounts , pay dividends ( interest ) on them out of earnings , and primarily provide consumer credit to members .

the federal regulator for credit unions is the national credit union administration ( ncua ) .

dealer — an individual or financial firm engaged in the purchase and sale of securities and commodities such as metals , foreign exchange , etc. , for its own account and at its own risk as principal ( see broker ) .

commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high - quality debt obligations , such as those of the federal government .

depository institution — customarily refers to commercial banks , savings institutions , and credit unions , since traditionally the greater part of their funding has been in the form of deposits .

deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed - upon terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor .

derivatives — financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of an underlying commodity or financial variable ( such as an interest rate , currency price , or stock index ) .

ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest .

derivatives are used by hedgers , who seek to shift risk to others , and speculators , who can profit if they can successfully forecast price trends .

examples include futures contracts , options , and swaps .

discount window — figurative term for the federal reserve facility for extending credit directly to eligible depository institutions .

it may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks and other depository institutions .

borrowers are expected to have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans .

the term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a reserve bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the federal reserve system .

dual banking system — the phrase refers to the fact that banks may be either federally or state - chartered .

in the case of state - chartered banks , the state is the primary regulator ; for national banks , the office of the comptroller of the currency is the primary regulator .

electronic fund transfer ( eft ) systems — a variety of systems and technologies for transferring funds electronically rather than by paper check .

exchange — a central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities .

federal home loan banks — twelve regional member - owned federally sponsored organizations that extend credit to their member banking institutions , largely to finance mortgages made to homeowners .

the 12 fhlbs make up a single government - sponsored enterprise .

federal safety net — a broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance , discount window credit , other lender of last resort support , and certain forms of regulations to reduce risk .

commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of these cushions against loss .

financial businesses — in discussions about financial services modernization , usually refers to commercial banks and savings institutions , securities firms , and insurance companies and agents , as contrasted with commercial and industrial firms .

financial holding company — a form of bank holding company authorized by the gramm - leach - bliley act that may control one or more banks , securities firms , and insurance companies .

financial institution — an enterprise that uses its funds chiefly to purchase financial assets such as loans and debt securities , as opposed to tangible property .

financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans , bonds , stocks , or some combination ; as well as by their sources of funds .

depository financial institutions are differentiated in that they may accept deposits which are federally insured against loss to the depositor .

nondepository financial institutions such as life and property / casualty insurance companies , pension funds , and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts , whose values may fluctuate with market conditions .

financial subsidiary — under the gramm - leach - bliley act , both national and state - chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself , subject to certain limits .

besides the permissible financial activities enumerated in p.l .

106-102 , the law provides a mechanism between the u.s. department of the treasury and the federal reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary .

firewalls — barriers to the flow of capital , information , management , and other resources among business units owned by a common entity .

in case of financial distress of one operation ( "fire" ) , the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other units — especially to banking units .

example: losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries .

foreign bank — banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the united states: u.s. - chartered subsidiary banks , agencies , branches , and representative offices .

their primary federal regulator is the federal reserve , under the international banking act of 1978 as amended .

states and the office of the comptroller of the currency may also regulate them , depending on whether they have a state or federal charter .

forward contract — a cash transaction in which a buyer and seller agree upon delivery of a specified quality and quantity of goods at a specified future date .

functional regulation — regulatory arrangements based on activity ( "function" ) rather than organizational structure .

the gramm - leach - bliley act called for more functional regulation than in the past .

futures contract — an agreement to purchase or sell a commodity for delivery in the future: ( 1 ) at a price that is determined at initiation of the contract ; ( 2 ) that obligates each party to the contract to fulfill the contract at the specified price ; ( 3 ) that is used to assume or shift price risk ; and ( 4 ) that may be satisfied by delivery or offset .

glass - steagall act — part of the banking act of 1933 ; divided the commercial and investment banking industries .

the gramm - leach - bliley act repealed two sections of the act dealing with the relationship between banks and securities firms .

government - sponsored enterprise ( gse ) — gses are private companies with government charters .

government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors , while their charters restrict the kinds of businesses they may conduct .

gramm - leach - bliley ac t of 1999 — p.l .

106-102 , also known as the financial services modernization act , authorized increased affiliations between banks , securities firms , and insurers .

permitted the establishment of financial holding companies , under the regulation of the federal reserve .

also addressed privacy protection for consumers' financial data .

haircut — in computing the value of assets for purposes of capital , segregation , or margin requirements , a percentage reduction from the stated value ( eg , book value or market value ) to account for possible declines in value that may occur before assets can be liquidated .

hedge funds — hedge funds are essentially unregulated mutual funds .

they are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets , including precious metals , commodities , foreign currencies , and derivatives ( contracts whose prices are derived from those of other financial instruments ) .

hedge funds are limited to qualified investors with high net worth .

hedging — investing with the intention of reducing the impact of adverse movements in interest rates , commodities , or securities prices .

typically , the hedging instrument gains value as the hedged item loses value , and vice versa .

insolvent — a firm whose liabilities exceed its assets .

institutional regulation — regulation that is institution - specific as contrasted with activity - specific ( see functional regulation ) .

investment bank — a financial intermediary , active in the securities business .

investment banking functions include underwriting ( marketing newly registered securities to individual or institutional investors ) , counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals , brokerage services , advice on corporate financing , and proprietary trading .

investment bank holding company — a holding company for securities firms authorized under the gramm - leach - bliley act .

such holding companies are subject to regulation by the securities and exchange commission .

issuer — a person or entity ( including a company or bank ) that offers securities for sale .

the issuing of securities , where the proceeds accrue to the issuer , is distinct from the secondary , or resale , market , where securities are traded among investors .

lender of last resort — governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system .

in the united states , the federal reserve has this role .

leverage — in derivatives markets , leverage ( or "gearing" ) often refers to the ability to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital .

in banking , the term leverage is often used to describe the amount of a bank's assets that are funded with debt rather than equity .

in banking , leverage is typically the ratio of lending to equity .

limited - purpose bank — although generally commercial firms may not conduct a banking business , some exceptions exist .

examples: nonbank banks are banks that either accept deposits or make commercial loans but cannot do both .

such banks grew up through a loophole in the law , which was closed by the competitive equality banking act of 1987 ( ceba ) .

credit card banks conduct credit card operations .

industrial loan companies in a few states may offer restricted banking services .

liquidity — the ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price , or the condition of a market with many buyers and sellers present .

also , the ability of a person or firm to access credit markets .

liquidity risk — the possibility that the market for normally - liquid assets will suddenly dry up , leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash .

also , the risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed .

market risk — the risk that the price of a tradeable security or asset will decline , resulting in a loss to the holder .

merchant banker — a european style investment banker concentrating on corporate deals , in which it may invest its own funds .

money market mutual fund ( mmf ) — a form of mutual fund that pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high - grade , short - term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return .

examples of these money market instruments include u.s. treasury bills , certificates of deposit , and commercial paper .

in addition to the investment features , most mmfs offer check - writing redemption features .

moral hazard — the tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection .

regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard , on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes , too .

mortgage - backed security ( mbs ) — a bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans .

the bondholders receive a share of the interest and principal payments on the underlying mortgages .

the cash flows may be divided among different classes of bonds , called tranches .

mutual fund — an investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors , and uses them to purchase large amounts of debt or equity obligations of businesses and sometimes debt obligations of governments .

the owners of the mutual fund hold proportional shares in the entire pool of securities in which a fund invests .

owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund ; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation .

naked o ption — the sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the underlying instrument .

operational risk — the possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly , from accounting mistakes , from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud , or from other causes arising inside the institution .

over - the - counter ( otc ) — trading that does not occur on a centralized exchange or trading facility .

otc transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone .

ponzi scheme — named after charles ponzi , a man with a remarkable criminal career in the early 20 th century , the term has been used to describe pyramid arrangements whereby an enterprise makes payments to investors from the proceeds of a later investment rather than from profits of the underlying business venture , as the investors expected , and gives investors the impression that a legitimate profit - making business or investment opportunity exists , where in fact it is a mere fiction .

prompt corrective action ( pca ) — a framework of bank regulation in which banks with insufficient capital must undertake remedial action to improve their capital positions .

in the united states , the pca framework has five categories of bank capitalization .

financially troubled banks are required to take prompt action as directed by the relevant agencies to remedy identified deficiencies .

receivership — when an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets .

regulatory arbitrage — if different contract types or firm charters can be used to achieve similar ends , but have different regulatory treatment , then regulatory arbitrage refers to attempts to receive the least burdensome regulatory treatment for a given activity .

in economics , arbitrage is the practice of taking advantage of a price difference between two or more markets .

resolution trust corporation ( rtc ) — the agency set up to resolve savings and loans declared failed beginning in 1989 .

between 1989 and mid - 1995 , the resolution trust corporation closed or otherwise resolved 747 thrifts with total assets of $394 billion .

repurchase agreement ( repo ) — a contract in which one party sells a contract ( typically a bond or other debt contract ) to buyer , with a commitment to repurchase the contract on a future date at a specified price .

in economics , repurchase agreements have similar characteristics to collateralized lending .

savings association — a savings and loan association , mutual savings bank , or federal savings bank , whose primary function has traditionally been to encourage personal saving ( thrift ) and home buying through mortgage lending .

in recent years , such institutions' charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services .

the federal regulator for most savings associations is the office of thrift supervision .

also known as savings and loans , thrifts , and mutual savings banks .

securities investor protection corporation ( sipc ) — a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and / or dealers .

sipc is a liquidator ; it has no supervisory or regulatory responsibilities for its members , nor is it authorized to bail out or in other ways assist a failing firm .

securitization — the process of transforming a cash flow , typically from debt repayments , into a new marketable security .

holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid .

types of loans that are frequently securitized are home mortgages , credit card receivables , student loans , small business loans , and car loans .

self - regulatory organizations ( sros ) — national securities or futures exchanges , national securities or futures associations , clearing agencies and the municipal securities rulemaking board are all authorized to make and enforce rules governing market participants .

the respective federal regulatory agency has authority in connection with sros and may require them to adopt or modify their rules .

examples of sros in the securities industry include the financial industry regulatory authority ( finra ) , and the new york stock exchange .

shadow banking — the funding of loans through firms that do not have bank charters , through securities markets , or the funding of banks with sources other than deposits .

often , the term shadow banking is used to describe financial intermediation with at least one deviation from a model in which banks raise all of their funds from sources with government guarantees ( such as deposit insurance ) and banks have access to emergency government lending facilities , such as the federal reserve's discount window .

special - p urpose e ntities ( spes ) — also referred to as off – balance - sheet arrangements , spes are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction .

they isolate financial risk from the sponsoring institution and provide less - expensive financing .

the assets , liabilities , and cash flows of an spe do not appear on the sponsoring institution's books .

speculation — a venture or undertaking of an enterprising nature , especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit .

state regulation — under the dual system of bank regulation , states as well as the federal government may charter , regulate , and supervise depository institutions .

states are the primary regulators in the insurance field .

states also have authority over securities companies , mortgage lending companies , personal finance companies , and other types of companies offering financial services .

structured debt — debt that has been customized for the buyer , often by incorporating complex derivatives .

subordinated debt — debt over which senior debt takes priority .

in the event of bankruptcy , subordinated debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full .

subsidiary — a company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another ( "parent" ) corporation .

like companies with less than 50% ownership , it is an affiliate of the controlling company .

a subsidiary is usually consolidated for regulatory and reporting purposes with its parent .

swap — the exchange of one asset or liability for a similar asset or liability for the purpose of lengthening or shortening maturities , or otherwise shifting risks .

for example , parties could exchange a fixed interest rate stream of income for a floating rate stream of income , or a stream of income based on one currency's exchange rate for a stream of income based on another currency's exchange rate .

systemic risk — the term systemic risk does not have a single , agreed - upon definition .

some define systemic risk as the risk an institution faces that it cannot diversify against .

in other circumstances , systemic risk is defined as the risk that the linkages between institutions may affect the financial system as a whole , through a dynamic sometimes referred to as contagion .

thrift holding company — also known as a savings and loan holding company , a business that controls one or more savings associations .

these holding companies are regulated under the home owners' loan act by the office of thrift supervision .

too - big - to - fail doctrine — an implicit regulatory policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government , because their failure would destabilize the entire financial system .

 ( see "moral hazard." ) .

umbrella supervision — the term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator ( s ) .

underwriter — for securities markets , see investment bankers .

for insurance , underwriters are the life , health and property - casualty companies that receive premiums and pay off losses and other risks as they occur .

the underwriters bear the risks of losses and expenses exceeding receipts .

unitary thrift holding company ( uthc ) — a holding company that owns a single thrift institution .

a distinction between uthcs and other thrift holding companies has been that a uthc could be involved in any lines of business , whereas the others have been restricted to certain activities primarily financial in nature .

the gramm - leach - bliley act limits the commercial activities and affiliations of new uthcs .

universal bank — an organizational model typical of some foreign countries whereby a bank can exist as an operating enterprise and own directly a variety of other businesses .

 ( see "subsidiary." ) .

it contrasts with the banking model typical in the united states where the parent holding company owns several different businesses , all structurally separate .

 ( see "affiliate." ) .

in practice , the two approaches are not exclusive .

volcker rule — section 619 of the dodd - frank act , which prohibits insured depository banks and their affiliated firms from engaging in proprietary trading or affiliating with hedge funds .

