the explosion on april 17 , 2013 , at the west fertilizer company fertilizer distribution facility in west , tx , has led to questions about the oversight and regulation of agricultural fertilizer .

congressional policymakers have expressed concern and requested information about coordination among federal regulatory agencies and the efficacy of agency regulations .

different federal agencies apply a variety of regulatory structures to these chemicals .

these regulations meet different policy rationales , goals , and purposes .

some attempt to ensure occupational safety , others environmental protection , and still others security .

as a consequence , various federal , state , and local agencies collect mission - relevant information about chemical holdings , with some entities gaining a narrower , or broader , understanding of a facility's chemical inventories .

the west fertilizer company possessed a variety of agricultural chemicals at its retail facility , but policy interest has focused on two chemicals: ammonium nitrate and anhydrous ammonia .

in 2012 , the west fertilizer company had reported to the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the state of texas the presence of 110,000 pounds of anhydrous ammonia and 270 tons of ammonium nitrate , and had complied with certain provisions of the clean air act , but the west facility may not have complied with all reporting requirements .

for example , the facility had not contacted the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which should have received information about ammonium nitrate or anhydrous ammonia stored at the facility .

the dhs notes that the west fertilizer company facility might not have qualified as a regulated high - risk facility even if it had reported its chemical holdings .

in addition to federal regulation requiring reporting and planning for ammonium nitrate and anhydrous ammonia , most state and some local governments have laws and regulations regarding the handling of either or both of these chemicals .

states regulate worker and environmental protection , product efficacy and safety , chemical sales and storage , and security .

in addition , states may enforce standards such building , plumbing , mechanical , electrical , and fire codes .

local zoning laws may dictate placement of a facility within a community .

many states require registration to track the sellers and sales of fertilizer .

this report will focus on some of the federal regulatory programs overseeing storage of ammonium nitrate and anhydrous ammonia by retailers .

the report will not address federal regulation of material in transport .

it will discuss federal occupational safety , environmental , and security statutes and regulations applicable to each chemical .

select policy issues regarding these federal regulatory programs will be highlighted .

it does not address various law enforcement activities related to tracking of anhydrous ammonia used for illegal drug synthesis ( eg , methamphetamine ) .

domestic production capacity of ammonium nitrate is approximately 7 million tons , and it is produced worldwide .

the vast majority of ammonium nitrate use occurs without incident .

most experts consider ammonium nitrate itself as a stable chemical with few handling restrictions , but , in combination with a fuel source , it can pose an explosion hazard .

ammonium nitrate requires certain conditions , such as added heat or shock , confinement , or contamination to explode .

ammonium nitrate in combination with certain additives is widely used as a type of explosive known as a blasting agent .

ammonium nitrate is also used as a fertilizer .

ammonium nitrate is suspected as the source of the explosion at the west fertilizer company .

accidental explosions of ammonium nitrate have resulted in loss of lives and destruction of property .

these accidents have rarely occurred , but have had high impacts .

for example , the ammonium nitrate explosion in 1947 in texas city , tx , where two ships carrying ammonium nitrate coated in wax and stored in paper bags caught fire and exploded , destroyed the entire dock area , including numerous oil tanks , dwellings , and business buildings .

because of this history , and its inherent characteristics , a variety of federal agencies have authority to regulate ammonium nitrate , some of which has been delegated to state agencies .

ammonia has a variety of uses , for example , as an agricultural fertilizer and an industrial refrigerant .

it also is used in industrial chemistry to manufacture other nitrogen - containing chemicals , such as ammonium nitrate , which is made from the reaction of ammonia with nitric acid .

the term "anhydrous ammonia" refers to essentially pure ammonia that exists as a gas .

this contrasts with "aqueous ammonia," where the ammonia is dissolved in water as a liquid solution .

many agricultural retailers and facilities with ammonia refrigeration systems store and use anhydrous ammonia .

domestic production of ammonia is approximately 12 million tons , and it is produced worldwide .

in contrast to ammonium nitrate , where the concern is one of potential explosion or theft to illegally manufacture explosives , anhydrous ammonia is a toxic inhalational hazard .

generally , anhydrous ammonia is stored as a liquid under pressure ; it becomes a toxic gas when released to the environment .

anhydrous ammonia can harm individuals who inhale or contact it .

thus , it is regulated to prevent release of the chemical into the atmosphere where it might travel as a cloud and impact workers and the surrounding environment .

it is also encountered routinely in relatively small quantities by local law enforcement officials and hazardous material response teams as part of illegal drug synthesis operations ( eg , methamphetamine ) .

as congressional policymakers consider the ramifications of the explosion in west , tx , they may face several policy issues .

these policy issues include the challenges arising from relying on reporting of chemical inventories by regulated facilities ; the potential for omission and duplication in existing regulatory reporting ; the long intervals between inspection at many such facilities ; the ability of federal , state , and local government agencies to share information effectively among themselves ; and public and first - responder access to regulatory information .

congressional policymakers might consider mechanisms to address the data quality issues arising from reporting by facilities .

regulatory programs often require facilities to report their chemical holdings , but such reporting creates the potential for the regulatory agency to be unaware if the facility does not report .

this may be especially true for federal agencies that rely on state or local implementation of federal requirements .

in addition , the quality of such information may be questioned due to its self - reported nature .

for example , the government accountability office has found that dhs does not use self - reported vulnerability assessment information in determining the security risk at chemical facilities .

because different chemicals often have different reporting requirements , regulated entities often report different information to different regulating agencies .

for example , as noted above , dhs , epa , and state regulatory agencies receive different information ; each chemical may fall under some , all , or no regulatory requirements due to particular exclusions or exemptions .

consequently , no central overview of facility chemical holdings exists , and may create the potential for inefficient regulation .

interested members of congress might focus upon the rate of inspection under the various regulatory programs .

under some federal programs , inspection has not occurred at a pace expected by policymakers .

for example , the dhs stated that it had inspected and approved site security plan implementation at 166 of 4,298 facilities regulated under cfats as of july 2013 .

in 2009 , the epa office of inspector general reported that epa had inspected less than half of the epa - identified high - risk facilities and less than 35% of all facilities reporting under section 112 ( r ) of the clean air act .

inspection of facilities reporting their chemical holdings may increase the trustworthiness of supplied information .

also , regular inspection may yield benefits in enhanced compliance with best practices and regulatory adherence .

of course , increased inspection relies upon a substantial inspector cadre , which would require additional appropriations for support .

similarly , delegation of inspection responsibilities for federal programs to state agencies might reduce the number of discrete inspections but increase the costs borne by those states .

conversely , additional efficiency might be achieved with a cross - trained inspectorate that might inspect a facility under all , or most , applicable regulatory regimes .

congressional policymakers have identified information sharing in the homeland security and intelligence context as a high priority following the events of september 11 , 2001 .

the reported gap in information between epa , which knew of the west fertilizer company's existence and its anhydrous ammonia holdings , and dhs , which did not , indicates a potential gap in information sharing among federal regulators .

similarly , information possessed by the state of texas , which knew of the west fertilizer company's ammonium nitrate holdings , apparently did not reach dhs .

the dhs has detailed some of its information sharing activities , including sharing cfats - regulated facility information with federal , state , and local partners , and is reinvigorating its coordination with epa and review of epa rmp data to identify facilities that may have failed to submit information under cfats .

increased information sharing may also raise concern among industry stakeholders regarding the potential for inadvertent release of proprietary information due to the effects of aggregation and the increased need to transmit such information between different entities .

president obama issued an executive order on improving chemical facility safety and security , which would aim to enhance federal agency coordination and information sharing , among other activities .

congressional policymakers have long been interested in the balance between providing public access to information regarding chemical hazards and limiting the potential for malicious use of such information .

reporting under epa regulation is intended to improve accident planning through increasing community and first - responder awareness of the potential for release of hazardous materials .

first responders receive some of this information directly and residents of the surrounding community may obtain access to it .

in contrast , dhs restricts information dissemination regarding security efforts at chemical facilities , partly in order to limit the ability of malicious actors to use such information for targeting purposes .

the extent to which the residents and first responders of west , tx , knew of the potential hazards may provide insights into this balance and the effectiveness of community outreach efforts .

