although it is difficult to provide a precise definition of "cloud computing," it is generally described as web - based services that allow users to access anything from e - mail to social media to banking to more complex programs like business computing .

traditionally , users would download software and manipulate data on their own computer , while in the cloud , this activity occurs over the internet on a third - party computer .

many e - mail services like gmail and hotmail operate using cloud computing , as do music programs like grooveshark and pandora , and social media sites like facebook and twitter .

likewise , many smartphone applications employ cloud computing that permits users to store and access large amounts of data .

cloud storage is also on the rise , with an estimated 500 million users by year end , and 1.3 billion users by 2017 .

cloud storage services like dropbox , google drive , and skydrive by microsoft allow users to store their information on the computer of a third - party and access it from any platform with internet access .

as cloud computing becomes integrated into our daily lives , a host of personal information ( eg , private communications , financial data , photographs , etc. ) .

will be stored on a server owned by a third party .

this raises privacy and security issues , including when and how government may access this information as part of a criminal or other type of investigation .

this report first describes cloud computing and how it differs from traditional computing .

it then describes how the fourth amendment and federal electronic privacy statutes apply to communications in the physical world , to internet communications generally , and specifically to the cloud .

finally , this report surveys recent legislation and other various proposals designed to update the existing statutory framework .

because many traditional activities are increasingly being transferred online , it is vital to first understand what privacy protections apply in the physical world before turning to possible protections in the cloud .

the fourth amendment and federal communication statutes provide the core privacy protections in the physical world .

the fourth amendment provides , in relevant part , that "[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated[.] .

the primary purpose of the fourth amendment is to ensure the privacy of the citizenry and to prevent arbitrary government intrusion into their lives .

to determine if the fourth amendment applies in a given case , a court tests whether the government activities constitute a search .

the modern formulation for determining whether certain conduct is a search under the fourth amendment derives from justice harlan's concurrence in katz v. united states .

this test asks "first that a person have exhibited an actual ( subjective ) expectation of privacy and , second , that the expectation be one that society is prepared to recognize as 'reasonable.' .

what is reasonable in a given case — the yardstick for all fourth amendment analyses — can depend greatly on the facts of the case .

however , there are certain lines of cases that provide baseline rules for the protection of communications in the physical world .

the closest analog to an e - mail in the physical world is the postal letter .

in 1878 , the supreme court was asked to rule in ex parte jackson whether congress had the constitutional authority to exclude certain obscene material from the u.s. postal system .

in discussing the nature of protecting the postal system , the court observed that letters and sealed packages of this kind in the mail are as fully guarded from examination and inspection , except as to their outward form and weight , as if they were retained by the parties forwarding them in their own domiciles .

the constitutional guaranty of the right of the people to be secure in their papers against unreasonable searches and seizures extends to their papers , thus closed against inspection , wherever they may be .

whilst in the mail , they can only be opened and examined under like warrant , issued upon similar oath or affirmation , particularly describing the thing to be seized , as is required when papers are subjected to search in one's own household .

no law of congress can place in the hands of officials connected with the postal service any authority to invade the secrecy of letters and such sealed packages in the mail ; and all regulations adopted as to mail matter of this kind must be in subordination to the great principle embodied in the fourth amendment of the constitution .

the court in ex parte jackson relied on a content / non - content distinction to find that the inside of the letter ( the content ) was protected , while the routing information on the outside ( non - content ) was not subject to similar fourth amendment restrictions .

of more recent vintage , the court observed in united states v. jacobsen that "[l]etters and other sealed packages are in the general class of effects in which the public at large has a legitimate expectation of privacy ; warrantless searches of such effects are presumptively unreasonable. .

the free flow of mail , however , is not absolute .

in united states v. leeuwen , the court held that government officials may detain packages for a brief period of time without a warrant to confirm the suspicious nature of the package .

additionally , under federal regulations postal workers can record the outside , routing information on letters sent , a technique known as a mail cover , to gather evidence regarding the commission of a crime .

these same regulations , however , prohibit postal employees from opening the mail , unless one of the limited exceptions applies .

like the contents of letters , the contents of a conversation — the words spoken either in person or through a device such as a cell phone or land - line phone — are generally protected under various constitutional and federal statutory provisions .

in united states v. katz , the court held that the contents of an individual's conversation are protected under the fourth amendment , even when spoken in a public telephone booth .

the court remarked that an individual who makes a telephone call from a closed telephone booth "is surely entitled to assume that the words he utters into the mouthpiece will not be broadcast to the world .

to read the constitution more narrowly is to ignore the vital role that the public telephone has come to play in private communication. .

congress augmented katz in title iii of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 as amended by the electronic communications privacy act of 1986 ( ecpa ) , establishing significant restrictions on surreptitious interception of private communications .

commonly referred to as the wiretap act , title iii prohibits the intentional interception of telephone , face - to - face , and electronic communications using a mechanical or other device , unless one of several exceptions applies , such as consent of one of the parties to the conversation , or a judicially authorized warrant based upon probable cause .

although accessing the contents of a telephone communication generally requires a probable cause warrant , access to telephone routing information , including the numbers dialed , requires lesser process .

in smith v. maryland , the court applied the third - party doctrine to the telephone numbers a person dials to place a call .

the third - party doctrine provides that information a person voluntarily conveys to another person is generally not protected by the fourth amendment .

the court observed in smith that when the defendant used his phone , he "voluntarily conveyed numerical information to the telephone company and 'exposed' that information to its equipment in the ordinary course of business .

in so doing , [he] assumed the risk that the company would reveal to police the numbers he dialed. .

seven years later , congress included in ecpa a prohibition against the use of pen registers and trap and trace devices ( which can record the incoming and outgoing telephone numbers from a certain customer ) , unless the government obtained a court order certifying that the information to be obtained is "relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation. .

another crucial form of communication in the modern world that is increasingly moving to the cloud is the transfer of business records .

in united states v. miller , the court applied the third - party doctrine to hold that a bank customer has no legitimate expectation of privacy in banking documents such as checks and deposit slips transferred to a bank in the ordinary course of business .

there , the court observed that "[t]he depositor takes the risk , in revealing his affairs to another , that the information will be conveyed by that person to the government .

… this court has held repeatedly that the fourth amendment does not prohibit the obtaining of information revealed to a third party and conveyed by him to government authorities , even if the information is revealed on the assumption that it will be used only for a limited purpose and the confidence placed in the third party will not be betrayed. .

in reaction to miller , congress enacted the right to financial privacy act , creating a statutory protection for these financial documents .

although the jurisprudence of internet privacy is in its infancy , the current body of case law sheds light on how the fourth amendment and federal statutes apply to the cloud .

when applying the fourth amendment , it appears that courts have not distinguished between traditional forms of internet communication and cloud - based communication ; the same rules apply to each .

however , when applying the stored communications act , cloud computing such as web - based e - mails or messaging through social network sites has not received the robust privacy protections accorded to traditional e - mail services .

in summary , there are many similarities between searches in the physical and digital worlds .

for instance , for law enforcement to access the contents of a postal letter , it must first obtain a warrant based upon probable cause , but routing information on the outside of the letter does not receive the same protection .

this distinction also applies to telephone calls , where law enforcement cannot surreptitiously record the content of one's conversation , but can access the numbers dialed with lesser process .

the limited number of courts reviewing this issue under the fourth amendment have applied this same content / non - content distinction to electronic communications such as e - mails .

to access the content of an e - mail , law enforcement generally must obtain a warrant .

to obtain the routing information , such as an ip address or the to / from address of an e - mail , a subpoena will usually suffice .

however , there are also differences between searches in the physical world and the internet .

for example , under the sca , the government can access the contents of e - mails stored for more than 180 days , and in some circuits , e - mails that have been opened no matter how long they are stored , with a subpoena and notice to the customer .

this is a clear difference from the physical world , as the government cannot access one's private physical letters , no matter how long they are stored , without a warrant .

also , in many instances , evidence obtained by an illegal search in the physical world is not admissible in a criminal prosecution under the exclusionary rule .

under the sca , however , there is no suppression remedy ; thus , even evidence unlawfully obtained may be admitted into evidence at trial .

in any event , if applicable , the fourth amendment provides a baseline threshold which the sca cannot lessen .

additionally , the few courts that applied the sca to e - mail and other internet communications seem to have created a dividing line between traditional forms of internet computing and cloud - based computing .

for instance , under the ninth circuit's approach in theofel , traditional e - mail services are covered under the sca's more stringent warrant requirement , whereas the cloud - based e - mails in weaver were subject to the lesser subpoena requirement .

in viacom intern .

inc. , youtube was considered an rcs provider thus also subjecting posted videos to the subpoena requirement .

it remains to be seen whether future courts will apply this distinction between cloud - based and traditional forms of electronic communications .

several courts , commentators , and government officials alike have called for an overhaul of ecpa , though disagreement may exist as to how to balance the competing interests of the government , the communications industry , and the individual .

senator patrick j. leahy , chairman of the senate judiciary committee , observed at a committee hearing that while ecpa is a useful tool for government officials , it is "hampered by conflicting standards that cause confusion for law enforcement , the business community , and american consumers alike. .

he further observed that "a single e - mail could be subject to as many as four different levels of privacy protections under ecpa , depending on where it is stored and when it is sent. .

several observers have also opined on perceived flaws in the sca: "it is more complicated than it needs to be .

it has sections that are redundant and merely confusing .

the absence of a statutory suppression remedy has created significant uncertainty about how the statute works .

the sca also offers surprisingly low privacy protections when the government seeks to compel the contents other than unretrieved communications held pending transmission for 180 days or less. .

the department of justice has also called for changes to ecpa , but has cautioned against the implementation of a heightened standard for accessing electronic communications: congress may wish to consider that raising the standard for obtaining information under ecpa may substantially slow criminal and national security investigations .

in general , it takes longer for law enforcement to prepare a 2703 ( d ) order application than a subpoena , and it takes longer to obtain a search warrant than a 2703 ( d ) order .

in a wide range of investigations , including terrorism , violent crimes , and child exploitation , speed is often judged to be essential .

legislation has been introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses , and various measures have been proposed by other entities , to overhaul ecpa .

the supreme court once remarked that when an individual "puts something in his filing cabinet , in his desk drawer , or in his pocket , he has the right to know it will be secure from an unreasonable search or an unreasonable seizure. .

does this proposition hold true today when people turn to digital desk drawers , digital filing cabinets , and digital pockets ? .

for the most part , many of the protections that apply to the physical world have been transferred to the digital world .

in the physical world the contents of letters , telephone calls , and other forms of communication are generally protected by the fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures .

the limited number of courts reviewing the question have held that the content of internet communications are similarly protected from government searches under the fourth amendment .

these protections may be supplemented by the sca , which accords varying degrees of privacy safeguards to both public and private intrusions , depending on how long the communication has been stored and how the provider of the network service is classified under its complicated definitions .

additionally , courts have occasionally applied lesser degrees of protection to communications sent and received through cloud - based services than with traditional forms of internet communications , based on the manner the information is stored by each , and how such storage is defined under the sca .

recent legislative proposals would apply the same rules to communications in the physical and digital worlds and between traditional computing and cloud computing .

