t ermination for convenience refers to the exercise of the government's right to bring to an end the performance of all or part of the work provided for under a contract prior to the expiration of the contract "when it is in the government's interest" to do so .

federal agencies typically incorporate clauses in their procurement contracts which grant them the right to terminate for convenience .

however , the right to terminate procurement and other contracts for convenience has also been "read into" contracts which do not expressly provide for it on the grounds that the government has an inherent right to terminate for convenience , or on other related grounds .

the right to terminate for convenience has historically been viewed as protecting the public interest by ensuring that the government does not have to pay for something that it may no longer need or want .

however , the exercise of this right generally also entails some compensation for the contractor because there arguably would not be a binding contract if one party were unilaterally able to end the contract with no liability to the other .

failure to pay the contractor for the government's exercise of its right to terminate for convenience would also generally be viewed as unfair to agencies' contracting partners , and could diminish the willingness of vendors to deal with the government .

this , in turn , could potentially result in the government having to pay higher prices for lower quality supplies and services , as the pool of potential vendors decreases .

termination for convenience is a topic of perennial congressional and public interest since any government contract could potentially be so terminated .

however , interest in termination for convenience has recently been heightened by the implementation of sequestration under the budget control act ( bca ) of 2011 .

some contracts were reportedly terminated , or considered for termination , for convenience in fy2013 as a result of sequestration .

in addition , because of agencies' diminished budget authority , questions have arisen as to how agencies might be able to reduce the amount that they must generally obligate or otherwise "reserve" to cover potential termination liability so that they can allot additional funds to performance of the contract , particularly early in the course of the contract's performance .

this report provides answers to 12 questions regarding termination for convenience frequently asked by congressional committees and staff .

these questions and their answers address everything from the contractual and other bases for the government's right to terminate to post - termination settlements between the government and the contractor .

they also address differences between termination for convenience and termination for default , cancellation , and certain other actions that the government may take ( eg , "de - scoping" pursuant to a changes clause ) .

the questions and answers are organized into three sections , one of which provides background information .

the other two address ( 1 ) differences between the various types of terminations and other reductions that agencies could make in the work performed under a contract ; and ( 2 ) potential government liability in the event of a termination for convenience .

the report does not address the termination of agency programs or budget elements .

such terminations could potentially result in the termination of contracts .

however , they would not necessarily do so .

similarly , language prohibiting an agency from terminating a "program , project or activity" ( ppa ) would generally not be construed to bar the agency from terminating contracts for that ppa .

the questions and answers in this section provide background information on termination for convenience , including ( 1 ) the legal basis for the government's right to terminate contracts for convenience ; and ( 2 ) the circumstances in which the government may so terminate .

the questions and answers in this section discuss the differences between the various types of terminations , and between termination for convenience and other actions that the government could take .

it covers total and partial terminations for convenience , constructive terminations , terminations for default , cancellation , and other reductions that agencies could make in the work performed under a contract , such as "de - scoping. .

the questions and answers in this section focus upon the government's potential liability in the event of a termination for convenience .

it begins by addressing how termination settlements are typically arrived at and what they may include before discussing the circumstances in which the government could potentially face liability for breach as a result of the exercise of its contractual and / or inherent right to terminate for convenience .

when the government exercises its right to terminate , it is typically obligated , pursuant to the terms of the contract , to pay the contractor for certain costs , discussed below ( see " what could a termination settlement include ? .

" ) .

this payment is commonly referred to as a "termination settlement," and the contract generally also prescribes the procedures for arriving at the termination settlement .

the standard termination clauses prescribed by the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) generally require the contractor to submit a "final termination settlement proposal" to the contracting officer within one year from the effective date of the termination ( or any longer period granted by the contracting officer ) .

this proposal can form the basis for an agreement between the contractor and the contracting officer regarding all or part of the amount to be paid because of the termination .

however , if the contractor fails to submit a proposal within the requisite time period , the contracting officer may determine the amount , if any , due to the contractor and pay it .

similarly , if the contractor and the contracting officer fail to agree on the "whole amount" to be paid , the contracting officer may determine the amount based upon certain factors specified in the contract ( eg , the price for any completed work that has not already been paid for , costs incurred in performing the terminated work ) .

such determinations constitute "final decisions" of the contracting officer , and may be appealed pursuant to the contract's disputes clause , so long as the contractor submitted a final termination settlement proposal within the requisite time period .

any settlement agreement reached by the parties modifies the contract , and is generally binding upon them .

the standard termination for convenience clauses in federal procurement contracts also generally address the specific components of any settlement between the government and the contractor for claims arising from a total or partial termination .

these components can vary depending upon the terms of the contract , but generally include ( 1 ) payment for work already performed , but not yet paid for ; ( 2 ) costs incurred in anticipation of performance ; ( 3 ) costs arising from the termination and settling the termination ; and ( 4 ) some recovery for profit , in the case of fixed - price contracts , or recovery of award or incentive fees , in the case of cost - reimbursement contracts .

a "fixed - price contract" is a contract whereby the contractor agrees to supply certain supplies or services to the government at a predetermined price , while a "cost - reimbursement contract" is one that provides for the government to pay the contractor allowable costs incurred in performing the contract up to a total cost specified in the contract .

because of this focus upon costs , termination has frequently been described as effectively converting fixed - price contracts into cost - reimbursement contracts , and the cost principles and procedures from part 31 of the far — which typically apply only to cost - reimbursement contracts — generally govern "all costs claimed , agreed to , or determined" under the standard termination for convenience clauses .

the application of part 31 is , however , subject to the general principle that the purpose of a termination settlement is to "fairly" compensate the contractor ( i.e. , the cost principles will not necessarily be strictly applied ) .

part 31 specifically contemplates the following costs as potentially allowable ( i.e. , included in settlements under the government contract to which it is allocable ) when a contract is wholly or partially terminated: common items : the costs of items "reasonably usable on the contractor's other work" if these items could not be retained at cost without the contractor sustaining a loss ; costs continuing after termination : costs which cannot be discontinued immediately after the termination "[d]espite all reasonable efforts by the contractor" ; initial costs : nonrecurring labor , material , and related overhead costs incurred in the early part of production as a result of factors such as training , lack of familiarity with the product , or excess spoilage due to inexperienced labor ; and preparatory costs incurred in preparing to perform the terminated work , such as initial plant rearrangement and alterations and production planning ; loss of useful value of special tooling , machinery , and equipment , provided that the items are not "reasonably capable of use" in the contractor's other work , and the government's interest is protected ; rental under unexpired leases , minus the residual value of such leases , provided that the amount of rent claimed does not exceed the reasonable use value of the property , and the contractor makes "all reasonable efforts" to terminate or otherwise reduce the cost of the lease ; alterations of leased property : alterations and reasonable restorations required by the lease , when the alterations were necessary for performing the contract ; settlement expenses : accounting , legal , clerical , and similar costs reasonably necessary for preparing settlement claims and for termination and settlement of subcontracts ; reasonable costs for the storage , transportation , protection , and disposition of property acquired or produced for the contract ; and indirect costs related to salary and wages incurred as settlement expenses in relation to the foregoing ; and subcontractor claims , including the allocable portion of the claims common to the contract and the contractor's other work , as well as an "appropriate share" of the contractor's indirect expenses , provided that the amount allocated is "reasonably proportionate" to the relative benefits received and is otherwise consistent with part 31 of the far .

other costs could potentially also be allowable , depending upon the circumstances , because "[t]he purpose of a termination settlement is to compensate a contractor fairly , ... and to make [the contractor] whole for costs incurred in performing the terminated work. .

the amount of any termination settlement can vary considerably , depending upon when in the course of the contract's performance the termination occurs and the costs that the contractor incurs as a result of the termination , among other factors .

in some cases , contractors may be entitled to — or agree to — a "no cost" settlement .

in other cases , the amount of the settlement can be in the billions of dollars .

the settlement costs cannot , however , generally exceed the "contract price less payments otherwise made or to be made under the contract," and the government accountability office ( gao ) has found that potential termination costs are generally not , in themselves , so large as to justify continued performance of contracts which agencies might otherwise consider terminating .

because the costs of any termination settlement could potentially be high , and agencies are generally required to obligate or otherwise "reserve" funds to cover potential termination liability , the possibility of termination for convenience can significant affect agencies' financial management practices and other operations , even though the likelihood of terminating any particular contract is low .

 ( see " why must agencies generally obligate or reserve funds for termination liability ? " ) .

however , in addition to potentially being "capped" by the contract price , the amount of any termination settlement could also be limited by the operation of certain contract clauses , such as the special termination cost clause included in certain department of defense contracts .

as a general rule , the government does not face liability for breach of contract when it terminates a contract for convenience because the government's right to terminate for convenience is an express or implied term of the contract .

 ( see " what is the basis for the government's right to terminate for convenience ? " ) .

however , in certain narrow circumstances , the government could potentially face liability for breach because the termination for convenience is found to have been motivated by bad faith or to constitute an abuse of discretion .

the number of such cases is arguably limited by the difficulty of proving bad faith or an abuse of discretion on the government's part .

bad faith , in particular , "is an onerous charge that requires 'well - nigh irrefragable proof,'" and public officials are presumed to perform their duties correctly , fairly , in good faith , and in accordance with the laws and regulations .

in certain cases , though , courts and boards of contract appeals have found breach when the government exercises its right to terminate for convenience .

such cases generally involve situations where ( 1 ) the government entered the contract with the intent to terminate it , or ( 2 ) the government purported to terminate the contract for convenience after the contract expired in order to avoid liability under the contract .

these findings impliedly or expressly reflect fundamental principles of the common law of contracts .

for example , in finding breach when the government entered the contract with the intent to terminate it , courts and boards have described the government's undisclosed intent to terminate as making a "mockery" of its purported assent to the contract .

mutual agreement by the parties is fundamental to any contract .

similarly , in finding that "retroactive terminations" constitute breach , courts and boards have emphasized that the government "may not use the standard termination for convenience clause to dishonor , with impunity , its contractual obligations. .

in other words , the government's express or implied contractual right to terminate contracts for convenience expires with the contract , and cannot thereafter be asserted to avoid liability for the government's failure to perform as required during the term of the contract .

the anti - deficiency act is a federal statute which generally prohibits the obligation of federal funds in excess of amounts actually appropriated under law .

as a result , when a federal agency enters into a contract , the agency must generally have sufficient funds to cover the cost of the contract , plus any liability that may arise if the agency chooses to terminate the contract before it expires .

in the case of a typical single - year fixed - price contract , the total recovery by the contractor generally may not exceed the contract price .

therefore , it is generally not necessary for an agency to set aside funds for termination liability for such contracts , as the government's liability would be within the amount required to pay for full performance under the contract .

however , where the contract gives the agency an option to renew , the contractor may have initial outlays that would not be recouped if the government chooses not to renew beyond the base period of the contract .

in order to provide some security for the contractor in these situations , renewable ( i.e. , multiple year ) contracts may contain provisions requiring the government to pay some form of "termination charge" in the event that a renewal option is not exercised .

notably , in contrast with a typical single - year contract , here the government may be liable for more than the cost of performance under the contract from its inception up until the refusal to renew .

therefore , the anti - deficiency act generally requires that an agency have sufficient funds to cover any termination charges before entering into such a contract .

the required obligation of termination costs also arises in the context of multiyear contracts authorized under the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( fasa ) , as amended , or other authority .

multiyear contracts are defined under fasa as contracts of up to five years in length .

multiyear contracts are an exception to the anti - deficiency act , but fasa imposes its own requirement to set aside termination costs .

specifically , fasa provides that civilian agencies may only enter into multiyear contracts if they either obligate the full cost of the contract over the entire term , or obligate the cost of the first year of the contract plus the estimated costs associated with any termination of the contract .

termination costs are often obligated from the same fund under which the underlying contract would be funded .

consequently , if an agency were not required to obligate potential termination liability when entering into a contract , the purchasing power of a particular appropriation would be increased .

to this end , exceptions to the general requirement to set aside funds for termination liability have been enacted by congress .

for example , congress has previously specified that a particular federal agency "shall not be required to obligate funds for potential termination liability in connection with" specific programs .

congress has also specifically appropriated or designated additional funds to cover potential termination liability .

in other cases , congress has placed ceilings on the amount of termination liability that an agency may negotiate with a contractor .

