after more than two years of social unrest and economic stagnation following the 2011 popular uprising , the government of egypt is facing serious economic pressures that , if not remedied , could lead to economic collapse and possibly new levels of violence .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) has been in negotiation with the government of egypt for at least $4.8 billion in loans in exchange for structural economic reforms , such as subsidy reduction .

egyptian acceptance of an imf loan could also pave the way for billions more in financial assistance from other bilateral and multilateral donors , potentially providing egypt with time to stabilize its political system and economy .

the obama administration is encouraging president mohammed morsi to reach out to the opposition and the public in order to gain the political support to quickly reach a deal with the imf in order to stave off further economic uncertainty .

egyptian leaders are concerned about the political ramifications of required imf reforms , which could be politically unpopular .

congress , which annually oversees and appropriates $1.55 billion in bilateral foreign aid to egypt , is following the situation in egypt closely , including the islamist - led government's stated commitment to , among other things , pursuing democratic principles and continued peace with israel .

some members of congress are also closely monitoring egypt - imf negotiations .

u.s. funds to provide bilateral debt relief to egypt have been tied to egypt committing to an economic program in conjunction with the imf .

legislative language also has been proposed that would tie u.s. bilateral economic assistance to egypt to , among other things , an imf program and implementation of reforms under the program .

congress could also pass legislation to shape u.s. policy toward egypt at the imf .

more generally , in the 113 th congress , lawmakers have proposed a number of bills that would prohibit , restrict , or rescind bilateral u.s. assistance and / or arms sales to egypt .

this report provides an overview of the economic situation in post - revolution egypt and negotiations between egypt and the imf .

it also analyzes why an imf program is controversial in egypt and the relationship between an imf program for egypt and u.s. foreign policy goals in the region .

it discusses the imf program from a congressional perspective , including how debt relief for egypt has been tied to an imf program and legislation that would condition u.s. bilateral economic assistance to egypt on an imf program .

for more information on the political situation in egypt , see crs report rl33003 , egypt: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

for more information on the imf , see crs report r42019 , international monetary fund: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

financial assistance from neighboring countries may reduce the immediate fiscal pressures on egypt , but it does not address deeper structural problems in egypt's economy .

if egypt ultimately fails to reach an agreement with the imf , it could signal a temporary setback for the obama administration , or it may be indicative of an oncoming period characterized by less u.s. - egyptian cooperation on economic matters .

in testimony before the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs , secretary of state kerry questioned whether the united states should be doing more to influence egypt , when he remarked that: i can't give you assurances about what this current [morsi] administration is going to do , because i think they're still sorting through that .

and the die is not cast yet .

that was the purpose of my visit [to egypt] and the purpose of the money which i am grateful to you for releasing .

qatar has put another $2 billion at the availability of egypt just in the last week or so .

before that , they put about $4 billion or $5 billion .

libya has loaned them $2 billion in the last week or so .

and the imf is in negotiating for $4.8 billion .

we promised $1 billion and until i took the 190 [$190 million] that you kindly helped us to be able to provide , we didn't provide them with a dime , not a dime .

we gave them a promise and a year later , we've given them zero .

now , you know , you don't buy your interests and you don't buy your — that's not what foreign aid is about .

but i'll tell you , if you're not helpful to people in their time of need , if you're not there , part of the process , it's very , very difficult to have the kind of leverage to say , a diverse pluralistic politics is critical to us when they say , what's it matter to you ? .

you don't really care .

you're not helping us .

the other guys are helping us .

thank you , we'll , you know , do what we want to do .

on the other hand , though u.s. officials may not entirely embrace aid from non - imf sources for egypt such as qatar , the administration may feel that it must deal cautiously with morsi's government so that the united states does not alienate friendly elements of the egyptian opposition .

some policymakers may feel that non - imf lending for egypt may keep egypt's financial situation in shaky , but workable order , and help to stave off a worst case scenario .

however , it remains uncertain whether president morsi's government can receive non - imf stop - gap lending indefinitely , and on what terms .

