the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) provided for automatic reductions to most federal discretionary spending if no agreement on deficit reduction was reached by the joint select committee on deficit reduction .

such reductions , referred to as sequestration , went into effect on march 1 , 2013 , the extended deadline for a deficit reduction agreement established under the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

in general , sequestration required agencies to reduce non - defense discretionary spending by 5.3% in fy2013 .

sequestration affects federal aviation administration ( faa ) operations in different ways .

faa's grants for airport improvements , which are subject to obligation limitations , were statutorily exempt from the sequester cuts .

on the other hand , faa's air traffic operations face significant spending reductions .

in total , it is estimated that faa will need to reduce its total funding by roughly $636 million in fy2013 compared to fy2012 enacted levels , with roughly three - quarters of this amount coming from faa operations , primarily air traffic and aviation safety functions .

in anticipation of the sequester cuts , transportation secretary ray lahood and faa administrator michael huerta issued a joint letter on february 22 , 2013 , announcing cost - cutting measures under consideration including furloughs for most faa employees , elimination of late - night shifts in as many as 72 air traffic control facilities , and the complete closure of up to 238 control towers at airports that have fewer than 150,000 flight operations or fewer than 10,000 commercial operations per year .

towers listed as candidates for closure included 195 run by contractors under the federal contract tower ( fct ) program and 43 staffed by faa controllers .

on march 22 , 2013 , faa announced it would close 149 fct program towers over four weeks beginning april 7 , 2013 .

faa said it chose to keep open 24 fct facilities initially identified for closure after weighing national security interests ; adverse economic impacts beyond the local community ; potentially significant impacts on interstate transportation , communication , or banking and financial networks ; and status as a critical diversionary airport for a large hub airport .

on april 5 , 2013 , citing a need for additional time to address multiple legal challenges to its tower closure decisions , faa delayed the closures and set june 15 , 2013 , as the date it would cease funding the 149 fct program towers .

several airports have filed suit against faa , chiefly questioning whether it has adequately met legal obligations to evaluate potential safety risks associated with the pending tower closures .

on may 1 , 2013 , following a week of faa air traffic controller furloughs that contributed to some isolated air traffic system delays , particularly at the nation's busiest airports , the reducing flight delays act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-9 ) was enacted .

the act gave faa authority to transfer up to $253 million to faa operations using available monies from unspent airport funds , which were not subject to sequestration , and from other available sources within faa .

on may 2 , 2013 , a bipartisan group of 25 senators transmitted a letter to secretary of transportation ray lahood and faa administrator michael huerta .

the letter indicated that the $253 million transfer authority was "far above the amount required to prevent furloughs," stressing further that "[c]ongressional intent is clear: the faa should prevent the slated closure of 149 contract towers by fully funding the contract tower program. .

on may 10 , 2013 , secretary lahood announced that the funds transfer authority under p.l .

113-9 was sufficient to end faa employee furloughs and keep the 149 towers open for the remainder of fy2013 .

while this action appears to have settled debate over the pending closure of control towers in fy2013 , long - range plans for tower closures , cutbacks in operating hours , or both may be revisited in future policy debates regarding the faa budget .

the financing and continued operation of low - activity towers , in particular , remain significant issues for future faa budgets .

in general , the funding and operation of civil air traffic control towers in the united states and u.s. territories fall into one of four categories: ( 1 ) tower operations funded through faa's operations budget and staffed with federal air traffic controllers ; ( 2 ) contract tower operations fully funded through faa's operations budget but staffed with controllers employed by the contractor under the federal contract tower ( fct ) program ( also known as the contract tower base program ) ; ( 3 ) contract tower operations partially funded through the faa's operations budget and partially funded by local or state government funding and managed and staffed by contractor personnel , referred to as the contract tower cost - share program ; and ( 4 ) non - federal control towers that receive no funding from the federal government and are staffed with non - federal controllers .

regardless of funding and operation , faa maintains responsibility for the regulation and oversight of operations and safety at all civil air traffic control towers in the united states .

contract towers and contract controllers must be certified by faa and must follow faa directives .

faa funds for tower operations are derived from appropriations to the faa's operations and maintenance ( o&m ) account , which is funded partially from the airport and airways trust fund ( aatf ) and partially from the treasury general fund .

these sources provide funding for both the contract tower program and faa - staffed towers .

when a tower closes , either overnight or permanently , the airport will typically remain open to traffic as an uncontrolled airport .

in some rare instances , an uncontrolled airport may close late at night for noise abatement or due to safety concerns in mountainous areas , but runway lights and other navigational aids remain functional so it could serve as an emergency landing site for an aircraft in distress .

when an airport is uncontrolled , pilots assume responsibility for following prescribed traffic procedures and seeing and avoiding other aircraft , both on the ground and in flight in the vicinity of the airport .

the potential safety impacts of long - term tower closures could be mitigated to some degree by technologies now under development .

these technologies fall into two broad categories: ( 1 ) in - cockpit situation awareness technologies and ( 2 ) remote air traffic services .

s.amdt .

45 , amending h.r .

933 , the vehicle for consideration of an fy2013 continuing budget resolution , was submitted on march 13 , 2013 , with the purpose of limiting faa tower closures in response to budget sequestration .

specifically , the amendment would fund the contract - tower program for fy2013 at a level of $130.5 million with $10.35 million for the cost - sharing program .

the amendment would offset the continued funding of the contract tower program at this level by rescinding $24 million of unobligated prior - year funds appropriated for faa facilities and equipment and $26 million of unobligated prior - year funds for faa research , engineering , and development .

the measure would not protect contract towers from budget reductions beyond fy2013 and does not address possible closures of faa - staffed towers .

on march 20 , 2013 , the senate passed an amended version of h.r .

933 that did not include the language of s.amdt .

45 regarding funding for the contract tower program .

subsequently , s. 687 was introduced on april 9 , 2013 .

it would explicitly prohibit faa from suspending or terminating operation of any faa air traffic control tower that was operational on march 1 , 2013 , in either fy2013 or fy2014 .

further , it stipulates that if faa suspends or terminates any tower operations between march 1 , 2013 , and the date of enactment , faa shall resume operations of such tower as soon as practicable .

prior to the announcement of pending tower closures in response to sequestration , legislation was offered seeking to increase tower staffing , particularly during late - night shifts .

the minimum staffing of air traffic controllers act of 2013 ( h.r .

66 ) would require a tower to be staffed with a minimum of two air traffic controllers at all times at all airports where there are regular air carrier operations .

the legislation appears to address concerns over fatigue among air traffic controllers during midnight shifts and over controller workload and operational errors , and is not directly related to budget reductions in tower operations .

due to budget limitations , a requirement for additional staffing at certain towers could result in a larger number of towers closing .

