in the 19 th century and first half of the 20 th century , the federal government made determinations about which groups of indians were tribes on an ad hoc basis when negotiating treaties and determining which groups of indians could reorganize their governments under the indian reorganization act .

in the 1970s , the number of requests for tribal recognition by the department of the interior ( department ) increased exponentially in the wake of the decisions in united states v. washington , which recognized tribal treaty fishing rights in the pacific northwest , and joint tribal council of passamaquoddy v. morton , which recognized a tribal land claim on the east coast .

faced with many requests for tribal recognition , in 1978 , the department adopted a uniform process and uniform criteria for considering whether a group should be acknowledged as an indian tribe .

acknowledgment or recognition as an indian tribe has important legal and practical significance .

one scholar on tribal acknowledgment explains the significance of tribal recognition as follows: an administrative determination that a group is a tribe ( i.e. , that it merits federal acknowledgment or recognition ) establishes a government - to - government relationship between it and the united states .

a positive determination under the regulations means that the group has inherent sovereign authority independent of the state in which it is located and independent of the united states , although it remains a domestic dependent nation .

a group acknowledged under the regulations has continuously existed throughout history .

a tribe , consequently , has sovereign immunity and may exercise jurisdiction over its territory and establish tribal courts , administer funds under the indian self - determination and education assistance act , establish gaming facilities under the indian gaming regulatory act , bring a land claim under the indian trade and non - intercourse act , exercise treaty hunting and fishing rights , and obtain other federal benefits and exercise their own sovereign authority , except as limited by federal law .

general prohibitions or limitations also apply to federally recognized tribes .

for example , possession of liquor is prohibited in indian country absent publication of a certified liquor ordinance , and the sale of land is limited .

thus , a determination that a group is or is not a tribe is a decision with significant impacts on the group itself , federal and state governments , other indian tribes , and non - indians .

the process set forth in 25 c.f.r .

part 83 includes procedures that the department must follow and establishes the burden of proof for petitioners and the criteria that indian groups must satisfy in order to be acknowledged as indian tribes .

the acknowledgment process is available to "american indian groups indigenous to the continental united states. .

only "groups that can establish a substantially continuous tribal existence and which have functioned as autonomous entities throughout history until the present" may be acknowledged .

therefore , groups that recently came together and "[s]plinter groups , political factions , communities or groups of any character that separate from the main body of a currently acknowledged tribe" may not be acknowledged .

groups that were subject to congressional termination may not use the process to be acknowledged .

finally , groups that have been through the process and failed may not re - petition for acknowledgment .

the acknowledgment process begins when a group files a letter of intent , signed by the governing body of the group , requesting that the group be acknowledged .

however , the review process does not begin until a group submits a documented petition .

the minimum amount of time from the start of active consideration of the group's petition until a final determination is 25 months .

in may 2014 , interior proposed a new rule for part 83 that would comprehensively change the acknowledgment process .

the preamble to the proposed rule explains that interior issued the proposed rule in response to criticism that the acknowledgment process is too slow , expensive , inefficient , burdensome , intrusive , less than transparent , and unpredictable .

accordingly , the proposed rule would change part 83 in an effort "to make the process and criteria more transparent , promote consistent implementation , and increase timeliness and efficiency , while maintaining the integrity of the process. .

the public may submit comments on the proposed rule until august 1 , 2014 .

the proposed rule would make several changes to the criteria .

first , the proposed rule would change criterion ( a ) from identification as an indian entity from 1900 to the present to a narrative explaining , and proof of , tribal existence at some point in 1900 or before .

current criteria 87.3 ( b ) and ( c ) require proof of community and proof of political authority from historical times to the present .

proposed criteria ( b ) and ( c ) would require proof of community and political authority from 1934 to the present "without substantial interruption. .

"without substantial interruption" would be defined to mean without gaps of more than 20 years .

in addition to the current bases for finding community and political authority , the proposed rule would establish as acceptable proof maintaining a state reservation by the petitioner since 1934 , or the united states holding land for the petitioner at any point since 1934 .

for criterion ( b ) the current rule requires that a predominant portion of the petitioner's membership be a distinct community .

the proposed rule would require that at least 30% of the petitioner's membership be a distinct community .

the proposed rule would also provide that proof of boarding school attendance by petitioner's children would constitute proof of community .

for criterion ( e ) , descent from a historical tribe , the proposed rule would make three changes .

first , under the current rule the term "historical" is defined to mean the later of 1789 or first non - indian settlement or government presence in the area .

the proposed rule would define historical as 1900 or before .

second , the proposed rule would change the requirement of proof that the tribe's membership descends from a historical tribe to proof that 80% of the membership descends from a historical tribe .

third , the proposed rule would establish that criterion ( e ) may be satisfied by a roll prepared either by interior or at the direction of congress , and that interior will rely on such a roll as an accurate roll of descendants of the tribe that existed in historical times .

in the absence of such a roll , the petitioner may rely on the most recent available evidence for the historical period ( 1900 or before ) .

criterion 83.7 ( f ) requires that the petitioner is composed principally of persons who are not members of federally recognized tribes .

the proposed rule would add that members of a petitioner who filed its petition by 2010 who then joined a federally recognized tribe would not count against the petitioner .

finally , criterion 83.7 ( g ) now requires petitioners to establish that they are not subject to legislation forbidding or terminating the tribal - federal relationship .

the proposed rule would shift the burden to interior to show that congress has forbidden or terminated the federal relationship with the petitioner .

the proposed rule would make several changes to the acknowledgment process , the most significant of which are described below .

under the current practice , ofa makes recommendations to the assistant secretary , whom the current regulations charge with making proposed findings and final determinations .

under the proposed rule , ofa would issue proposed findings and the assistant secretary would make final determinations .

the assistant secretary's decision would be final for interior , with no consideration by the ibia .

the proposed rule would provide for consideration of the criterion in stages and provide that petitioners receiving a negative proposed finding at any stage could appeal the finding to a judge within the office of hearings and appeals ( oha ) .

the oha judge could hold a hearing and would issue recommendations for the assistant secretary to consider in making the final determination .

during the first stage of making proposed findings , ofa would consider criterion ( e ) ( descent from a historical tribe ) .

if a petitioner satisfied criterion ( e ) , ofa would then consider criteria ( a ) ( tribal existence ) , ( d ) ( governing document ) , ( f ) ( membership ) , and ( g ) ( congressional prohibition or termination ) .

finally , if the petitioner satisfied those criteria , ofa would consider criteria ( b ) ( community ) and ( c ) ( political authority ) .

if a petitioner made it through all stages of review , ofa would issue a positive proposed finding .

the proposed rule would provide that , in limited circumstances , petitioners that received negative final determinations under the current rule could re - petition .

first , if the assistant secretary issued a negative final determination and the petitioner appealed to the ibia or federal court and lost , the petitioner could re - petition if it obtained the consent of the prevailing party , if any , in those proceedings .

second , if a petitioner did not seek review by the ibia or a federal court , or it did but there was no opposing party , a petitioner could re - petition if an oha judge determined that the petitioner had demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that changes in the rules warranted a reconsideration of the final determination or that the wrong standard of proof was used in the final determination .

