international trade is a critical component of the u.s. economy , with u.s. goods trade amounting to about $4 trillion in 2014 , with merchandise imports of $2.4 trillion and exports of $1.6 trillion ( see appendix b ) .

the efficient flow of legally traded goods in and out of the united states is thus a vital element of the country's economic security .

while u.s. trade in imports depends on the smooth flow of legal cargo through u.s. ports of entry ( poe ) , the goal of trade facilitation often competes with two additional goals: enforcement of u.s. trade laws and import security .

how to strike the appropriate balance among these three goals is a fundamental question at the heart of u.s. import policies .

striking the appropriate balance among competing import policy goals is made more difficult due to the volume and complexity of trade inflows .

u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the agency charged with managing the import process at the border , admitted about 30.4 million import entries per year through over 300 u.s. poes , in fiscal year ( fy ) 2013 .

the largest volume of imports comes through land ( truck and rail ) and maritime flows , which together account for over 25 million shipping containers per year .

air cargo consists mainly of lower volume , higher value goods .

this report describes and analyzes cbp's role in the u.s. import process .

 ( the report does not cover cbp's role in the u.s. export control system. ) .

the first section of the report describes the three overarching goals of u.s. import policy and the tension among them .

second , the report summarizes recent legislative developments and provides a legislative history of customs laws , followed by an overview of the u.s. import process as it operates today .

third , the import process and cbp's role in it are discussed .

congress has a direct role in organizing , authorizing , and defining cbp's international trade functions , as well as appropriating funding for and conducting oversight of its programs .

thus , the final section highlights several policy issues that congress may consider in its oversight role or as part of customs or trade legislation , including measures seeking to provide additional trade facilitation benefits to importers and others enrolled in "trusted trader" programs , to improve enforcement of intellectual property and trade remedy laws , to strengthen cargo scanning practices , and / or to promote modernization of customs data systems , among other issues .

u.s. import policy seeks to balance three overarching policy goals .

first , import policy promotes trade facilitation .

trade facilitation refers to efforts to simplify and streamline international trade procedures to allow for the easier flow of legitimate goods across international boundaries and thereby to reduce the costs of trade .

trade facilitation includes the availability of advanced customs rulings , transparent and efficient procedures , elimination of "red tape," clear information , effective communications , and cooperation between border agencies , among other provisions .

trade facilitation is a priority for cbp and the trade community because trade represents a key component of the u.s. economy .

international trade accounts for about a quarter of the u.s. economy , with merchandise trade ( i.e. , cargo ) accounting for more than three - quarters of all u.s. trade flows .

most economic research finds that while international trade may impose short - term costs on certain sectors and industries that compete with imports , in the long run , trade promotes efficiency , reduces costs to consumers , and increases economic growth due to competitive advantage .

with the production of goods increasingly organized into global supply chains , in which the manufacture and final product assembly often occur in two or more countries , intermediate components during the manufacturing process are a significant percentage of total imports and exports in most countries , and a wide variety of u.s. manufacturers depend on the efficient import and export of these inputs .

partly for this reason , trade facilitation has been a priority issue for the united states and its international partners in organizations such as the world trade organization ( wto ) and the world customs organization ( wco ) , and in free trade agreement negotiations ( ftas ) .

within the wto doha development round of multilateral trade negotiations , for example , the united states has pursued "the shared objective of a rules - based , transparent , and efficient approach to goods crossing the border. .

in the wto , the united states was instrumental in negotiating binding disciplines on trade facilitation included in the december 2013 multilateral "bali agreement. .

the united states and other members of the wco are encouraging the use of electronic systems to expedite the clearance of merchandise entries and to ensure effective customs controls , including the adoption of a "single window" data system through which multiple cross - border regulatory agencies can clear merchandise entries ( see " interagency coordination " ) .

there is an inherent tension between efforts to promote efficient trade flows , and a second goal of u.s. import policy: the enforcement of trade laws designed to protect u.s. consumers and business against illegal imports and to collect customs revenue .

in general , u.s. trade laws seek to protect u.s. consumers by enforcing health and safety standards , and to protect u.s. businesses by enforcing patent , trademark , and copyright laws and by collecting anti - dumping and countervailing duties ( ad / cvd ) .

trade enforcement policies also govern the collection of tariffs , fees , and taxes ; cbp generated more than $36 billion in revenue in fy2013 , including more than $31 billion in customs duties .

the third overarching goal of u.s. import policy is import security , or preventing the entry of chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) weapons and related material ; illegal drugs ; and other contraband .

while customs agencies have always played a role in protecting public safety , including through narcotics enforcement in particular , the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , caused many americans to place even greater emphasis on transportation and port security .

thus , security measures enacted after 9 / 11 placed additional responsibilities on customs officials to pro - actively prevent weapons of mass destruction and other threats to the homeland from entering the united states and have made import security a central feature of u.s. trade policy ( see " major post - 9 / 11 import security legislation " ) .

import security also has become an important feature of international efforts , and the united states and its partners in the wco have adopted new security protocols for tracking , inspecting , and screening containerized imports and exports .

trade facilitation is in tension with trade enforcement and import security because trade facilitation involves promoting faster and more efficient trade flows , while trade enforcement and import security involve identifying and preventing illegal flows — tasks that often involve slower cargo flows and reduced efficiency for the importer .

these competing pressures make the implementation of import policy a complex and difficult task , which cbp addresses through a process of risk management , as described below ( see " the import process " ) .

many policy questions with respect to the import process concern how congress and cbp balance these three goals .

some u.s. importers and some in congress have criticized cbp for neglecting trade facilitation in favor of import security and trade enforcement .

for example , some in the trade community view the paperwork and additional reporting requirements imposed on u.s. importers as overly burdensome , and they assert that these requirements run counter to u.s. interests by threatening america's economic security .

others argue that infrastructure issues , scanning , and inspections at land ports of entry result in unacceptably long and unpredictable border wait times .

delays have been described as particularly onerous at the u.s. - mexico border , where trade has increased more than sixfold since the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) was implemented in 1994 .

several studies have estimated the economic consequences of border crossing delays , including a 2008 draft report by the department of commerce that estimated that crossing delays at the u.s. - mexico border resulted in $5.8 billion in lost economic output , $1.4 billion in lost wages , 26,000 lost jobs , and $600 million in lost tax revenues — and would result in losses twice this size by 2017 .

a review of nine additional studies concluded that "one message comes through quite clearly — long and unpredictable wait times at the poes are costing the united states and mexican economies many billions of dollars each year. .

at the same time , others in congress and in the trade community assert that the united states may remain vulnerable to a terrorist attack against a port of entry — with potentially catastrophic results — and that cbp should place greater emphasis on import security , even if the economic costs are high .

some members have expressed frustration , for example , that the great majority of cargo containers are not scanned or physically inspected prior to arrival at a u.s. port .

similarly , some manufacturers have alleged that cbp has not adequately investigated allegations of duty evasion , product mislabeling , fraudulent country of origin declarations , or deliberate misclassification of shipments ; and some assert that their intellectual property rights ( ipr ) are being violated by ever growing imports of counterfeit goods , and that cbp efforts in collaboration with the private sector in identifying and enforcing ipr violations have been inadequate .

in short , how congress and cbp balance trade facilitation , trade law enforcement , and import security has important implications for homeland security , public safety , and virtually every sector of the u.s. economy .

to varying degrees , this tension underlies most aspects of u.s. import policymaking .

several bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress to reauthorize cbp's customs - related activities , including s. 1269 , the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ( hatch ; introduced may 11 , 2015 ) ; related bill h.r .

1907 ( tiberi ; introduced april 21 , 2015 ) ; and h.r .

1916 ( levin ; introduced april 21 , 2015 ) .

s. 1269 was reported by the senate finance committee on may 13 , 2015 ; and h.r .

1907 was marked up and ordered reported by the house committee on ways and means on april 23 , 2015 .

in the senate , on may 14 , 2015 , the text of s. 1269 was incorporated into h.r .

644 ( which was renamed the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ) and subsequently passed by a vote of 78-20 .

on june 12 , 2015 , the house passed an amended version of h.r .

644 by a vote of 240-190 .

in a joint statement released june 17 , 2015 , senate majority leader mitch mcconnell and house speaker john boehner stated their intent "to have a conference on the customs bill and complete that in a timely manner so that the president can sign it into law. .

title i of the house and senate versions of h.r .

644 would require cbp to , among other things , work with the private sector and other federal agencies to ensure that all cbp partnership programs provide meaningful trade benefits to program participants ; require cbp to establish key performance measures on modification ; carry out facilitation and trade enforcement functions ; require cbp and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) to establish joint educational seminars ( with private sector input authorized ) for enforcement personnel at poes ; and require cbp and ice , in consultation with federal agencies , other law enforcement agencies , international organizations , and other interested parties , to develop and report to congress on a biennial joint strategic plan for trade facilitation and enforcement .

title i would also authorize existing cbp programs , including customs modernization efforts such as the automated commercial environment ( ace ) and the international trade data system ( itds ) , the commercial customs advisory committee ( coac ) , the centers of excellence and expertise ( cees ) , and targeting and analysis groups to focus on each of cbp's priority trade issues ( ptis ) .

the government accountability office ( gao ) and cbp would also be required to report on cbp improvements in areas including trade enforcement , tracking merchandise in - bond , and drawback simplification .

in section 111 , the senate version would authorize a commercial targeting division ( ctg ) and national targeting and analysis groups ( ntags ) to target priority trade issues ( ptis ) .

the ctg would establish methodologies for assessing import risk and issuing trade alerts to port directors .

section 111 of the house version would authorize the national targeting center to perform similar functions .

both versions would allow a port director to determine not to conduct further inspections for certain reasons , provided that other customs authorities are notified .

additionally , title i of the house and senate versions of h.r .

644 would require cbp to strengthen internal controls , in part , by developing criteria for assigning importer - of - record identification numbers ; and would provide cbp with the authority to strengthen enforcement controls over new importers , including ensuring collection of duties , fees , and penalties through risk - based bonding .

the house - passed version would also require cbp to collect additional information on "nonresident importers" and would require customs brokers to collect information on the identity of importers .

the house - passed version of h.r .

644 would also require cbp to establish priority trade issues ( ptis ) , including agriculture , antidumping and countervailing duties ( ad / cvd ) , import safety , intellectual property ( ipr ) , textiles and wearing apparel , and preference programs .

additionally , for purposes of the title , the term "appropriate congressional committees" is specifically identified as the committee on finance and the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs of the senate ; and the committee on ways and means and the committee on homeland security of the house of representatives .

title ii of both versions address import health and safety .

title ii would establish an interagency import safety working group , chaired by the secretary of homeland security .

the group would be responsible for developing a joint import safety rapid response plan to establish protocols and practices that cbp , in conjunction with other federal , state and local authorities , must use when responding to cargo that poses a threat to the health or safety of u.s. consumers .

title ii also requires joint exercises with these entities and training for cbp port personnel in enforcement of import health and safety laws .

title iii of both versions of h.r .

644 addresses intellectual property rights ( ipr ) enforcement .

first , title iii would amend customs laws to authorize and direct cbp ( except in cases that would compromise an ongoing law enforcement or national security investigation ) to share information with rights holders so that they could help to quickly identify whether a product entering the united states at a poe is in violation of a copyright or trademark .

second , cbp would be authorized to seize merchandise if it is found to be in circumvention of ipr laws , and would require cbp to notify an injured right holder if they are included on an annually revised , cbp - maintained list .

third , the secretary of dhs is directed to enforce copyrights on goods for which the owner has submitted a copyright application in the same manner as if the copyright were already registered .

title iii would also establish a national intellectual property rights coordination center within cbp .

title iv of s. 1269 , and h.r .

1907 , and title v of h.r .

1916 , address antidumping ( ad ) and countervailing duty ( cvd ) evasion .

one major difference between the senate and house versions is that even though both bills would require the investigation of allegations of ad and cvd evasion within specific deadlines and requirements , the senate version would require cbp to investigate the allegations , while the house version would grant the department of commerce authority to carry out investigations .

h.r .

1916 would assign primary investigative duties of ad / cvd evasion to cbp .

also related to ad / cvd laws , the house version would establish a trade remedy law enforcement division in cbp , direct cbp to identify evasion , authorize increased data sharing between cbp , the department of commerce , and the u.s. international trade commission for enforcement actions against evasion , and direct cbp to enter into agreements with customs officials in foreign countries to increase cooperation in combatting evasion the house version would also require cbp to assign sufficient personnel to prevent and investigate evasion , require cbp to submit an annual report to congress detailing evasion policies and activities , terminate the ability of new shippers to post bonds during new shipper ad / cvd reviews , and require the government accountability office ( gao ) to submit a report to congress on the effectiveness of cbp efforts in investigating and preventing ad / cvd duty evasion .

title v of both versions of h.r .

644 seeks to amend ad and cvd laws , in part , by clarifying and expanding the methods that the international trade administration of the department of commerce ( ita ) and the u.s. international trade administration ( usitc ) may use to make determinations in ad / cvd investigations .

for example , title v would clarify that the ita , in cases in which an exporter , manufacturer or producer of the targeted merchandise fails to cooperate by providing information needed to calculate the duty rate , that the highest applicable dumping or subsidy rate may be used .

the amendment would also clarify and expand the calculation methods that the ita may use to calculate ad / cvd rates if there are particular market situations that may distort prices or costs .

title v would also clarify the authority of the ita to limit the number of foreign exporters , manufacturers , or producers for which it calculates individual duty rates if it finds that an investigation is unduly burdensome due to the complexity of the issues or information presented , among other factors .

with regard to the usitc's injury phase of ad / cvd investigations , title v would amend the definition of "material injury" to provide that a negative determination of material injury may not be found solely on the basis of domestic industry profitability or recently improved performance .

the section would further expand the criteria that the usitc must use to evaluate the impact of competing imports to include the effects of "actual and potential decline in output , sales , market share , gross profits , operating profits , net profits , ability to service debt , productivity , return on investment , return on assets , and utilization of capacity. .

title v would also revise the "captive production test" that the usitc must use to assess injury if the targeted product is a component used in a downstream finished good .

title v of both bill versions would also address additional trade enforcement priorities by requiring the administration , in close consultation with congress , to identify these priorities and to more regularly consult with congress on enforcement strategies .

the administration would be directed to address trade enforcement issues that , if eliminated , would have the most impact on positive u.s. economic growth .

the enforcement provisions in these bills would also authorize the administration to reinstate the suspension of concessions under article 22 of the wto dispute settlement agreement under certain conditions .

the bills would also require the usitc to provide an internet - based database to provide information on the volume and value of imports ; and would require the department of commerce to provide reports on quarterly changes in the volume and value of imports .

title vi of the senate bill would also establish a trade enforcement trust fund to be used by the ustr and other agencies to enforce u.s. trade agreements and trade rights under the wto and u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

the trust fund could also be used for trade capacity building efforts .

title vi of the senate version of h.r .

644 would also require cbp and ice to institute certain measures to stop illegal honey transshipment ; and require that the two agencies train and employ sufficient personnel to detect , identify , and seize cultural property , archeological or ethnological materials , and other fish , wildlife or plants that violate u.s. laws .

title vi would also codify the establishment of the interagency trade enforcement center ( itec ) .

regarding ipr enforcement , the senate version would add countries that deny adequate protection of trade secrets to the ustr's priority watch list , and require the ustr to develop an action plan for each country that has been on the list for at least one year .

s. 1269 would also establish at ustr a chief innovation and intellectual property negotiator with the rank of deputy ustr .

title vii of the senate version addresses issues regarding currency undervaluation .

among other things , title vii would require the ita to investigate alleged currency undervaluation in ad / cvd investigations and would provide a method for calculating the amount of undervaluation .

the bill would also require the administration to actively engage with those countries found to manipulate exchange rates in order to urge implementation of monetary policies that would address the issue .

the house version would provide for engagement with other countries on currency undervaluation , but contains no enforcement provisions .

both bills would also establish an advisory committee on exchange rate policy to advise the treasury secretary on the impact of international exchange rates on the policies of the united states .

title viii of the senate version would provide a process for congress , in conjunction with the usitc , to receive and consider a miscellaneous trade bill ( mtb ) containing proposed duty suspensions and reductions in 2015 and 2018 .

the process would require congress to post on the internet a process for submission and consideration of proposed duty suspensions for possible inclusion in the mtb , and also require the usitc to publish in the federal register and on the internet a notice requesting mtb submissions from the public .

title ix of the house and senate versions of h.r .

644 address miscellaneous customs provisions .

all three bills would raise the de minimis value ( currently $200 ) for unaccompanied cargo to $800 .

the bills would also require dhs to consult with congress no later than 30 days after proposing and 30 days prior to finalizing , any dhs policies , initiatives , or actions that would have a major impact on trade and customs revenue functions .

other provisions include adding committing or conspiring to commit an act of terrorism to the list of offenses that are grounds for removal of a customs broker's license , amending harmonized tariff schedule chapter 98 to reduce the record - keeping burden on u.s. goods entering without improvement abroad , and allowing for the subtraction of the value of u.s. components assembled in goods that are exported and returned after being improved abroad .

miscellaneous provisions also include making bulk cargo residue exempt from duty and implementing drawback simplification .

all three bills would eliminate the "consumptive demand" exception to the prohibition on importation of goods made with convict , forced , or indentured labor .

the senate version of h.r .

644 would also provide offsets , in title x , for the bill by temporarily extending an increased customs user fee , among other things .

the u.s. customs service ( uscs ) , the agency historically responsible for trade facilitation and enforcement , was established by an act of congress on july 31 , 1789 ( 1 stat .

29 ) , and on september 2 , 1789 , was placed under the secretary of the treasury .

at that time , the primary role of the service was to collect u.s. customs tariffs , which were the major revenue source for the u.s. government until the federal income tax was established in 1913 .

key laws establishing and authorizing the trade functions of the uscs included provisions in the tariff act of 1930 , the customs simplification act of 1953 , and the reorganization plan of 1965 .

more recent customs legislation can be categorized into two components .

the first is focused on the customs service's traditional role of trade facilitation and enforcement , and the second , which emerged following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , has focused on the issue of import security .

the homeland security act ( p.l .

107-296 ) placed all or parts of 22 different federal departments and agencies , including the customs service , into the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

dhs's bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) has been the lead agency facilitating , enforcing , and securing trade flows since 2003 .

under the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) as amended in 2003 , cbp is the lead agency charged with enforcing the trade laws under the mod act and the security measures under the mtsa , the safe port act , and the other post - 9 / 11 laws .

cbp's trade strategy emphasizes risk management , which means that cbp collects advance information about shippers , importers , and cargo to evaluate cargo for potential import security and trade enforcement risks , and focuses enforcement efforts primarily on cargo and shippers identified as relatively high risk .

conversely , those deemed lower - risk imports ( including , eg , shipments of "trusted traders" ) are less likely to be targeted for cbp enforcement and may be eligible for expedited processing — thus advancing cbp's trade facilitation goal and freeing up resources for targeting higher - risk imports .

cbp's trade strategy also emphasizes layered enforcement , meaning that risk assessment and risk - based enforcement happen at a number of different points in the import process , beginning well before cargo arrives at a u.s. port of entry , and continuing long after cargo has been formally admitted to the united states .

cbp attempts to target high - risk flows as early as possible in the import process , but its ability to conduct enforcement activities at different stages of the import process is designed to create multiple opportunities to interdict illegal imports .

the import process includes three main stages , as illustrated in figure 1 .

first , prior to entry at a u.s. poe , importers and carriers file paperwork and provide advance electronic cargo information , and all imports are subject to risk - based screening .

based on the results of this screening , certain goods are subject to import security scanning and inspection in foreign ports and / or upon arrival at a u.s. port .

second , importers file "entry documents" when cargo reaches a u.s. port , and cargo may be subject to additional scanning and inspection for import security and trade enforcement purposes .

admissible cargo is released from the port , and importers file an additional set of "entry summary" documents , which cbp uses to calculate customs duties and to make an initial assessment of taxes , fees , and duties owed .

third , following cargo entry , importers may challenge the assessment for up to a year , or longer under certain circumstances , until the final assessment of taxes and fees , a process known as liquidation .

trade enforcement activities may continue through audits and other post - entry investigations .

reauthorization of cbp's trade , enforcement , and security functions has been the subject of several hearings and legislative proposals in recent years .

this section reviews selected issues addressed in previous legislation and hearings related to import policy involving customs issues , including policies related to the competing goals of trade facilitation , trade enforcement , and import security , along with customs modernization and interagency coordination .

many of these issues are also addressed in the customs reauthorization bills being discussed in the 114 th congress ( see " legislation in the 114th congress " ) .

an overarching goal of u.s. trade policy is to facilitate the efficient flow of goods in and out of the united states , but there is an inherent tension between the commercial interest in trade facilitation and the often competing goals of enforcing trade laws and import security measures .

the mod act of 1993 ( title vi of p.l .

103-182 ) sought to address this tension , to a degree , by replacing the previous model of trade enforcement , in which the then - u.s. customs service ( uscs ) was responsible for the classification of goods and assessment of duties , with a "shared responsibility" approach , in which importers make their own duty determinations and the customs agency is primarily responsible for revenue collection and oversight of importers .

in theory , robust post - entry audits and high penalties for noncompliance should act as a deterrent , and shared responsibility may facilitate legal flows without compromising trade enforcement .

the tension is more profound when it comes to import security , however , because post - entry enforcement may be too late to prevent a significant security breach .

post - entry enforcement also may be problematic for certain trade issues , such as consumer safety laws , and in ad / cvd cases where harm may be done to u.s. industries .

thus , while c - tpat follows a similar logic as the mod act by "outsourcing" certain security functions from cbp to trusted industry partners , post - 9 / 11 security concerns may limit the benefits that may be offered to trusted traders — a fact that has been a source of frustration to importers who play by the rules but still confront burdensome trade procedures .

at the same time , certain programs may strengthen the overall import process without forcing such facilitation - versus - enforcement dynamics .

transition to the automated commercial environment ( ace ) , for example , should streamline the import process while also enhancing enforcement efforts through the international trade data system ( itds ) .

similarly , improving poe infrastructure and expanding poe personnel may speed trade flows while also making more resources available for inspections .

yet these types of win - win programs often are expensive to implement , and congress may be reluctant to make such investments at this time .

appendix a. glossary of trade - related acronyms appendix b .

selected trade statistics appendix c. estimated expenditures for selected cargo security programs , fy2004-fy201 .

