over the last two years , u.s. policymakers , many members of congress , and their european counterparts have struggled with how best to respond to the swift pace of change in several countries in the middle east and north africa ( mena ) .

fueled by deeply rooted economic , social , and political frustrations , popular uprisings began in tunisia in late 2010 and quickly spread to egypt and libya in early 2011 .

in all three of these countries , this so - called "arab spring" or "arab awakening" led to the downfall of autocratic leaders in power for decades .

such events also encouraged some citizens in morocco and jordan to press the existing monarchies for further political and constitutional reforms .

and in syria , demonstrations challenging the ruling asad regime triggered a brutal government response that has since escalated into a civil war , in which tens of thousands have been killed .

almost immediately after the onset of the "arab spring," analysts on both sides of the atlantic began calling for robust u.s. - european cooperation to help promote a more peaceful and prosperous mena region .

those of this view noted that the united states and europe share a multitude of common concerns in the region ( from countering terrorism to guaranteeing a reliable flow of energy exports ) , and similar interests in ensuring that the transitions underway result in more open and democratically accountable governments , greater economic opportunities , and long - term stability and security .

these experts argued that greater transatlantic cooperation , in particular between the united states and the european union ( eu ) , would enable both sides to leverage one another's strengths , ensure synergy in trade and development policies , and prevent a duplication of diplomatic and economic resources at a time when the united states and europe are each facing their own political and economic challenges .

despite significant cultural , historical , and geopolitical differences , some commentators early on drew analogies with the way the united states and its west european allies worked together to support the transitions in central and eastern europe after the end of the cold war .

in light of the sweeping changes , u.s. and european officials alike asserted their intentions to pursue policies in the mena region that emphasized supporting democratic and economic reforms to a greater degree than before in countries such as egypt and tunisia .

at the same time , some observers have criticized u.s. and european responses to date as modest at best .

although only one gauge , analysts point out that the bulk of eu financial assistance for the mena countries for 2011-2013 was budgeted prior to the start of the "arab spring," and that u.s. financial support for the transitions in the mena region over the last two years has largely come from reallocating funding from existing programs .

experts contend that stronger eu efforts toward the mena region have been hindered by different member state policy preferences and competing priorities , such as managing the eurozone financial crisis .

similarly , many note that the united states has been constrained in its response by its own economic and budgetary problems , a growing sense of "intervention fatigue" among the american public after more than a decade of war , and policy debates over the appropriate design and funding level for assistance programs in the region .

for example , although the obama administration requested new funding to support the changes underway in the mena region for fy2013 , congressional approval of this request was largely derailed by broader disagreements over the u.s. budget and how to handle the national debt .

some analysts suggest that the september 11 , 2012 , terrorist attack on the u.s. diplomatic mission in benghazi , libya — which resulted in the death of u.s .

ambassador christopher stevens and three other americans — may also weaken the u.s. political appetite for robust engagement in the mena region .

amid such political and fiscal realities , several commentators have suggested that u.s. - european cooperation may be crucial to providing a significant , effective , and complementary package of western economic and political support to help shape a positive outcome for the mena region as a whole .

the united states and the eu already share a dynamic political and economic relationship , and the united states often looks to the eu for partnership on an extensive range of global challenges .

for years , many members of congress have called for european allies and friends — both in nato and the eu — to shoulder a greater degree of the burden in protecting shared interests and addressing common challenges , including many of those emanating from the greater middle east .

however , others contend that despite the possible benefits of greater u.s. - european coordination toward the middle east and north africa , it is likely to remain a lofty and elusive goal .

both the united states and europe face inherent difficulties in dealing with a changed political landscape in the mena region in which new actors and unsettled conditions make for considerable uncertainty .

as events unfold in the region , potential u.s. - european policy differences — on issues ranging from how best to encourage egypt's democratic progress and prevent state failure , to how to manage the role of islamist parties , or what to do about the deteriorating situation in syria — could arise and complicate the prospects for closer u.s. - european cooperation .

some u.s. policymakers and members of congress may also be cautious about working too closely with european governments or the eu if doing so might constrain u.s. policy choices toward the mena countries or u.s. options in managing challenges elsewhere in the region .

furthermore , experts note that the united states and its european partners are limited in what they can or should do to influence events in the region .

past u.s. and european policies that emphasized stability and good relations with autocratic regimes may continue to taint public perceptions in the mena countries .

others point out that too much western involvement could be counterproductive if perceived as an attempt to protect u.s. - european interests at the expense of the aspirations of local populations , or if used by some mena leaders to deflect blame for domestic and regional problems .

and some note that the united states and europe do not have the same tools or global standing as they did when seeking to bolster the transformations in central and eastern europe after the end of the cold war — that is , the ability to provide significant economic incentives to the mena countries given current domestic financial concerns , or to offer a european or transatlantic "perspective" in the form of eu and / or nato membership .

europe's geographic proximity to and history with the middle east and north africa , as well as the nature of its economic ties , shape its relations with the region in ways that are distinct from those of the united states .

over the years , the european union has established an array of formal policies that seek to guide its relations and those of its member states with the mena region .

many critics contend , however , that the eu in the past focused more on promoting stability and protecting economic interests — prioritizing concerns such as controlling migration , fighting terrorism , and ensuring access to energy supplies — at the expense of pressuring governments in the mena region to reform .

eu policies toward the transformations in the middle east and north africa continue to evolve in response to ongoing events .

in general , however , the eu has been seeking to impose greater conditionality in its relations with the mena countries in the wake of the "arab spring," offering more financial support and closer ties to those countries more committed to instituting political and economic reforms .

but some experts contend that despite such rhetoric , eu policies toward the middle east and north africa remain largely the same as before , and many stress that the eu's influence on events in the region is limited by a variety of factors .

in the wake of the "arab spring," the u.s. government , like its european counterparts and the eu , has been examining long - standing u.s. policies in the middle east and north africa .

this section provides a broad overview of u.s. policy in the region .

it focuses largely on u.s. initiatives to encourage post - transition political and economic development in the mena countries and highlights similarities and differences with european efforts to provide a basis for comparison when considering prospects for future u.s. - european cooperation .

u.s. programs and policies described in this section should be considered illustrative , rather than exhaustive .

the united states and its european partners share similar interests in ensuring that the changes underway in the middle east and north africa result in a more stable , secure , and prosperous region .

common u.s. and european concerns in the region include countering terrorism , weapons proliferation , and transnational crime ; curtailing islamist extremism ; ensuring a reliable flow of energy exports and commercial transit ; and ensuring israel's security and advancing peace negotiations with the palestinians .

europe's geographic proximity to the mena region also makes controlling migration a key priority for individual european countries and for the eu as a whole , while preserving military cooperation with mena countries remains critical for the united states , especially given long - standing u.s. interests in israel and the persian gulf .

many analysts suggest that to date , u.s. and eu policies have been closely aligned on most issues regarding the changes underway in the mena region .

as noted previously , numerous experts also argue that greater u.s. - european cooperation may be essential to providing robust and effective western support to the region .

this section describes the current status of u.s. - european efforts to coordinate political and economic policies toward the mena region , presents an array of potential areas and options for future consideration , and discusses possible challenges and pitfalls to closer u.s. - european cooperation .

crs report rl33487 , armed conflict in syria: u.s. and international response , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42393 , change in the middle east: implications for u.s. policy , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33003 , egypt: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43053 , egypt and the imf: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41959 , the european union: foreign and security policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21372 , the european union: questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33546 , jordan: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42393 , change in the middle east: implications for u.s. policy , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21579 , morocco: current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21666 , political transition in tunisia , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42621 , state , foreign operations , and related programs: fy2013 budget and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] , marian leonardo lawson , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43043 , the fy2014 state and foreign operations budget request , by [author name scrubbed] , marian leonardo lawson , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42153 , u.s. trade and investment in the middle east and north africa: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

