congress has made global health a high priority for several years , with notable appropriations increases for global health during the george w. bush administration .

during this period , global - health - related appropriations rose from less than $2 billion in fy2001 to almost $8 billion in fy2008 ( figure 1 ) .

much of the funding increases were provided to support programs , such as the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) and the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) , which fought hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria ( htam ) .

executive and legislative priorities in global health mostly aligned under the george w. bush administration .

they largely remained so under the obama administration , though some debates emerged on more finite issues , such as the type of hiv / aids interventions to support and the extent to which the united states should support international family planning and reproductive health programs .

it remains to be seen whether legislative and executive priorities will align under the trump administration .

while congressional support for global health remained steadfast throughout the obama administration , the great recession that began in 2008 slowed overall federal spending , and appropriations for global health programs became relatively stagnant .

on average , congress appropriated roughly $9 billion annually for global health throughout the obama administration .

u.s. support for global health has been motivated in large part by concern about emergent and reemerging infectious diseases .

following outbreaks of diseases like severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , hiv / aids , and pandemic influenza , several presidents highlighted the threats such diseases pose to economic development , stability , and security and launched a variety of health initiatives to address them .

congress demonstrated support for each initiative by meeting requested levels , and in some instances exceeded budget proposals .

in 1996 , for example , president bill clinton issued a presidential decision directive that called infectious diseases a threat to domestic and international security , called for u.s. global health efforts to be coordinated with those aimed at counterterrorism , and established a health advisor on the national security council ( nsc ) for the first time .

president clinton later requested $100 million for the leadership and investment in fighting an epidemic ( life ) initiative in 1999 to expand u.s. global hiv / aids efforts .

president george w. bush recognized the impact of infectious diseases on domestic and global security in his 2002 and 2006 national security strategy papers and created a number of initiatives to address them , including the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) in 2003 , the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) in 2005 , and the neglected tropical diseases ( ntd ) program in 2006 .

president barack obama also recognized the risk of infectious diseases and made several statements about how their spread across developing countries might affect u.s. security .

in the 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) and the 2010 national security strategy , the obama administration advocated for the coordination of global health programs in other areas , such as security , diplomacy , and development .

rather than create an initiative aimed at infectious diseases , president obama announced the global health initiative ( ghi ) in 2009 to improve the coordination and impact of u.s. global health efforts .

implementation of the initiative was short - lived , though efforts to deepen integration of global health programs continued throughout the obama administration .

prompted in part by the west africa ebola epidemic , the 115 th congress has continued deliberating approaches for strengthening weak health systems while preserving congressional priorities for key global health programs like pepfar .

the ebola epidemic not only revealed the threat that weak health systems in developing countries pose to the world , but also exposed gaps in international frameworks for responding to global health crises .

consensus is emerging that health system strengthening is important for protecting advancements in global health and for bolstering international security , though debate abounds regarding the appropriate approach for achieving this goal , as well as identifying the role the united states might play in such efforts , especially in relation to other u.s. global health assistance priorities .

while legislative and executive commitment to global health remained strong during the bush and obama terms , the 115 th congress and the trump administration appear to have prioritized funding for global health programs differently .

in fy2018 , for example , the trump administration proposed that funding for global health programs that year be cut by roughly $2.3 billion from fy2017 levels .

the $6.8 billion fy2018 request included $6.5 billion for related efforts financed through state - foreign operations ( sfops ) appropriations and $0.3 billion for global health programs supported through labor , health and human services , and education ( labor - hhs ) appropriations .

in response , congress funded global health programs in excess of $2.3 billion of the fy2018 budget request in fy2018 and almost $100 million more than fy2017 levels .

for fy2019 , the trump administration again has sought to reduce u.s. global health spending by more than $2 billion from fy2018 levels .

the $7.1 billion request includes $6.7 billion through sfops and $0.4 billion through labor - hhs .

language in the congressional budget justifications ( cbj ) for the state department and u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) indicated that the trump administration "will continue to challenge the global community to devote resources and political commitments to building healthier , stronger , and more self - sufficient nations in the developing world. .

congress funds most global health assistance through two appropriations bills: state - foreign operations and related programs ( sfops ) and labor , health and human services , and education ( labor - hhs ; see figure 4 ) .

these bills are used to fund global health efforts implemented by usaid and the u.s. centers for defense control and prevention ( cdc ) , as well as pepfar programs that are coordinated by the department of state and implemented by several u.s. agencies .

through pepfar , the united states contributes to multilateral efforts to combat hiv / aids , tb , and malaria ( hatm ) , including the global fund and the joint united nations program on hiv / aids ( unaids ) .

this section describes the global health activities implemented or coordinated by each agency that received appropriations , as described above .

this discussion is limited to those agencies and departments for which congress provides funding specifically for global health: usaid , state , and cdc .

agencies may use internal funding to contribute to additional global health efforts .

several presidents have launched health initiatives to advance their priorities , some of which are enduring .

the section below describes health initiatives that were launched during the george w. bush administration and continue to be implemented .

funding for global health assistance has grown over the past decade ( figure 5 ) .

during economic recession periods in europe and the united states , rates of growth for global health aid slowed , but health aid remained mostly level .

global funding to curb the 2014 west africa ebola outbreak contributed to a spike in global health aid in 2015 .

the united states provides more official development assistance ( oda ) for health than any other country in the development assistance committee ( dac ) .

in 2016 , u.s. spending on global health accounted for more than 60% of all health aid provided by dac members ( figure 5 ) .

the united states also apportions more of its foreign aid to improving global health than most other dac countries ( figure 6 ) .

the united states apportioned 30.5% of its foreign aid to health assistance in 2016 .

among top health aid donors , the netherlands allotted the second - largest share ( 16.4% ) of its oda to health assistance in 2016 , followed by the united kingdom ( 13.3% ) , japan ( 3.4% ) , and germany ( 2.6% ) .

congressional support for global health assistance focuses primarily on specific health conditions , especially hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

almost 75% of fy2018 global health appropriations , for example , were aimed at controlling hiv / aids ( 61% ) , tb ( 3% ) , and malaria ( 10% ) .

the emergence of ebola in west africa , yellow fever outbreaks in densely populated cities in angola and brazil , as well as the spread of tropical diseases like zika and dengue fever to western nations has heightened concerns about the ability of low - and middle - income countries to prevent and respond to an infectious disease outbreak with pandemic potential , as well as the vulnerability of the united states and other western states to the importation of such diseases .

whereas the united states demonstrated strong support for the global health security agenda under the obama administration , it is unclear whether the trump administration will maintain such support .

each of the global health budget requests from the trump administration included an almost $2 billion reduction in u.s. global health spending .

in contrast , congress mostly maintained global health funding levels in fy2018 and is considering the fy2019 budget request .

congress is also debating responses to efforts by the trump administration to reinstate and expand the mexico city policy and whether to authorize the extension of pepfar .

the section below discusses these issues .

despite ongoing debates about the utility or appropriate levels of foreign assistance , global health programs have , in general , continued to receive bipartisan support , possibly indicating that global health remains a congressional priority .

while the international community has achieved significant gains in curbing preventable deaths , some experts are concerned about looming health challenges .

in a growing number of countries , deaths and illness from noncommunicable diseases ( like diabetes , cancer , and heart disease ) are outnumbering fatalities and ailments from communicable diseases ( like malaria and hiv / aids ) .

many middle - income countries like south africa face dual epidemics of diseases associated with growing prosperity ( diabetes ) and persistent poverty ( vaccine - preventable child deaths ) .

in the absence of higher spending levels , bolstering health systems will likely gain greater importance in u.s. global health programs .

