increasingly , the federal government uses technology to facilitate and support the federal procurement ( or acquisition ) process .

primary beneficiaries of this shift to online procurement systems ( i.e. , websites and databases ) are the government's acquisition workforce and prospective and incumbent government contractors .

web - based procurement systems are essential for completing certain processes and fulfilling various requirements including , for example , publicizing contracting opportunities , helping to ensure that the government only does business with responsible contractors , capturing subcontracting information , and collecting and maintaining contract award data .

possible benefits conferred by the suite of acquisition systems include enhanced efficiency , improved access to information , mitigation of the administrative burden shared by federal employees and contractors , and the timely collection of accurate data .

the government's reliance on web - based systems is not surprising for yet another reason: the magnitude of government procurement .

beginning with fy2008 , the federal government has spent over $500 billion and conducted at least 5.7 million contract actions each fiscal year through fy2012 .

during the same time period , federal agencies dealt with at least 154,000 contractors each fiscal year .

this figure does not include entities that competed for , but were not awarded , any government contract .

congressional interest in the executive branch's procurement systems ( and , more broadly , government procurement ) is fueled by a combination of its responsibilities .

as the keeper of the federal purse and the body responsible for oversight of the executive branch , congress takes a keen interest in how federal agencies spend the funds appropriated to them and , generally , how well the acquisition process works .

while congressional oversight of government procurement includes overseeing web - based acquisition systems , these systems also serve as resources for congressional oversight efforts as well as legislative activities .

additionally , some online procurement systems may be useful when crafting responses to constituents who have commented on , or requested assistance related to , government procurement .

relatedly , congress has demonstrated an ongoing interest in promoting the transparency of government spending data , including contract award information , for citizens and other interested parties .

this report begins with an overview of major online procurement systems that support certain acquisition processes , or contain data about agencies' procurements .

this section includes a table that provides basic information about each system and that may serve as a reference guide .

the next section of the report then examines several issues and topics , including data quality , the system for award management ( sam ) , and the posting of contracts online .

major web - based , executive branch procurement systems are the focus of this report .

this report does not include any agency - specific websites or databases .

additionally , it does not include all of the governmentwide online systems associated with government procurement , such as the small business administration's subcontracting opportunities directory and sub - net , or the rfp - ez pilot program .

generally , only executive branch agencies are subject to the applicable statutes , regulations , policies , or guidelines that govern the use of the procurement systems covered in this report .

although individual legislative branch or judicial branch agencies might be permitted to use these systems , they are not necessarily required to do so .

the past two decades have seen the federal government take "increasing advantage of technology to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the acquisition lifecycle , from performing market research to recording contractor performance information. .

initially , most online acquisition systems were established for the purpose of facilitating and improving the procurement process .

contracting officers , and other members of the government's acquisition workforce , post solicitations ( and other documents , such as sources sought notices ) on the federal business opportunities ( fedbizopps ) website .

in turn , fedbizopps is a resource for would - be government contractors seeking opportunities to sell their goods or services to the government .

the system for award management streamlines the registration process for prospective and current contractors while providing a single repository of information for agency personnel to use , for example , to confirm business size , review contractors' certifications , and pay contractors .

to aid in ensuring that the government does business only with responsible contractors , agency personnel also use sam to determine whether a contractor is presently suspended or debarred , and query the federal awardee performance information and integrity system ( fapiis ) .

contracting officers submit performance information to the past performance information retrieval system ( ppirs ) and , in turn , use information stored in the system when evaluating a contractor's past performance .

some web - based acquisition systems may primarily serve other purposes and other users .

congressional staff and agency personnel may find the contract award data available on the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) website useful when developing , or implementing , policy .

a push for transparency led to the passage of the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata , p.l .

109-282 ) .

ffata mandated the development of a user - friendly system comprising a variety of government spending data , including procurement data .

another effort aimed at enhancing transparency involves fapiis .

subsequent to the establishment of fapiis , legislation was enacted which made the contents of this system , except for past performance data , accessible to the public .

table 1 contains information regarding 11 web - based acquisition systems and a related department of labor system .

the table reflects the current status of the general services administration's effort to consolidate eight procurement websites , plus the catalog for federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) , into one integrated system , sam .

three websites — central contractor registration ( ccr , which includes federal agency registration ( fedreg ) ) , excluded parties list system ( epls ) , and online representations and certifications application ( orca ) — migrated to sam in july 2012 .

none of the three is listed separately in table 1 .

each of the five remaining procurement systems slated to migrate to sam at later dates has its own entry in the table .

these websites are the electronic subcontracting reporting system ( esrs ) , fedbizopps , fpds - ng , ppirs , and wage determinations online ( wdol ) .

additional information about sam is provided below .

web - based systems increasingly have become embedded in the federal government's acquisition process , providing the means for collecting , storing , searching , or disseminating a variety of data and other information to the acquisition workforce and other interested parties .

many of the systems were designed to facilitate the acquisition process ; some of them also promote transparency .

recognizing the potential benefits of integrating certain online procurement systems ( and the catalog for federal domestic assistance ) , gsa has undertaken an effort to consolidate nine systems into the system for award management .

it remains to be seen whether efforts to disclose additional procurement information ( such as posting contracts online ) , or to present procurement data in a new portal , or format ( such as proposed in the data act ) , come to fruition .

no matter the source of information or data , though , some would argue that access does not necessarily confer comprehension , which may require some knowledge of government procurement .

