the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 ( rcra ; 42 u.s.c .

§6901 et seq . , as amended ) is a comprehensive environmental statute that authorizes the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate hazardous wastes in accordance with stringent waste management procedures , established largely in subtitle c of the law .

pursuant to explicit directives from congress in that subtitle , epa has promulgated and is authorized to enforce standards applicable to hazardous waste generators and transporters , and to owners and operators of hazardous waste treatment , storage , and disposal facilities ( tsdfs ) .

this regulatory program is sometimes referred to as "cradle - to - grave" management .

rcra does not identify which wastes are hazardous and therefore subject to subtitle c regulation .

instead , congress left that designation to epa .

however , in 1980 amendments to rcra , several categories of high - volume industrial waste were statutorily excluded from subtitle c requirements , pending further study by epa .

commonly referred to as the bevill and bentsen amendments , those exclusions are for waste generated from the exploration and production of crude oil or natural gas ( "bentsen waste" ) , and cement kiln dust , mining and mineral processing waste , and waste from the combustion of coal and other fossil fuels at electric utilities and industrial facilities ( "bevill waste" ) .

a key reason bevill - bentsen wastes were excluded from subtitle c was because they were generated in tremendous amounts , particularly when compared to other waste intended to be regulated under subtitle c. that remains the case today .

in 2011 , all regulated hazardous waste was produced by a total of 16,447 industrial waste generators , and totaled 34.3 million tons .

that year , there were 589 coal - fired power plants in the united states .

according to industry estimates , such plants generated approximately 130 million tons of coal combustion waste ( ccw , a bevill waste ) .

other bevill - bentsen waste is generated in similarly large quantities .

epa's study of each waste , prepared in accordance with study criteria specified in each amendment , resulted in its determination that regulation under subtitle c was not warranted for most bevill - bentsen wastes .

with some exceptions , regulatory determinations were made for each waste between 1988 and 2002 .

since that time , however , epa has gathered additional information about some of the wastes , including information regarding changes in the waste's volume and hazardous characteristics , as well as risks of and actual damages tied to the improper management of the waste .

one such case of actual damages occurred after a breach in an impoundment pond at the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) kingston , tn , power plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal ash slurry .

after the kingston release , epa revisited its may 2000 regulatory determination that subtitle c requirements were not necessary for ccw .

to establish national standards to address risks associated with the management of ccw , in june 2010 epa proposed two regulatory options to manage the waste .

under the first option , epa would reverse its previous bevill determination and use its existing authority under subtitle c to subject the waste to subtitle c requirements , including tailored tsdf requirements applicable to "special waste. .

under the second option , epa would promulgate regulations applicable to disposal facilities that receive ccw , pursuant to its authority under subtitle d to manage solid waste .

under subtitle d epa is not authorized to directly enforce any new standards applicable to bevill - bentsen waste disposal .

instead , epa would rely on states or citizens to enforce those standards .

epa's 2010 regulatory proposal ( not yet finalized ) illustrates potential authorities from which epa could draw to regulate bevill waste and , to a limited extent , bentsen waste .

interested stakeholders , including some members of congress , have expressed concern over epa's potential to apply any new federal requirements on any bevill or bentsen waste under subtitles c or d. the purpose of this report is to identify epa's existing authorities to regulate the bentsen or the bevill waste , absent the provision of any additional authority or directive from congress .

the report also provides background on the bevill and bentsen amendments and epa's authorities to regulate the waste pursuant to those amendments .

the report discusses specific bevill or bentsen waste only as necessary to provide examples of recent issues that have called attention to the waste , particularly issues that may lead epa to determine that new federal waste management requirements should be established for any one or more of the currently excluded wastes .

rcra is the primary federal law governing the management of solid and hazardous waste .

enacted in 1976 , rcra recodified and amended the solid waste disposal act of 1965 .

the most significant aspect of rcra's 1976 amendments was the establishment of the federal hazardous waste management program under subtitle c. epa has primary authority to implement the federal hazardous waste program , but has developed procedures for states to become authorized to implement that program .

most states have chosen to do so .

also significant was rcra's prohibition on waste management practices that constitute open dumping of solid or hazardous waste , under subtitle d. in contrast to its authorities under subtitle c , epa has no authority to directly enforce any regulations it may establish for the management of solid waste under subtitle d. instead , states have primary authority to regulate solid waste .

since epa determined that regulation under subtitle c was not warranted , various stakeholders representing environmental , public health , and industry groups have disagreed over whether the exclusion results in risks to human health and the environment .

those stakeholders , as well as epa and state regulatory agencies , have disagreed on a wide range of issues , including the level of risk posed by the waste ; whether or not existing state or other federal requirements are adequate to address risks associated with the waste ; the degree to which there are gaps in local or state regulation of the waste ; and whether regulation under subtitle c is an appropriate mechanism to manage the waste .

in recent years , issues common to that debate have been raised with regard to two exclusions from subtitle c — the bentsen exclusion for waste generated from natural gas exploration and production ( e&p waste ) , and the bevill exclusion for ccw .

with regard to e&p waste , the recent increase in the use of hydraulic fracturing to extract natural gas from shale formations has resulted in a dramatic increase in the generation of associated wastewater .

neither the volume nor the nature of wastewater produced during shale gas extraction was considered by epa in its 1988 regulatory determination for e&p waste .

that is not to suggest that subtitle c requirements necessarily provide the most appropriate mechanism to regulate such wastewater , but rather details specific to the waste as it is currently being produced were not considered when evaluating whether existing state or other federal requirements were adequate to protect human health and the environment from risks associated with managing the waste .

the current approach to managing ccw has also drawn national attention in recent years .

in 2008 , a breach in a surface impoundment pond at the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) kingston , tn , plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry .

the release covered more than 300 acres and damaged or destroyed homes and property .

four years later , the spill is still being cleaned up , at an estimated cost of $1.2 billion .

according to epa , however , a more common risk associated with the improper management of ccw is from the leaching of toxic constituents in the material ( primarily heavy metals such as arsenic , selenium , and lead ) .

to address those risks , in june 2010 epa proposed for public comments two regulatory options to manage the waste , under its respective authorities under rcra subtitles c and d. the options included in epa's proposal provide an example of the agency's current authorities to regulate bevill - excluded waste and , to a limited degree , bentsen - excluded waste ( discussed in the section " epa authorities to regulate bevill - bentsen waste " ) .

various stakeholders representing industry , state regulatory agencies , public health , and environmental groups , to name a few , reacted strongly to epa's 2010 proposal to subject a bevill waste to new rcra requirements .

concerns raised by those stakeholders were also reflected in the reaction from some members of congress .

for example , some members expressed concern over the cost to industry and state regulatory agencies , as well as broader impacts to the economy , energy prices , or recycling opportunities .

others have expressed concern that , given the risk associated with improper management , subtitle c provides epa with the only available option to establish enforceable national standards to protect human health and the environment from risks associated with the waste .

similarly , epa's lack of authority to enforce any regulations it may establish under subtitle d has led some members to oppose any proposal to regulate only solid waste disposal facilities that may receive the waste .

other members have also expressed concern that subjecting industry to regulation , under subtitle c or d , could prove burdensome to industry by expanding actions potentially subject to citizen suits under rcra .

epa's existing authority to subject bevill - bentsen waste to any new federal waste management requirements under rcra is established under subtitle c , subject to limitations specified in the bevill and bentsen amendments .

epa could also develop regulations applicable to solid waste disposal facilities that receive bevill - bentsen waste under its subtitle d authorities .

in 1976 , congress found that federal standards to properly manage waste were necessary , in part , because when improperly managed , corrective action was likely to be expensive , complex , and time - consuming .

consistent with that finding , waste management standards established by epa were intended to prevent contamination associated with waste disposal , if at all practicable , rather than remedy it after discovery .

the federally enforceable waste management requirements , established and implemented under subtitle c , are those that would prevent a release of hazardous constituents in a regulated hazardous waste .

this system represents a proactive approach to protecting human health and the environment .

rcra subtitle c does not , however , attempt to control all hazardous wastes .

it regulates only materials that meet the regulatory definition of hazardous waste .

an exemption from subtitle c's requirements is not equivalent to determining that the waste is nonhazardous .

if improperly managed , it may pose some threat to human health and the environment .

as a result , subtitle c establishes a proactive system of protection only insofar as its requirements apply to regulated waste .

in contrast , cercla and other related authorities take a largely reactive approach by authorizing cleanup and enforcement actions to respond to actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances , upon discovery of such threats .

as epa collects more information on the risks associated with managing bevill - bentsen waste and the degree to which state regulatory programs control those risks , the agency may determine that national standards applicable to bevill or bentsen wastes are needed .

to do so , epa may establish requirements in accordance with its existing subtitle c or d authorities .

regardless of those authorities , as a practical matter , the agency may find it difficult to promulgate new rcra requirements for any bevill or bentsen waste .

as evidenced by the opposition to epa's previous attempts to regulate ccw as a hazardous waste , it is uncertain whether epa would reverse previous regulatory determinations for ccw or any other bevill or bentsen waste .

also , the prospect of exposing bevill - bentsen waste disposal facilities to citizen suits may mean that promulgating regulations under subtitle d could be similarly difficult for epa .

given the likely opposition to regulating the waste under subtitle c or d , epa may use certain other authorities as necessary to protect human health and the environment .

under rcra , any "other authorities" available to epa are generally those established under section 7003 .

while epa may not have used its imminent hazard authorities in the past , it may do so in the future if the agency determines that it is the only plausible option to address risks associated with the improper management of bevill - bentsen waste .

