the defense production act of 1950 , as amended ( dpa ) , provides the president a broad set of authorities to ensure that domestic industry can meet national defense requirements .

in the dpa , congress has found that "the security of the united states is dependent on the ability of the domestic industrial base to supply materials and services for the national defense and to prepare for and respond to military conflicts , natural or man - caused disasters , or acts of terrorism within the united states. .

through the dpa , the president can , among other activities , prioritize contracts for goods and services , and offer incentives within the domestic market to enhance the production and supply of critical materials and technologies when necessary for national defense .

since 1950 , the dpa has been reauthorized over 50 times by congress , most recently in 2009 .

the majority of dpa authorities will expire on september 30 , 2014 , unless reauthorized .

this report examines some of the extensive history of the dpa , focusing primarily on its creation and most recent legislative reauthorization .

this report also discusses the foremost active authorities of the dpa .

nevertheless , this report is not intended to evaluate all authorities of the dpa comprehensively .

in discussing the major authorities of the dpa , this report explains how those authorities may have changed as a result of the most recent reauthorization of the law ( p.l .

111-67 , the defense production act reauthorization of 2009 , henceforth referred to as "reauthorization of 2009" ) .

this report also identifies relevant delegations of the president's dpa authorities made in executive order ( e.o. ) .

13603 , national defense resources preparedness .

finally , this report provides a brief overview of issues relevant to congress and tracks legislation in the 113 th congress to reauthorize the dpa .

h.r .

4809 was reported out of the committee on financial services in the house of representatives on june 11 , 2014 .

if enacted , h.r .

4809 would reauthorize the dpa for five years and would reform other provisions , as discussed later in the report .

the report also discusses congressional considerations for expanding , restricting , or otherwise modifying the authorities provided by the dpa , either in conjunction with or separate from a reauthorization .

this section provides summaries of the major authorities granted to the president in the three remaining active titles of dpa .

each summary describes how the dpa authorities are delegated to cabinet officials or other offices of the u.s. government in the recently issued executive order ( e.o. ) .

13603 , national defense resource preparedness .

the section highlights substantive changes made to these authorities in the defense production act reauthorization of 2009 ( reauthorization of 2009 ) .

this portion of the report identifies substantive changes contained in the reauthorization of 2009 and e.o .

13603 .

it is not intended to comprehensively evaluate all authorities in the dpa .

the information provided below is reviewed in table a - 2 in the appendix for select provisions of the dpa .

table a - 1 also provides a list of additional materials , information , and resources on various topics of the dpa that may be of use to congress .

all dpa authorities in titles i , iii , and vii are scheduled to terminate on september 30 , 2014 , with the exception of four sections .

as explained in section 717 of the dpa , the sections that are exempt from termination are: 50 u.s.c .

appx .

ยง2074 , section 104 of the dpa that prohibits both the imposition of wage or price controls without prior congressional authorization and the mandatory compliance of any private person to assist in the production of chemical or biological warfare capabilities ; 50 u.s.c .

appx .

ยง2157 , section 707 of the dpa that grants persons limited immunity from liability for complying with dpa - authorized regulations ; 50 u.s.c .

appx .

ยง2158 , section 708 of the dpa that provides for the establishment of voluntary agreements ; and 50 u.s.c .

appx .

ยง2170 , section 721 of the dpa , the so - called exon - florio amendment , that gives the president and cfius review authority over certain corporate acquisition activities .

in addition , section 717 ( c ) provides that any termination of sections of the dpa "shall not affect the disbursement of funds under , or the carrying out of , any contract , guarantee , commitment or other obligation entered into pursuant to this act" prior to its termination .

this means , for instance , that prioritized contracts or section 303 projects created with dpa authorities prior to september 30 , 2014 , would still be executed until completion even if the dpa is not reauthorized .

similarly , the statute specifies that the authority to investigate , subpoena , and otherwise collect information necessary to administer the provisions of the act , as provided by section 705 of the dpa , will not expire until two years after the termination of the dpa .

if the dpa were to expire , there are other permanently authorized authorities that may serve as a partial substitute for the title i priorities and allocations authority .

most prominently , section 18 of the selective service act of 1948 allows the president to place orders with any person for "articles and materials" and require that person to "give precedence" to that order above all others in the interest of national security .

however , as has been discussed in congressional testimony by executive branch officials , this selective service act authority is more limited than the dpa's priorities and allocations authority in that it only applies to orders of materials intended for the armed forces or atomic energy programs ( instead of the broad national defense definition of the dpa ) , and that it does not offer liability protection for recipients of the prioritized orders ( as is offered by section 707 of the dpa ) .

additionally , through two more statutes , the president is authorized only in a time of war or when war is "imminent" to place priority orders for supplies necessary for the armed forces , or even assume full or partial control of factories producing such items , so long as persons are justly compensated for their loss .

frequently , congress has elected to reauthorize the dpa by extending the termination date provided in section 717 for a limited period , such as a year , without making significant amendments to the overall statute .

in other circumstances , congress has reauthorized the law by extending the section 717 date for several years while also amending the other provisions of the law .

in either circumstance , reauthorizations have typically been presented as discrete bills , though on occasion the dpa has been reauthorized through a provision in a larger legislative vehicle such as the national defense authorization act .

for a chronology of all laws reauthorizing the dpa since inception , see table a - 4 .

the laws discussed above reauthorized the dpa by explicitly amending the termination clause in section 717 .

it may also be possible to implicitly extend the dpa termination clause by appropriating funds for carrying out the provisions of the dpa that would be available after the termination date had been reached .

for example , if appropriations for fy2015 were enacted which did not explicitly amend section 717 , but provided funds for activities conducted pursuant to the expiring provisions of the dpa , it is likely that this fy2015 appropriation would be read as implicitly suspending the september 30 , 2014 , termination date for the duration of the appropriated funds .

finding an implicit suspension would avoid creating a situation in which congress would have made a meaningless appropriation of funds for purposes that cannot be fulfilled .

in addition to a full - year fy2015 spending law , an implicit suspension of the termination date could also arise in the context of a shorter - term continuing resolution .

however , in previous instances where a continuing resolution did not provide funds , either in the text of the resolution itself or as incorporated by reference , specifically for a program that would expire , no implicit suspension of that expiration date was found .

the rationale for finding an implicit suspension of the termination clause appears to be strongest in scenarios where congress appropriates funding that would not become available until after the termination date would have elapsed .

for example , in the situation described in the previous paragraph , the hypothetical funding provided in a full - year fy2015 appropriation or a continuing resolution would become available at the beginning of fy2015 , after the dpa provisions had sunset at the end of fy2014 .

the argument for implicit suspension of the termination date is not as strong where appropriations for dpa activities precede the termination date but the availability of those funds extend beyond it .

for example , appropriations for dpa activities in preceding fiscal years are typically "available until expended. .

as "no - year" money , that temporal availability of those funds would theoretically extend beyond the termination date .

however , gao has previously opined that , in the case of a termination of authority , "no new obligations may be incurred after the termination date as a charge against the agency's appropriation even if funds remain from an appropriation made available to the agency prior to the termination date. .

h.r .

4809 passed the house under suspension of the rules on july 29 , 2014 .

if enacted , section 1 of the bill would reauthorize the expiring provisions of the dpa for five years , from september 30 , 2014 , to september 30 , 2019 .

the remaining sections of the bill would reform existing provisions of the dpa .

section 2 of the bill would make several revisions to the defense production act committee ( dpac ) , which was established in the reauthorization of 2009 and is currently authorized in section 722 of the dpa .

first , section 2 would restate the general purpose of the dpac .

originally , the committee was created to advise the president on the effective use of the full scope of authorities of the act .

the bill would instead redirect this to coordination and planning for the use of title i priorities and allocations authority within the executive branch .

notably , this proposed change would likely result in the abolishment of several "industrial capability assessment study groups" created under dpac authority .

second , section 2 would supersede the rotating chair system for the dpac , which was established by presidential memorandum .

under the existing procedure , the secretary of defense and secretary of homeland security rotate annually in the dpac chair .

instead , the bill would direct the president to appoint as chair the "head of the agency to which the president has delegated primary responsibility for government - wide coordination of the authorities in this act. .

as currently established in e.o .

13603 delegations , the secretary of homeland security appears to be the most likely chair - designate , but the language of the proposed bill could allow the president to appoint another secretary .

third , section 2 of the bill would require the chair to appoint a person to coordinate all committee activities .

finally , section 2 of the bill would revise the annual reporting requirements of the dpac to emphasize title i priority and allocation authority and to require the report to include updated copies of title i - related rules .

section 3 of the bill accentuates the title i rulemaking requirement first directed in the reauthorization of 2009 by requiring delegated agencies with title i authority to issue and annually review their final rules .

of the six departments to which the president delegated title i authority , only three ( commerce , energy , and transportation ) had issued final rules as of june 10 , 2014 .

the departments of agriculture , defense , and health and human services have not yet completed final rules .

section 4 of the bill would revise the title iii , section 303 authority of the dpa .

first , section 4 ( a ) of the bill would require the president , on a non - delegable basis , to provide written explanatory materials on how actions taken under section 303 would meet several presidential determinations required by law ( that the actions are essential to the national defense and that sufficient commercial production and supply of the good would otherwise not be available ) .

current law allows these determinations to be delegated beyond the president .

in recent practice , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics has been responsible for making these determinations and for submitting signed explanatory materials to the committees of jurisdiction .

section 4 ( a ) would also reinstitute two provisions , with minor revisions , that were removed from the law in the reauthorization of 2009 .

in addition to the existing conditions in section 303 ( a ) ( 5 ) of the dpa that must be determined to be met before using section 303 authorities , the president would be required to determine that the actions taken are "the most cost effective , expedient , and practical alternative method for meeting the need. .

further , section 4 ( a ) of the bill would reinstitute another deleted provision .

that provision required that , should the aggregate cost of planned actions taken to address an industrial base shortfall under section 303 exceed $50 million , those actions must first be authorized by an act of congress .

this monetary limitation on action was removed from law in the reauthorization of 2009 and replaced with a general notification to the committees of jurisdiction for projects estimated to cost more than $50 million .

the proposed revision would require the president to both notify the committees of jurisdiction and obtain authorization in an act of congress before taking actions in excess of $50 million to address a manufacturing capacity or supply shortfall .

section 4 ( b ) of the bill would retroactively exempt any existing title iii project ( i.e. , one that has already been determined to meet requirements of the law ) from the requirements of the proposed section 4 ( a ) .

in other words , if actions to address a shortfall for any existing project do not exceed $50 million currently , but ultimately do so in the future , that project would not require direct authorization from congress .

in their totality , the revisions made by section 4 of the bill , if enacted , may partially limit exiting section 303 authority .

for example , if the bill is enacted as currently written , congress would be able to refuse authorization to new title iii projects and actions that would push the aggregate cost above the $50 million threshold .

however , the president would retain the ability to waive these requirements in periods of national emergency or if the actions are necessary to avert a shortfall that would severely impair national defense capability .

section 5 of the bill would revise the existing "such sums as necessary" authorization of appropriations found in section 711 of title vii of the dpa .

instead , the bill would authorize the appropriation of $133 million per fiscal year , starting in fy2015 , to carry out the provisions and purposes of the defense production act .

past appropriations to the dpa fund are listed in table 1 , which shows that the annual average direct appropriation to the dpa fund between fy2010 and fy2014 was $127.7 million , with a high of $223.5 million in fy2013 and a low of $34.3 million in fy2011 .

monies in the dpa fund are available until expended , so annual appropriations may carry over from year to year if not expended .

in conjunction with or separate from a reauthorization bill , congress could amend the dpa in order to extend , expand , restrict , or otherwise clarify the powers granted to the president in the dpa .

for example , congress could eliminate certain authorities altogether , such as the section 710 ( e ) authority underpinning the national defense executive reserve .

likewise , congress could expand the dpa to include new authorities to address novel threats to the national defense .

in addition to addressing the specific authorities granted in title i , title iii , and title vii of the dpa , congress may also consider other amendments to the dpa .

the "declaration of policy" in the dpa describes the general intentions of the authorities it confers to the president .

one option for congress is to amend this section of the statute in order to expand , restrict , or clarify the overall purpose of the authorities .

for instance , congress could include further discussion on the specific circumstances under which it finds dpa authorities are appropriate for use by the president .

though this section serves as a guide for the overall use of dpa authorities , changes to the declaration of policy may not fully endow or deny the president's authorities covered in the titles of the dpa without also amending the dpa's other provisions .

rather than passing legislation to amend the text of the dpa , congress could adopt a resolution clarifying the purpose of the dpa authorities .

for example , one such resolution introduced in the 112 th congress , h.con.res .

110 , states that is it the "sense of congress" that the dpa should not be used to "confiscate personal or private property , to force conscription into the armed forces on the american people , to force civilians to engage in labor against their will or without compensation , or to force private businesses to relinquish goods or services without compensation. .

however , "sense of congress" resolutions of this nature do not carry the force of law .

congress may wish to amend the definitions of key terms found in the dpa to shape the scope and use of the authorities , especially the definition of national defense .

as an example , congress could amend the definition of national defense to remove space from the definition , and as a result the president may be less able to use dpa authorities to support space - related projects .

on the other hand , for example , congress could amend the definition of national defense to specifically include counter - narcotics , cybersecurity , or organized crime .

doing so would more explicitly enable the use of dpa authorities to address these homeland security and national defense concerns .

congress could increase or reduce future appropriations to the dpa fund to manage the scope of title iii projects initiated by the president ( see table 1 for appropriations to the dpa fund since fy2010 ) .

use of the dpa fund , however , is specific to title iii .

therefore , adjusting appropriations to the dpa fund is unlikely to have an effect on the president's ability to exercise his authorities under the other titles of the dpa , unless congress writes specific language in the appropriations statute changing the nature of the fund itself or authorizing its used beyond a specific title .

within the scope of a reauthorization bill , congress may wish to reintroduce of a separate provision in section 711 of the dpa authorizing only certain appropriation amounts over a given time period for title iii or other dpa authorities .

likewise , congress may wish to direct the usage of such funds more specifically , such as has been done recently in relation to advanced drop - in biofuels .

congress might be satisfied with the existing scope and use of dpa authorities by the president , but may wish to add more extensive notification and reporting requirements on the use of all or specific authorities in the dpa .

additional reporting or notification requirements could involve formal notification of congress prior to or after the use of certain authorities in certain circumstances .

for example , congress may wish for the president to notify congress ( or the committees of jurisdiction ) when the priorities and allocations authority is used on a contract over a certain dollar amount .

congress might also consider expanding the existing reporting requirements of defense production act committee ( dpac ) , to include semi - annual updates on the recent use of authorities or explanations about controversial determinations .

thus far , the dpac has failed to regularly submit an annual report on time to the committees of jurisdiction , which may be limiting the ability of congress to oversee the use of the dpa .

existing requirements could also be expanded from notifying / reporting to the committees of jurisdiction to the congress as a whole , or to include other interested committees , such as the house and senate armed services committees .

additionally , congress may consider reestablishing a select committee with a similar purpose as the joint committee on defense production that was repealed in 1992 by congress .

in the reauthorization of 2009 , congress required agencies with delegated priorities and allocations authority under title i of the dpa to issue final rules creating standards and procedures for the use of the authority .

similarly , a rulemaking requirement exists for the voluntary agreement authority in title vii .

congress may wish to review the compliance with these existing rulemaking requirements , and potentially expand them for other authorities included in the dpa .

for example , congress may consider whether the president should promulgate rules establishing standards and procedures for the use of all or certain title iii authorities .

congress may consider limiting the use of certain dpa authorities to specific departments and agencies .

to do so , congress could amend the president's delegation of dpa authorities , superseding those made in e.o .

13603 , by amending the statute to assign specific authorities to individual cabinet secretaries as opposed to the president .

further , congress could expand the use of the legislative clause "on a nondelegable basis" to ensure that the authority is not delegated beyond the person identified in the statute .

in considering these options , congress may determine that the use of some authorities by certain agencies is appropriate and necessary for the national defense , but not for others .

there are many government - sponsored websites , reports , and guides that discuss various aspects of the defense production act in depth that may be of interest to congress .

table a - 1 provides a list of some of these resources .

