the medicare supplementary medical insurance program ( part b ) currently covers a wide variety of durable medical equipment , prosthetics , orthotics , and other medical supplies ( dmepos ) if they are medically necessary and are prescribed by a physician .

medicare beneficiaries who are prescribed an item of dmepos obtain it from a dmepos supplier , who then bills medicare for reimbursement .

durable medical equipment ( dme ) is equipment that ( 1 ) can withstand repeated use , ( 2 ) has an expected life of at least three years ( effective with respect to items classified as dme after january 1 , 2012 ) , ( 3 ) is used to serve a medical purpose , ( 4 ) generally is not useful in the absence of an illness or injury , and ( 5 ) is appropriate for use in the home .

examples include hospital beds , blood glucose monitors , and wheelchairs .

the benefit also includes related supplies , such as drugs and biologicals that are necessary for effective use of the product .

prosthetics ( p ) replace all or part of a body organ , such as colostomy bags , pacemakers , and breast prostheses for post - mastectomy patients .

orthotics ( o ) are artificial or mechanical aids , such as braces , to prevent or assist movement of weak or injured joints or muscles , and include leg , arm , back , and neck braces .

medicare also covers some items or supplies ( s ) , such as disposable surgical dressings when used in conjunction with dmepos .

according to the national health expenditure accounts , medicare spending on dme in cy2011 represented 20% of all spending on dme ; over half of dme spending ( 55% ) is paid out - of pocket .

medicare part b program expenditures for dmepos were $7.8 billion in cy2011 .

there were approximately 98,000 active dmepos suppliers in the united states in may 2012 ; approximately half of those suppliers ( 50,000 ) had total allowed medicare payments of greater than $10,000 between may 2011 and may 2012 .

approximately one in three beneficiaries uses dmepos in a given year .

medicare generally pays for most dmepos on the basis of fee schedules .

a fee schedule is a list of medicare payments for specific items and services , which are calculated according to statutorily specified formula and take into account the actual amount of care ( or items ) provided .

medicare pays 80% of the fee schedule amount , while the beneficiary is responsible for paying the remaining 20% ( co - insurance ) , in addition to any unmet deductible .

unless otherwise specified by congress , fee schedule amounts are updated each year by a measure of price inflation and economy - wide productivity .

however , investigations by the government accountability office ( gao ) and the office of the inspector general ( oig ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) have shown that medicare pays above - market prices for certain items of dme .

such overpayments may be due partly to the fee schedule mechanism of payment , which does not reflect market changes , such as new and less - expensive technologies , changes in production or supplier costs , or variations in prices in comparable localities .

the medicare program and beneficiaries are disadvantaged when medicare pays above - market prices for dmepos .

first , the higher payments result in an otherwise greater amount of part b ( supplementary medical insurance ) program payments , which are financed primarily through general tax revenues and beneficiary premiums .

second , the beneficiaries who use dmepos pay more ; though the proportion of co - insurance paid by beneficiaries remains at 20% , the higher fee schedule payment means the beneficiary co - insurance results in a higher dollar amount .

third , the payment differential between market prices and medicare payments for dmepos make fraud "particularly lucrative , further attracting bad actors to the system. .

however , legitimate medicare participating suppliers and dmepos manufacturers are advantaged by the higher medicare prices , which may , in part , enable less efficiently run businesses to remain in business .

following competitive bidding demonstrations required by the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 , bba 97 ) , the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 , mma ) required the secretary of hhs to establish a competitive acquisition program ( also known as competitive bidding ) under which prices for selected dmepos sold in specified areas would be determined not by a fee schedule , but by suppliers' bids .

a bid represents the amount a dmepos supplier is willing to accept to provide specified items or services to a medicare beneficiary .

the first round of the competitive bidding program began on july 1 , 2008 , but was suspended , contracts dissolved , and a rebid required due to implementation concerns .

between october and december 2009 , dmepos suppliers submitted new bids for nine categories of equipment in nine competitive bidding areas ; payments based on the bids of winning suppliers went into effect on january 1 , 2011 ( referred to in this report as round 1 rebid ) .

payment amounts based on round 2 of competitive bidding are scheduled to take effect in 91 additional metropolitan areas on july 1 , 2013 , for a slightly modified set of nine equipment categories ; round 2 also includes a competition for mail order diabetic testing supplies , which applies to the entire nation .

because the contracts signed with winning bidders are limited to three years , the process to "recompete" for the contracts in round 1 areas has already started .

payments based on the re - compete are expected to go into effect on january 1 , 2014 .

this report describes the dmepos competitive bidding program , including how winning bidders are chosen and how payments for equipment are determined .

it summarizes evaluations of the first round of the program .

finally , it discusses issues for congress and recently introduced legislation .

the text box below provides a brief legislative history ; a more detailed legislative history can be found in the appendix .

this section describes the statutory and regulatory requirements of where competitive bidding takes place , what items are included ( or excluded ) , how winning bidders are determined , and how the payments for the competitively bid items ( single payment amounts ) are determined .

it includes a discussion of the concerns of small suppliers .

often the authorizing statutes for the competitive bidding program are broad , allowing or requiring the secretary to determine the specific policies under this program .

the secretary has broad authority to administer the medicare program and to undertake research , studies , and other initiatives , either directly or through contracts or authorized grant or demonstration programs .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services has primary responsibility for administration of the medicare program .

in addition to the secretary's general administrative and oversight authority , several specific provisions in section 1847 of the social security act , which authorizes the competitive bidding program , require formation of an advisory body , an additional ombudsman's office , and various program evaluations , as described below .

in addition , congress , in its oversight capacity , has held several hearings examining the implementation and functioning of the competitive bidding program .

several required evaluations of the competitive bidding program have been published , while some required evaluations are still outstanding , as discussed below .

several issues have been voiced in regard to the competitive bidding program that may raise questions about its long - term viability , or whether the prices established through competitive bidding reflect the market for those products .

four bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress to amend the competitive bidding program .

the small supplier fairness in bidding competition act of 2013 ( h.r .

27 ) was introduced on january 3 , 2013 .

the bill would repeal the dmepos competitive bidding program , effective upon enactment , and require the secretary to submit a report to the house committee on small business and the senate committee on small business and entrepreneurship on the impact of competitive bidding on small clinical laboratories , among other provisions .

the medicare dmepos market pricing program act of 2013 ( h.r .

1717 ) was introduced on april 24 , 2013 .

the bill would require the secretary to repeal the dmepos competitive bidding program , and establish a market pricing program ( mpp ) to determine the prices of selected dmepos under medicare part b .

the design parameters for the program , the conducting of the auctions , and other requirements , would be contracted out , based on criteria specified in the bill .

the auctions for dmepos would be live auctions , and would be based on a reference item for each category .

the prices of all other items in a category would be determined by their value relative to the representative item , as calculated by the contractor .

two items would be auctioned in each area and the winners of those auctions would be required to sign two - year contracts ; the market - clearing prices resulting from those auctions would be applied to similar markets , with modifications , and , in general , any supplier willing to accept the mpp - determined price ( for a product category that was not auctioned in the suppliers' area ) could sell those products .

additionally , the secretary would be required to re - establish the program advisory and oversight committee ( paoc ) for two years ; the paoc was originally established to provide advice to the secretary on implementation of the competitive bidding program .

certain provisions of the competitive bidding program would also apply to the mpp , including the requirement that the oig evaluate the bidding methodology , the supplier feedback requirement for missing financial documentation , and provisions determining the contents of contracts .

a portion of the cost of terminating the competitive bidding program and establishing the mpp would be paid through fee schedule reductions and rescission of budget authority in discretionary accounts , programs , projects , and activities ( other than those in the department of defense or the department of veteran's affairs. ) .

on june 14 , 2013 , h.r .

2375 was introduced .

the bill would delay for at least six months the implementation of round 1 recompete and round 2 of the competitive bidding program and national mail order program for diabetic supplies .

on june 27 , 2013 , s. 1265 was introduced .

the bill would delay implementation of round 2 in tennessee .

the secretary would be required to terminate contracts for round 2 winning suppliers in tennessee and to rebid those contracts .

the bill would also impose penalties on the implementation contractor for specified errors including awarding a contract to a dmepos supplier in tennessee that did not meet state licensing requirements .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , responsible for preparing cost estimates of legislation pursuant to the congressional budget act of 1974 , has not yet issued cost estimates for the bills .

the following is a legislative history of the dmepos competitive bidding program , with descriptions of selected evaluations and congressional hearings for context .

the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba97 , p.l .

105-33 ) competitive bidding for dmepos was introduced in the bba97 , which required the secretary to establish five three - year competitive bidding demonstration projects .

suppliers competed for contracts to furnish medicare beneficiaries with selected items and services .

the bba97 required the secretary to select areas for the demonstrations based on the availability and accessibility of suppliers , and on the likelihood that savings could be realized by competitive bidding .

the secretary was permitted to limit the number of winning suppliers .

if the demonstrations decreased medicare spending , the secretary could expand the projects to other areas .

demonstrations in texas and florida three demonstrations were conducted in two different sites .

the first demonstration site was polk county , fl .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) reviewed bids from 30 different suppliers for both quality and value .

based on these bids , medicare established new payment rates for five categories of products: oxygen supplies and equipment , hospital beds and accessories , surgical dressings , enteral nutrition equipment and supplies , and urological supplies .

to ensure beneficiary access and a choice of suppliers , between 4 and 13 suppliers were selected for each category ( with 16 winning suppliers in total ) .

new rates took effect on october 1 , 1999 .

this phase of the demonstration , which ended in september 2001 , saved the medicare program and beneficiaries an estimated 16% - 17% on covered items .

a second round of bidding took place in polk county in early 2001 .

the bidding was conducted on the same product categories minus enteral nutrition .

again , 16 winners were chosen to participate , of whom half had participated in the previous round .

the prices went into effect on october 1 , 2001 .

the polk county demonstration ended september 30 , 2002 .

this second round of the demonstration resulted in estimated savings of approximately 20% .

a second demonstration site in a three - county area around san antonio , tx , began on february 1 , 2001 .

the project covered oxygen supplies , hospital beds , manual wheelchairs , non - customized orthotic devices ( including "off - the - shelf" items such as braces and splints ) , and certain nebulizer inhalation drugs used to treat lung disease and other conditions .

fifty - one suppliers were selected .

this project saved medicare and beneficiaries an estimated 20% over predicted expenditures before its termination in december 2002 .

a final report to congress by the secretary of hhs evaluated the dmepos demonstrations by criteria including ( 1 ) medicare expenditures , ( 2 ) beneficiary access , and ( 3 ) quality and product selection .

overall , the demonstrations in both sites saved an estimated 19% over what would have been paid under existing fee schedules .

the demonstration reduced medicare payments by an estimated $7.5 million and beneficiary payments by $1.9 million over the three - year period .

analyses of beneficiary and supplier surveys , and site visits , suggested that the demonstrations had little to no impact on access to goods and services , with one exception .

polk county , fl , experienced a decline in the use of portable oxygen equipment .

these results were further analyzed using claims data , which confirmed a 3 percentage point decline in portable oxygen use overall , and a 12 percentage point decline among new users .

though it is possible that the demonstration could have induced suppliers to save money by reducing access to portable machines , there may have been other contributing factors , including an oxygen policy change coinciding with the initiation of the polk county demonstration , which tightened medicare eligibility for portable oxygen .

conversely , the san antonio , tx , site did not show a decline in portable oxygen use .

with respect to quality and product selection , beneficiary surveys showed high satisfaction with suppliers under the demonstration projects .

supplier surveys showed that products provided to beneficiaries changed little during the demonstration .

though it did not show up in either of the surveys , anecdotal reports pointed to issues surrounding urological supplies and wheelchair fitting and delivery .

these instances were isolated , and "eventually self - correcting" through a new round of bidding , changes in ordering documentation , and increased experience of the referral agents ( such as hospital discharge planners ) in directing beneficiaries to selected suppliers .

medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) mma was signed into law on december 8 , 2003 .

mma required the secretary to establish a competitive acquisition program ( otherwise known as the competitive bidding program ) for durable medical equipment .

the secretary was permitted to first phase in items and services with the highest cost and highest volume , or those items and services that the secretary determined had the largest savings potential .

the secretary could exempt items and services for which competitive bidding was not likely to result in significant savings .

when establishing competitive bidding areas , the mma gave the secretary the authority to exempt rural areas and areas with low population density within urban areas that are not competitive , unless a significant national market existed through mail order for a particular item or service .

mma established a phase - in schedule as follows: 10 of the largest metropolitan statistical areas ( msas ) in 2007 , 80 of the largest msas in 2009 , and remaining msas after 2009 .

the secretary was given the authority to establish a process where a physician could prescribe a particular brand or mode of delivery of an item or service within a particular healthcare procedure code ( hcpcs ) if the physician determined that doing so would avoid an adverse medical outcome for the beneficiary , although this could not affect the amount of payment otherwise applicable .

the mma established certain requirements for the program .

specifically , contracts could only be awarded in an area if the following conditions were met: entities met quality standards established by the secretary ; entities met financial standards specified by the secretary , taking into account the needs of small providers ; total amounts paid under the contracts were expected to be less than otherwise paid ; and , beneficiary access to multiple suppliers was maintained .

contracts are subject to terms and conditions specified by the secretary and must be re - competed at least every three years .

the secretary is required to award contracts to multiple entities submitting bids in each area for an item or service but has the authority to limit the number of contractors in a competitive bidding area to the number needed to meet projected demand for covered items and services .

payment for competitively priced items and services must be based on bids submitted and accepted .

the secretary determines a single payment amount for each item or service in each competitive bidding area .

medicare payment is 80% of the payment amount , with beneficiaries paying the remaining 20% ( after meeting the part b deductible ) .

payment for any item or services can be made only on an "assignment - related" basis , which means that the supplier bills medicare and accepts medicare payment as payment in full .

the use of advanced beneficiary notice is not precluded by this program .

in establishing the categories and products subject to bidding , the secretary can consider the clinical efficiency and the value of specific items within health care procedure codes , including whether some items have a greater therapeutic advantage to individuals .

small suppliers must have an opportunity to be considered for participation in the program .

the secretary cannot pay for items furnished by a contractor unless the contractor has submitted a bid to supply the item and the contract has been awarded .

certain provisions of the federal acquisition regulation that are necessary for the efficient implementation of this program can be waived , except confidentiality of information .

a program advisory and oversight committee with members appointed by the secretary provided advice to the secretary regarding the implementation of the program , data collection requirements , proposals for efficient interaction among manufacturers and distributors of the items and services , providers , and beneficiaries , the establishment of quality standards , and other functions specified by the secretary .

mma sunset the committee on december 31 , 2009 .

in a final rule for mma published april 10 , 2007 , the secretary described the methodology cms uses in implementing the competitive bidding program .

it includes descriptions of how cms determines ( 1 ) competitive bidding areas , ( 2 ) items to be included in the program , ( 3 ) the winning suppliers , and ( 4 ) the payments for items .

it includes considerations for small businesses .

a summary of the final rule can be found in the body of this report .

implementation concerns congress held several hearings during which equipment suppliers and their representatives expressed concern about the competitive bidding program and how it was being implemented .

concerns about implementation focused on the following: supplier and beneficiary education , the system for submitting bids , rejection of bids based on missing information , and basis of calculations for winning bids and payment amounts .

one concern was that there was not sufficient education for suppliers , and that some suppliers who wanted to bid may not have been able to navigate the bidding process or may have had to revise their bids .

a subsequent analysis by gao confirmed that "cms had difficulty providing bidders with clear , timely information. .

gao also found that cms had not notified all suppliers of its post - bidding review process , discussed in more detail below .

suppliers also argued that they should have been the ones to help educate the beneficiary community but were not asked to do so .

cms disagreed with this position and indicated that they had had "extensive communication" with beneficiaries , partner groups ( the local area agencies on aging , the state health insurance assistance programs [ships] ) , beneficiary advocacy groups and other local organizations , providers ( doctors , social workers , discharge planners and others ) , and dmepos suppliers .

cms indicated that supplier education started prior to the publication of the final rule and began formally on april 2 , 2007 .

another concern was that the system for submitting bids was "primitive , cumbersome and fraught with problems resulting in excessive data input time and loss of submitted data .

frequently the system was non - operational and inaccessible. .

cms acknowledged difficulties with the online bidding system and indicated that the bidding window was extended to allow suppliers time to submit bids .

suppliers expressed concern that some bids may have been rejected due to misplaced or overlooked documentation or rejected based on "financial stability" reasons without clarification about what that meant .

cms indicated that they reexamined bids that the implementation contractor had disqualified due to missing documentation to confirm that the packages were incomplete .

cms confirmed that it did not disclose exactly how the financial information was used to judge or score each bidder .

a subsequent gao analysis found that the cms post - bid review process had not been effectively communicated to suppliers or consistently applied to bids .

a post - bid review was conducted only on bids of suppliers who had contacted cms with questions about their disqualification .

as a result of the post - bid review , cms found that 58 bids from 10 suppliers had been incorrectly disqualified ( out of 1,935 bids from 357 suppliers reviewed ) ; of these , 7 suppliers ( submitting 27 bids ) were ultimately offered contracts .

medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa , p.l .

110-275 ) the medicare competitive bidding program for dmepos started on july 1 , 2008 , in 10 designated competitive bidding areas , but when mippa became law on july 15 , 2008 , it stopped the program , terminated all contracts with suppliers , and required the secretary to rebid the first round of the program in 2009 .

mippa also includes provisions designed to address some of the implementation issues identified in congressional hearings .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) indicated that these provisions "will not have substantial budgetary effects" because the program delay and other changes were paid for through a decrease in payments for medicare dmepos .

the following is a detailed description of the provisions in mippa that amended the competitive bidding program for dmepos .

termination of contracts and delay in implementation mippa terminated all contracts awarded for round 1 of the competitive bidding program and prohibited payments based on those contracts .

to the extent that there were damages as a result of the terminations , mippa directed damages to be paid from the federal supplementary medical insurance ( part b ) trust fund .

the secretary was required to conduct a new round 1 competition in 2009 .

previously identified competitive bidding areas for round 1 ( except puerto rico ) and items and services ( except negative pressure wound therapy and complex rehabilitative power wheelchairs ) were to be included in the competition .

mippa precluded suppliers from seeking administrative or judicial review of the contract termination for round 1 .

mippa delayed round 2 until 2011 .

it also clarified that round 2 add ed 70 new competitive bidding areas to the program ( resulting in 80 total areas ) , as identified by the secretary as of june 1 , 2008 .

the provision gave the secretary the authority to subdivide an area with a population of at least 8 million for the purposes of the program .

mippa delayed when the secretary can expand the program beyond the original 80 locations by two years ( after 2011 instead of after 2009 ) except for national mail order items , which can be implemented after 2010 .

prior to 2015 , in expanding the program after the first two rounds , the secretary is prohibited from expanding competitive bidding ( other than national mail order ) into the following locations ( 1 ) rural areas , ( 2 ) msas of fewer than 250,000 if not previously selected , and ( 3 ) areas with low population density within msas that are otherwise selected for competitive bidding .

mippa delayed the secretary's authority to use information from the program to adjust the payments for items and services in areas that are not competitive bidding areas by two years ( from january 1 , 2009 , to january 1 , 2011 ) .

prior to exercising this authority , the secretary must promulgate regulations describing the method to be used in adjusting rates .

fee schedule reductions for round 1 items and services the two - year delay in the program was paid for through reductions in the fee - schedule update .

specifically , mippa reduced the 2009 fee schedule update by 9.5% for all items , services , and related accessories identified prior to july 1 , 2008 , as part of round 1 of the competitive bidding program .

this reduction applied to all areas , regardless of whether the area was a competitive bidding area or not .

for any item or service that was not identified as part of round 1 , the 2009 fee schedule update was the increase in the consumer price index ( cpi - u ) ( the same as current law ) .

for 2010 through 2013 , the fee schedule update was the increase in the cpi - u .

mippa had required a 2% increase in the fee schedule update for competitively bid items in 2014 ( in addition to cpi - u ) , but the increase above the cpi - u was eliminated in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

new assessments and opportunities for feedback on implementation the original authorizing legislation required several reports to evaluate program implementation .

mippa required an additional evaluation , expanded the scope of one evaluation , and created an ombudsman's office for competitive acquisition , as described below .

the oig must assess the process cms used to conduct the competitive bidding program , and the pricing determinations used as the basis for the pivotal bid amounts and single payment amounts .

this will be done to verify calculations for rounds 1 and 2 , as well as subsequent rounds .

mippa delayed a required gao evaluation of the competitive bidding program from january 1 , 2009 , to no later than one year after the first date that payments are made under the program .

mippa expanded the scope of the study to include an analysis of ( 1 ) beneficiary access to items and services including the impact on access of awarding contracts to bidders that did not have a physical presence in the area where they received the contract or had not previously provided the product category they were contracted to provide ; ( 2 ) beneficiary satisfaction with the program and cost savings ; ( 3 ) costs to the suppliers of participating in the program and recommendations on ways to reduce those costs without compromising quality standards or savings to medicare ; ( 4 ) the impact of the program on small businesses ; ( 5 ) the impact on use of different items and services within the same healthcare common procedure coding system ( hcpcs ) code ; ( 6 ) the costs to cms , including payments to contractors , for administering the program compared to administration of the fee schedule , in comparison with relative savings of the program ; ( 7 ) the impact on access , medicare spending , and beneficiary spending of any difference in treatment for diabetic testing supplies depending on how the supplies are furnished ; and , ( 8 ) other topics as the gao determines appropriate .

notification of certain missing documents the secretary must notify bidders if certain documents ( covered documents ) are missing from their bids as of a specified date ( the covered document review date ) .

if the supplier receives a notice from the secretary of missing covered documents and submits those documents to the secretary , the secretary is prohibited from rejecting the bid on the basis that the documents had been missing or had not been submitted on a timely basis .

however , it does not prohibit the secretary from rejecting the bid on another basis .

the notification process only applies to the timely submission of documents and does not apply to determinations of the accuracy , completeness , or whether they meet other applicable requirements .

accreditation mippa required all dmepos suppliers ( directly or as a subcontractor ) to submit evidence of accreditation by october 1 , 2009 .

mippa identified a group of health care professionals for which the accreditation requirement did not apply unless the secretary were to determine that the standards were designed specifically to be applied to those professionals .

in addition , the secretary had the authority to exempt other professionals from the accreditation requirement if the secretary determined that licensing , accreditation , or other mandatory quality requirements applied to those professionals .

mippa identified some of the professionals that might be subject to the provision , including physicians ; physical or occupational therapists ; physicians assistants ; nurse practitioners ; clinical nurse specialists ; orthotists ; and prosthetists .

mippa specified that the added authority should not be construed as preventing timely implementation of the first round of the program .

mippa required contracted suppliers to inform the secretary of each subcontractor and whether the subcontractor met accreditation requirements .

additional studies mippa required the secretary to evaluate the hcpcs code for negative pressure wound therapy to ensure accurate reporting and billing for items and services under that code .

starting in the second round of the program , suppliers must demonstrate that their bid covers over 50% ( or more as specified by the secretary ) of all types of diabetic test strips in use ( in the aggregate and taking into account the volume of the different types of test strips ) .

the volume of the types of test strips in use could be determined with data ( such as marketing data ) as recognized by the secretary .

the inspector general was required to conduct a study to determine the types of diabetic test strips by volume that could be used to make this determination , and submit the report prior to the start of round 2 .

items exempt from competition mippa exempted off - the - shelf orthotics and other durable medical equipment and medical supplies from competitive bidding when furnished by physicians or other practitioners ( as defined by the secretary ) to their own patients as part of their professional service , or by a hospital to its own patients during an admission or on the date of discharge .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) the patient protection and affordable care act became law on march 23 , 2010 .

section 6410 of aca expands the number of areas that begin competitive bidding in round 2 of the program from 70 to 91 msas .

the 21 additional msas will be the next largest msas by population .

the secretary is also required to extend the program , or apply competitively bid rates , to remaining areas by 2016 .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that this provision would save medicare $0.3 billion for fy2010-fy2014 and $1.4 billion for fy2010-fy2019 .

section 3109 of aca extended to january 1 , 2011 , the accreditation deadline for all pharmacies not participating in competitive bidding .

effective january 1 , 2011 , aca also exempts certain pharmacies from the accreditation requirements , although all pharmacies will still be required to meet accreditation requirements to qualify for competitive bidding .

the cbo score is $0.0 billion for fy2010-fy2014 and $0.0 billion for fy2010-fy2019 .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra , p.l .

112-240 ) the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 requires the payments for diabetic supplies determined under the mail order competitive bidding program to also be applied to non - mail order diabetic testing supplies .

in addition , within 30 days of enactment , but before payments based on competitive bidding are applied , the secretary was required to recalculate and apply new payment rates to non - mail order diabetic supplies taking into account a 9.5% reduction in the payment update for 2009 that did not apply to those items in 2009 .

the cbo score is a $0.6 billion savings for both fy2013-fy2017 and fy2013-fy2022 .

