water and energy are critical resources that are reciprocally linked .

energy is required for the pumping , conveyance , treatment and conditioning , and distribution of water and for collection , treatment , and discharge of wastewater .

likewise , as described in this report , meeting energy sector needs depends upon the local availability of water , often in large quantities , for mineral fuel production , hydropower , and thermoelectric power plant cooling .

this interdependence is often described as the water - energy nexus .

this report addresses how the u.s. energy sector uses and relies on water ; it provides summary descriptions divided into four topics: ( 1 ) water for energy primer , ( 2 ) fuel production , ( 3 )  electric grid and generation , ( 4 ) policy response options and considerations .

crs report r43200 , energy - water nexus: the water sector's energy use , addresses the related topic of energy needs of the water sector .

water availability issues , such as regional drought , low flow , or intense competition for water , can curtail hydroelectric and thermoelectric generation .

fuel and power plant choices and capital investments made in the near term are likely to establish the trajectories for electric generation's long - term water use and vulnerability .

policy makers at the federal , state , and local levels are deciding whether to respond to the growing water needs of the energy sector , and if so , which policy levers to use .

in the united states , private entities make many of the energy sector's water decisions .

often federal entities lack authority over water use , and states have most of the water allocation authority .

instead of direct influence on water use , the public sector influences private water decisions through other routes ( eg , tax incentives , loan guarantees , permits , regulations , planning , and education ) .

if action to manage energy - sector water issues is deemed appropriate , a range of options are available , as shown in table 1 : minimize water use , facilitate access to water , or improve decisions and data .

energy choices represent complex tradeoffs ; water use and wastewater byproducts are two of many factors to consider .

for many policy makers , concerns other than water — low - cost reliable energy , energy independence and security , climate change mitigation , public health , and job creation — are more significant drivers of their positions on energy policies .

analyses quickly get complex when attempting to comprehensively evaluate energy - water tradeoffs .

some energy alternatives , such as solar photovoltaics and wind turbines , do not pose significant energy - water tradeoffs , but may pose other challenges , such as intermittent production or reduced dispatchability , which is the ability and ease with which output from an electric generation facility can be altered .

other energy tradeoffs include transport and storage .

some fuels are easier to store and use existing transport networks and multiple transport modes , while others may require new or expanded infrastructure investments ( eg , pipelines ) .

significantly , low - carbon energy is not necessarily low in water or environmental impact ( eg , new hydropower reservoirs , freshwater - cooled utility - scale solar ) , and specific carbon mitigation policies and actions may increase or decrease water consumption .

because of these complexities and the difficulty in comparing different types of impacts , analyses supporting decision - making are often incomplete .

it is within this complex and confusing context that policy decisions that influence future energy and related water policies are being made .

