hydraulic fracturing is a technique used to recover oil and natural gas from underground low permeability rock formations .

hydraulic fracturing involves pumping fluids ( primarily water and a small portion of chemicals , along with sand or other proppant ) under high pressure into rock formations to crack them and allow the resources inside to flow to a production well .

the technique has been the subject of controversy because of the potential effects that hydraulic fracturing and related oil and gas production activities may have on the environment and health .

this report focuses on selected legal issues related to the use of hydraulic fracturing .

it examines some of the requirements for hydraulic fracturing contained in major federal environmental laws .

it also provides an overview of issues involving state preemption of local zoning authority , as well as state tort law .

from the date of the sdwa's enactment in 1974 until the late 1990s , hydraulic fracturing was not regulated under the act by either epa or any of the states who had chosen to take on responsibility for administration of the sdwa .

however , in the last 15 years a number of developments called into question the extent to which hydraulic fracturing would be considered an "underground injection" to be regulated under the sdwa .

one trigger for this debate was a challenge to the alabama uic program brought by the legal environmental assistance foundation ( leaf ) .

the decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit in leaf i highlighted a debate over whether the sdwa , as it read at the time , required epa to regulate hydraulic fracturing .

although the eleventh circuit's decision applied only to hydraulic fracturing for coalbed methane production in alabama , the court's reasoning — in particular , its finding that hydraulic fracturing "unquestionably falls within the plain meaning of the definition [of underground injection]" — raised the issue of whether epa could be required to regulate hydraulic fracturing generally under the sdwa .

before this question was resolved through agency action or litigation , congress passed an amendment to the sdwa as a part of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ; p.l .

109-58 ) that addressed this issue .

section 322 of epact 2005 amended the definition of "underground injection" in the sdwa as follows: the term "underground injection" — ( a ) means the subsurface emplacement of fluids by well injection ; and ( b ) excludes — ( i ) the underground injection of natural gas for purposes of storage ; and ( ii ) the underground injection of fluids or propping agents ( other than diesel fuels ) pursuant to hydraulic fracturing operations related to oil , gas , or geothermal production activities .

this amendment clarified that the uic requirements found in the sdwa do not apply to hydraulic fracturing , although the exclusion does not extend to the use of diesel fuel in hydraulic fracturing operations .

this amended language is the definition of "underground injection" found in the sdwa as of the date of this report .

hydraulic fracturing is a water - intensive practice .

after a well is hydraulically fractured , a substantial portion of the injected fluid returns to the surface as "flowback. .

this flowback typically contains proppant ( sand ) and chemical residues from the frac fluid , as well as salts , metals , and potentially significant amounts of naturally occurring radioactive materials ( norm ) that may be present in the water produced from the geologic formations .

additionally , oil and gas wells generally continue to produce formation water throughout their production lives .

flowback water and production brine that are not reused will require proper disposal , either through underground injection or treatment and surface discharge .

often this flowback is injected into wells for disposal .

however , if underground injection is not feasible or not employed for other reasons , drilling companies may opt to transfer the wastewater to publicly owned treatment works ( potw ) that discharge into navigable waters in compliance with the clean water act ( cwa ) .

section 301 ( a ) of the cwa prohibits "the discharge of any pollutant" into "navigable waters" except as permitted pursuant to other sections of the cwa .

under section 304 ( m ) , epa sets national standards for discharges of industrial wastewater based on best available technologies that are economically achievable .

states incorporate these limits into discharge permits .

current effluent limitation guidelines ( elgs ) and standards for the oil and gas extraction point source category prohibit direct discharges of onshore oil and gas wastewater into surface waters .

however , current elgs do not include standards for "indirect discharges" of these wastewaters to potws .

on june 28 , 2016 , epa promulgated final regulations establishing a "zero discharge" pretreatment standard to prohibit discharges to potws of wastewater resulting from unconventional oil and gas production .

in the proposed regulations , epa had noted that , while states are not approving requests for such discharges to potws , the proposed zero discharge standard would "provide regulatory certainty and would eliminate the burden on potws to analyze such requests. .

as this report has explained , the definition of "underground injection" found in the sdwa prevents regulation of hydraulic fracturing pursuant to that statute unless the fracking fluid contains diesel fuel .

however , other federal environmental statutes do not contain similar reservations of jurisdiction , and epa has sought to regulate certain environmental impacts of hydraulic fracturing pursuant to these statutes .

one such avenue is regulation of emissions associated with the hydraulic fracturing process via the clean air act ( caa ) .

on august 16 , 2012 , epa issued new regulations covering , among other things , emissions of volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) from onshore natural gas hydraulic fracturing operations .

the impetus for the new regulations was a legal challenge filed by environmental organizations .

in 2009 , wildearth guardians and the san juan citizens alliance filed a petition in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia alleging that epa had failed to review and revise its new source performance standards ( nspss ) for oil and gas operations every eight years as required by section 111 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of the caa .

specifically , the environmental groups alleged that epa had failed to update existing standards and adopt new standards for emissions from oil and natural gas production as well as natural gas transmission and storage .

the challenge and subsequent settlement triggered a new rulemaking by epa in which it not only updated existing standards for certain natural gas processing plants , but also established new standards for emissions from certain types of natural gas operations not covered at all in the existing standards .

among the new standards were requirements applicable to new onshore natural gas hydraulic fracturing operations as well as refracturing operations .

the new regulations direct the industry to adopt a process known as "green completions" or "reduced emissions completions" for hydraulically fractured gas wells .

 ( hydraulically fractured oil wells are exempt from the 2012 nsps requirements. ) .

in a "green completion," the natural gas that would otherwise be vented or flared during the completion process is captured and cleaned for reuse in another process that does not involve direct release into the atmosphere .

in order to allow the industry time to make the needed changes , the rulemaking established two phases for compliance .

during phase 1 , which lasted from the effective date of the rulemaking ( october 15 , 2012 ) until january 1 , 2015 , industry had to reduce voc emissions at new hydraulic fracturing sites either by using a "completion combustion device" in a technique commonly referred to as "flaring," or by employing the green completion process .

as of january 1 , 2015 , all hydraulically fractured wells had to employ a green completion .

these requirements apply both to new hydraulic fracturing operations and to refracturing of existing wells .

the regulations also establish reporting requirements for owners and operators of hydraulically fractured and refractured wells prior to the start of well completion .

there are some exceptions in these regulations for certain types of wells .

exploratory or "wildcat" drilling operations and "delineation wells" used to determine the borders of a reservoir , and low - pressure wells do not need to employ green completions .

the 2012 nsps requires operators of these types of wells to use completion combustion devices unless hazardous or prohibited under state or local law or regulations .

on june 3 , 2016 , epa promulgated several caa rules affecting the oil and natural gas production industry , including amendments to the nsps standards for the oil and natural gas source category to establish new emissions standards for methane ( a short - lived greenhouse gas ) and vocs .

briefly , the rules do the following: 1 .

build on the 2012 nsps "to set first - ever controls for methane emissions and extend controls for voc emissions beyond the existing requirements to include new or modified hydraulically fractured oil wells , pneumatic pumps , compressor stations , and leak detection and repair at well sites , gathering and boosting stations , and processing plants. .

the final rule also includes the issuance for public comment of an information collection request ( icr ) that would require companies to provide extensive information that is instrumental for developing comprehensive regulations to reduce methane emissions from existing oil and gas sources .

epa notes the new nsps does not add requirements for operations covered by the 2012 rule but it expands coverage to include other sources .

2 .

revise permitting requirements applicable to stationary sources in the oil and natural gas sector .

the rule establishes in regulation a specific meaning of the term "adjacent" for this sector , which was previously defined in guidance documents .

3 .

limit emissions from oil and gas production in indian country .

further , epa has issued rules or guidelines to strengthen the greenhouse gas reporting program to require reporting in all segments of the industry ( promulgated on october 22 , 2015 ) and extend voc reduction requirements to existing oil and gas sources in ozone nonattainment areas and states in the ozone transport region ( released on august 18 , 2015 ) .

federal and state authorities to regulate wastes are established under the solid waste disposal act of 1965 , as amended by the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 ( rcra ) .

subtitle c of rcra established a framework for epa , or authorized states , to regulate waste identified as "hazardous. .

specifically , epa was required to develop criteria necessary to identify hazardous wastes and to promulgate regulations applicable to hazardous waste generators and transporters and to facilities that treat , store , and dispose of such wastes .

epa has primary authority to implement the federal hazardous waste program , but was required to develop procedures for states to become authorized to implement that program .

most states have chosen to do so .

under rcra subtitle d , state and local governments were established as the primary planning , regulating , and implementing entities responsible for managing non - hazardous solid waste , including waste explicitly exempt from regulation under subtitle c. epa's primary role under subtitle d is to provide state and local agencies with information , guidance , and policy .

the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) , often referred to as superfund , provides broad authority for the federal government to respond to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances into the environment , in order to protect public health or welfare , or the environment .

federal resources to carry out response actions under cercla are subject to the availability of appropriations .

to minimize the burden of the costs on the taxpayer , cercla established a liability scheme to hold persons responsible for a release or threatened release liable for response costs ( i.e. , cleanup costs ) , natural resource damages , and the costs of federal public health studies that may be carried out at a site to assess potential hazards .

the categories of "potentially responsible parties" who may be held liable under cercla include past and current owners and operators of facilities from which there is a release or threatened release of a hazardous substance , persons who arranged for disposal or treatment of hazardous substances ( often referred to as generators of wastes ) , and persons who transported hazardous substances and selected the site for disposal or treatment .

the president's response and enforcement authorities under cercla are delegated by executive order to the epa and certain other federal departments and agencies to fulfill various functions under the statute .

although the sites at which hydraulic fracturing is conducted may not fit the typical mold of superfund sites , it is possible that hydraulic fracturing operations could result in the release of hazardous substances into the environment at or under the surface in a manner that may endanger public health or the environment .

if a release were to occur as a result of hydraulic fracturing , the facility owner and operator and other potentially responsible parties could face liability under cercla .

however , certain exclusions or exemptions from the statute potentially could limit liability in such instances , including the petroleum and natural gas exclusion and the exemption from liability for federally permitted releases , discussed below .

the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requires federal agencies to consider the potential environmental consequences of proposed federal actions and to involve the public in the federal decisionmaking process , but does not compel agencies to choose a particular course of action .

if the action is anticipated to affect significantly the quality of the human environment , the agency must document its consideration of those effects in an environmental impact statement ( eis ) .

if the degree of impacts is uncertain , an agency may prepare an environmental assessment ( ea ) to determine whether a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) could be made or whether an eis is necessary .

there are certain categories of action that do not individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the human environment and , thus , do not require the preparation of an eis or ea .

in contrast to the other environmental statutes discussed in this report , nepa is a procedural statute .

it requires that agencies assess the environmental consequences of an action .

if the adverse environmental effects of the proposed action are adequately identified and evaluated , an agency is not constrained by nepa from deciding that other benefits outweigh the environmental costs and moving forward with the action .

because the requirements of nepa apply only to federal actions , nepa applies to hydraulic fracturing activities only when such activities take place on federal lands or when there is otherwise a sufficient federal nexus to hydraulic fracturing .

the following sections discuss two case studies involving a potential federal role in the production of oil or natural gas resources that may potentially require the preparation of a nepa document .

the composition of the fluid used in hydraulic fracturing varies with the nature of the formation but typically contains mostly water ; a proppant to keep the fractures open , such as sand ; and a small percentage of chemicals .

a primary function of these chemicals is to assist the movement of the proppant into the fractures made in the formation .

although some of these chemicals may be harmless , others may be hazardous to health and the environment .

a report by the minority staff of the house committee on energy and commerce found that between 2005 and 2009 , the 14 leading oil and gas service companies used 780 million gallons of chemical products in fracturing fluids .

calls for public disclosure of information about chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing have increased as homeowners and others express concerns about the potential presence of unknown chemicals in tainted well water near oil and gas operations .

proponents of chemical disclosure laws maintain that public disclosure of the chemicals used in each well would allow for health professionals to better respond to medical emergencies involving human exposure to the chemicals ; assist researchers in conducting health studies on shale gas production ; and permit regulators and others to perform baseline testing of water sources to track potential groundwater contamination if it occurs .

however , some manufacturers of the additives , as well as others in the industry , remain reluctant to disclose information about the chemicals they use .

these parties have expressed concerns that disclosure would reveal proprietary chemical formulas to their competitors , destroying the parties' valuable trade secrets .

in 2011 , president barack obama directed secretary of energy steven chu to convene a panel to study the effects of shale gas production on health and the environment .

the shale gas production subcommittee of the secretary of energy advisory board made several recommendations intended to address these effects .

one recommendation calls for the public disclosure , on a "well - by - well basis," of all of the chemicals added to fracturing fluids , with some protection for trade secrets .

no federal law currently requires parties to submit detailed information about the chemical composition of a hydraulic fracturing fluid .

under the emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) , owners or operators of facilities where certain hazardous hydraulic fracturing chemicals are present above certain thresholds may have to comply with emergency planning requirements ; emergency release notification obligations ; and hazardous chemical storage reporting requirements .

in addition , environmental advocacy groups have petitioned epa to collect and share health and environmental effect information for hydraulic fracturing chemicals under the toxic substances control act and to require the oil and gas extraction industry to report the toxic chemicals it releases under epcra section 313 , which established epa's toxics release inventory .

several states have adopted chemical disclosure requirements in the form of laws , regulations , or administrative interpretations .

the interstate oil and gas compact commission ( iogcc ) , an organization with members that include state regulators and industry representatives , has argued that current regulation of hydraulic fracturing by the states is sufficient .

a main goal of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) is to protect human health and the environment from unreasonable risks associated with toxic chemicals in u.s. commerce .

under the act , epa may require manufacturers and processors of chemicals to develop , maintain , and report data on the chemicals' effects on health and the environment .

epa may also place certain restrictions on chemicals when the agency has determined that they warrant regulation based on unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment or other criteria delineated in the statute .

 , on august 4 , 2011 , earthjustice and more than 100 other environmental advocacy organizations petitioned epa to promulgate rules under section 4 and section 8 of tsca for chemical substances and mixtures used in oil and gas exploration or production ( e&p chemicals ) .

section 4 of tsca authorizes epa to issue rules requiring manufacturers or processors of chemicals to test the chemicals in order to obtain data on their health and environmental effects .

section 8 of tsca generally authorizes epa to require manufacturers , processors , and distributors of chemicals in u.s. commerce to maintain and report certain data on the health and environmental effects of the chemicals .

the petition stated that epa and the public "lack adequate information about the health and environmental effects of e&p chemicals , which are used in increasing amounts to facilitate the rapid expansion of oil and gas development throughout the united states. .

earthjustice and the other petitioners further argued that e&p chemicals may present an unreasonable risk of injury to health and the environment for several reasons .

petitioners maintained that , for example , leaks and spills of the chemicals may cause harm to people and animals , as well as the quality of air , water , and soil .

the petitioners also argued that the large volume of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing of wells in the united states could result in substantial human exposure to the chemicals , as well as a substantial release of the chemicals into the environment .

in the petitioners' view , testing was needed to obtain sufficient data on the chemicals' effects because existing federal and state disclosure requirements were inadequate .

epa's response to the petitioners was mixed .

in a november 2 , 2011 , letter , epa denied the petitioners' request for promulgation of a tsca section 4 test rule .

in a short paragraph , the agency wrote that the petitioners had failed to present sufficient facts for epa to find that such a rule was necessary .

however , in a november 23 , 2011 , letter , epa partially granted petitioners' section 8 ( a ) and section 8 ( d ) requests .

the agency wrote that it would initiate a rulemaking to gather available data on the chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing .

however , the agency declined to issue rules for other chemicals in the oil and gas exploration and production sector .

epa intends to discuss potential section 8 reporting requirements with the states , industry , and public interest groups to "minimize reporting burdens and costs , take advantage of existing information , and avoid duplication of efforts. .

on july 11 , 2013 , epa published an explanation of the reasons for the agency's response to the petition .

in may 2014 , epa issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking "to develop an approach to obtain information on chemical substances and mixtures used in hydraulic fracturing. .

epa indicated that it had not yet determined whether to mandate disclosure of the chemical information under tsca , provide incentives for voluntary reporting , or use an approach combining aspects of both mandatory and voluntary disclosure .

the occupational safety and health administration has promulgated a set of regulations under the occupational safety and health act ( oshact ) referred to as the hazard communication standard ( hcs ) .

a primary purpose of the hcs is to ensure that employees who may be exposed to hazardous chemicals in the workplace are aware of the chemicals' potential dangers .

manufacturers and importers must obtain or develop material safety data sheets ( msds ) for hydraulic fracturing chemicals that are hazardous according to osha standards .

msds must list basic information about the identity of the chemicals ; the chemicals' potential hazards ; and safety precautions for their handling and use , among other things .

the hcs requires operators to maintain msds for hazardous chemicals at the job site .

msds may provide limited information about hydraulic fracturing chemicals .

currently , the most specific details about chemical identities that must be listed on the data sheets are the common or chemical names of substances that are considered to be hazardous under osha regulations .

chemical abstract service registry numbers ( casrns ) for substances or mixtures do not have to be listed .

in addition , parties that prepare msds may withhold chemical identity information from the data sheets at their discretion in some circumstances .

however , the regulations do not prevent parties from voluntarily submitting data sheets with more detailed information .

the emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) establishes programs to provide members of the public with information about hazardous chemicals located in their communities .

it also requires that representatives from different levels of government coordinate their efforts with communities and industry to prepare response plans for emergencies involving the accidental release of hazardous chemicals .

the act seeks to induce each state to establish a state emergency response commission ( serc ) .

each serc appoints and coordinates the activities of a local emergency planning committee ( lepc ) for each emergency planning district created within a state or across multiple states .

a lepc is responsible for developing an emergency response plan for an accidental chemical release with input from stakeholders and submitting it to the serc .

generally , a facility is subject to epcra's emergency planning requirements if there is a substance on epa's list of extremely hazardous substances ( ehs ) present at the facility in excess of its epa - determined threshold planning quantity .

whether a well site where hydraulic fracturing occurs would be subject to epcra's planning requirements would depend on the identities and quantities of the chemicals present , among other things .

as the use of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling to initiate production from oil and gas wells has increased , owners of property located near oil and gas operations have expressed concerns about the potential effects of these activities on the environment .

additionally , some worry that the proximity of oil and gas operations to their homes will cause a decline in the values of their properties .

in response to these concerns , many local governments have increased their regulation of hydraulic fracturing and related oil and gas production activities .

some requirements imposed by local governments appear to be intended to regulate the land use aspects of oil and gas operations .

however , other requirements have tended toward regulation of the technical aspects of oil and gas operations .

in addition to raising questions about the relationship between federal and state authority , the increase in local regulation of hydraulic fracturing has led to questions about the relationship between state and local authority .

regulation of oil and gas operations is an area of mixed state and local concern .

it implicates the state's interest in the safe and efficient development of its natural resources and the local government's interest in regulating land uses to protect the public from harm to property values , health , and the environment .

in matters of mixed state and local concern , states retain authority over local governments , even when municipalities enjoy some degree of independence from the state as a result of "home rule" provisions .

however , the pennsylvania supreme court held that the state could not preempt municipal zoning restrictions when it would violate guarantees contained in the state's constitution .

the question of state preemption of municipal land use and zoning powers arises when both state and local governments seek to regulate oil and gas production .

although the doctrine of preemption may differ among the states , most jurisdictions recognize three types of preemption: ( 1 ) express preemption , in which the express language of the state statute or regulation shows that the state intended to preempt all local control over regulation of a particular subject matter ; ( 2 ) occupation of the field , in which the state's regulatory scheme is so comprehensive that it leaves the locality no room in which to regulate ; and ( 3 ) conflict preemption , in which a local law is preempted to the extent that it conflicts with the application of the state law .

owners of property located near oil and gas operations have brought common law tort claims against companies that operate oil and gas wells and related infrastructure .

plaintiffs have claimed that damages have occurred as a result of hydraulic fracturing and related oil and gas operations , including contamination of land from drilling waste placed into pits on the plaintiffs' properties ; noise and air pollution from natural gas compressor stations ; contamination of water supplies ; damage to a house allegedly caused by vibrations from nearby drilling activity ; and personal injury .

common law causes of action brought under state tort law have included claims for nuisance , trespass , negligence , and strict liability , among others .

plaintiffs have sought monetary and , in some cases , injunctive relief , including remediation of contaminated property and medical monitoring .

often in these cases , some of the damages are alleged to have occurred underground or in the air above a plaintiff's property .

as a result , plaintiffs may have difficulty demonstrating that the activities of the defendants caused them harm .

in some cases , defendants have requested that courts enter modified case management orders ( mcmos ) requiring plaintiffs to specifically make a prima facie showing of exposure , injury , and causation prior to the full discovery process by submitting expert opinions regarding the nature of the substances to which the plaintiffs were allegedly exposed ; allowing access to the plaintiffs' medical records ; and providing other supporting data .

in colorado , defendants initially succeeded in having one case dismissed after entry of such an order because the plaintiffs failed to "produce sufficient information and expert opinions upon which to establish the prima facie elements of their claims. .

however , a colorado appeals court later reversed the trial court's entry of the order .

in some cases courts have declined to enter mcmos when there are a limited number of parties to the litigation and the claims are relatively simple .

one question that arises when a court considers whether defendants are subject to strict liability for their operations is whether hydraulic fracturing and related oil and gas production activities are abnormally dangerous as a matter of law .

section 519 of the restatement ( second ) of torts states that "[o]ne who carries on an abnormally dangerous activity is subject to liability for harm ... of another resulting from the activity , although he has exercised the utmost care to prevent the harm. .

in determining whether an activity is abnormally dangerous , courts generally consider six factors: ( a ) existence of a high degree of risk of some harm to the person , land or chattels of others ; ( b ) likelihood that the harm that results from it will be great ; ( c ) inability to eliminate the risk by the exercise of reasonable care ; ( d ) extent to which the activity is not a matter of common usage ; ( e ) inappropriateness of the activity to the place where it is carried on ; and ( f ) extent to which its value to the community is outweighed by its dangerous attributes .

it appears that few courts have considered the issue .

in an april 2014 summary judgment order , a federal district court judge wrote that "based on an analysis of the six factors set forth in the restatement ( second ) of torts ... hydraulic fracturing does not legally qualify as an ultra - hazardous activity giving rise to strict tort liability. .

in another case , a court speculated that it may be difficult for plaintiffs to meet factors ( d ) , ( e ) , and ( f ) in the restatement definition at the summary judgment stage .

with respect to trespass claims , the texas supreme court considered whether the subsurface hydraulic fracturing of a natural gas well that extended into an adjacent property was a trespass "for which the value of gas drained as a result may be recovered as damages. .

the court held that such damages could not be recovered because of the rule of capture , which "gives a mineral rights owner title to the oil and gas produced from a lawful well bottomed on the property , even if the oil and gas flowed to the well from beneath another owner's tract. .

in another case , plaintiffs argued that the defendant committed a trespass when it engaged in acts that were not necessary to the extraction of minerals on the plaintiff's surface property .

plaintiffs have also argued that emissions of air pollution over their land constitute a trespass .

as discussed previously , regulation of practices associated with oil and gas exploration and production is primarily left to the states and municipalities that have overseen the practice for decades .

federal regulation of these practices is usually limited to the realm of environmental impacts .

this , however , is not the case when it comes to oil and gas exploration and production on federal lands .

the bureau of land management ( blm ) , an agency within the department of the interior , oversees leasing and permitting for oil and gas on federal lands .

in the 114 th congress , several bills propose to expand federal regulation of hydraulic fracturing activities , while others would limit federal involvement .

this section discusses some of this legislation .

the fracturing responsibility and awareness of chemicals act of 2015 ( frac act ) has been introduced in the house ( h.r .

1482 ) and the senate ( s. 785 ) .

the bills would amend the sdwa to ( 1 ) require disclosure of the chemicals used in the fracturing process , and ( 2 ) repeal the hydraulic fracturing exemption established in epact 2005 , and amend the term "underground injection" to include the injection of fluids used in hydraulic fracturing operations , thus authorizing epa to regulate this process under the sdwa .

additionally , s. 785 would authorize states to seek primary enforcement authority for hydraulic fracturing operations , regardless of whether the state had obtained primacy for other types of uic wells , including class ii wells .

the safe hydration is an american right in energy development act of 2015 ( h.r .

1515 ) also would amend the sdwa to create a new prohibition on fracking unless the party conducting the fracking operations agrees to comply with new testing and data reporting requirements .

legislation also has been introduced to require baseline and follow - up testing of potable groundwater in the vicinity of hydraulic fracturing operations .

h.r .

1515 , the safe hydration is an american right in energy development act of 2015 , would amend the sdwa to prohibit hydraulic fracturing unless the person proposing to conduct the fracturing operations agreed to testing and reporting requirements regarding underground sources of drinking water .

h.r .

1515 would require testing prior to , during , and after hydraulic fracturing operations .

testing would be required for any substance epa determines would indicate damage associated with hydraulic fracturing operations .

the bill also would require epa to post on its website all test results , searchable by zip code .

h.r .

1647 and s. 15 , the protecting states' rights to promote american energy security act , would amend the mineral leasing act to prohibit the department of the interior from enforcing any federal regulation , guidance , or permit requirement regarding hydraulic fracturing relating to oil , gas , or geothermal production activities on or under any land in any state that has regulations , guidance , or permit requirements for hydraulic fracturing .

although this language is broadly applicable to any federal regulation , guidance , and permit requirements "regarding hydraulic fracturing," the prohibition on enforcement applies only to the department of the interior , and therefore would presumably impact only hydraulic fracturing operations on lands managed by the depart ment .

the bill also would require the department of the interior to defer to state regulations , permitting , and guidance for all activities related to hydraulic fracturing relating to oil , gas , or geothermal production activities on federal land regardless of whether those rules were duplicative , more or less restrictive , or did not meet federal guidelines .

the house version of the bill also would direct the comptroller general to conduct a study "examining the economic benefits of domestic shale oil and gas production resulting from the process of hydraulic fracturing. .

other legislation has also been introduced in the 114 th congress to limit the authority of the department of the interior to regulate hydraulic fracturing on federal and indian lands .

environmental statutes enforced by epa contain several key exemptions for hydraulic fracturing and related oil and gas production activities .

for example , an amendment to the sdwa passed as a part of the energy policy act of 2005 clarified that the underground injection control requirements found in the sdwa do not apply to hydraulic fracturing , although the exclusion does not extend to the use of diesel fuel in hydraulic fracturing operations .

in addition , drilling fluids , produced waters , and other wastes associated with the exploration , development , or production of crude oil , natural gas , or geothermal energy are exempt from regulation as hazardous wastes under subtitle c of rcra .

under epcra , facilities used by the oil and gas extraction industry are generally not included in the industry codes required to report under the toxics release inventory ( tri ) .

environmental groups have filed petitions seeking regulation of hydraulic fracturing and related activities under various environmental laws enforced by epa .

in september 2010 , an environmental advocacy group filed a petition seeking to have epa regulate drilling fluids , produced waters , and other wastes associated with the exploration , development , or production of crude oil , natural gas , or geothermal energy as hazardous waste under subtitle c of rcra .

in august 2011 , environmental advocacy organizations petitioned epa to promulgate rules under section 4 and section 8 of tsca for chemical substances and mixtures used in oil and gas exploration or production .

in october 2012 , several environmental advocacy organizations asked epa to require the oil and gas extraction industry to report the toxic chemicals it releases under the tri program .

regulation of hydraulic fracturing by local governments has raised questions about state preemption of municipal land use and zoning powers .

courts in a few states have ruled that local governments may regulate where drilling occurs but not how it occurs .

in addition , owners of property located near oil and gas operations have brought common law state tort claims against operators , including claims for negligence , strict liability , nuisance , and trespass to land .

although this litigation is still in its early stages , it appears that courts have already faced questions about causation ; whether hydraulic fracturing is an abnormally dangerous activity ; and whether hydraulic fracturing may constitute a subsurface trespass to land .

a recent federal district court decision invalidated blm's adoption of safety and disclosure requirements for hydraulic fracturing on federal lands , although an appeal of that decision is pending .

