the united states has long distinguished settlement or permanent immigration from temporary immigration .

current u.s. immigration policy governing lawful permanent immigration emphasizes four major principles: ( 1 ) family reunification ; ( 2 ) immigration of persons with needed skills ; ( 3 ) refugee protection ; and ( 4 ) country - of - origin diversity .

family reunification , which has long been a key principle underlying u.s. immigration policy , is embodied in the immigration and nationality act of 1952 , as amended ( ina ) , which specifies five categories of family - based immigrants .

these include the numerically unlimited category of immediate relatives of u.s. citizens ( spouses , minor children , and parents ) and four numerically limited family preference categories .

the latter vary according to individual characteristics such as the citizenship status of the petitioning u.s. - based relative , and the age , family relationship , and marital status of the prospective immigrant .

in addition , the ina limits family preference immigration from any single country to 7% of each category's total .

family - based immigration currently makes up two - thirds of all legal permanent immigration .

each year , the number of foreign nationals petitioning for lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status exceeds the total number of immigrants that the united states can accept annually under the ina .

consequently , a visa queue has accumulated with roughly 4 million persons who qualify as family - based immigrants under the ina but who must wait for a numerically limited visa to immigrate to the united states .

interest in immigration reform and concerns over "chain migration" — a term that some use to characterize the process by which family - based immigration allows foreign nationals who obtain lpr status and citizenship to then sponsor other relatives under the family - based immigration provisions — has increased scrutiny of family - based immigration and has revived discussion about the appropriate number of annual permanent immigrants .

this report reviews family - based immigration policy .

it outlines a brief history of u.s. family - based immigration policies , discusses current law governing family - based immigration , and summarizes recommendations made by previous congressionally mandated commissions charged with evaluating immigration policy .

it then presents data on legal immigrants entering the united states during the past decade and discusses the queue of approved immigrant petitioners waiting for an immigrant visa .

it closes by discussing selected policy issues and legislative proposals .

although u.s. immigration policy incorporated family relationships as a basis for admitting immigrants as early as the 1920s , the promotion of family reunification found in current law originated with the passage of the ina in 1952 .

while the 1952 act largely retained the national origins quota system established in the immigration act of 1924 , it also established a hierarchy of family - based preferences that continues to govern contemporary u.s. immigration policy , including prioritizing spouses and minor children over other relatives , as well as relatives of u.s. citizens over those of lprs .

the immigration and nationality act amendments of 1965 ( p.l .

89-236 ) , enacted during a period of broad social reform , eliminated the national origins quota system , which was widely viewed as discriminatory .

it gave priority to immigrants with relatives living permanently in the united states .

the law distinguished between immediate relatives of u.s. citizens , who were admitted without numerical restriction , and other relatives of u.s. citizens and immediate and other relatives of lprs , who faced numerical caps .

it also imposed a per - country limit on family - based and employment - based immigrants that limited any single country's total for these categories to 7% of the statutory total .

twenty - five years later , congress passed the immigration act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-649 ) , which increased total immigration under what some have called a "permeable cap. .

the act provided for a permanent annual flexible cap of 675,000 immigrants , and increased the annual statutory limit of family - based immigrants from 290,000 to the current limit of 480,000 .

provisions of the 1990 act are described later in this report in the section titled " current laws on family - based immigration . .

current u.s. immigration policy retains key elements of its landmark 1952 and 1965 reformulations .

given that continuity in immigration policy , earlier recommendations for revising family - based immigration policy to address certain perennial issues — in particular , the large "visa queue" of prospective family - based immigrants awaiting a numerically limited visa , and the high proportion of immigrants who enter based upon family ties — still have relevance .

key reform proposals originated from two congressionally mandated commissions established to evaluate u.s. immigration policy .

recommendations from these commissions are discussed in the section of this report titled " findings from earlier congressionally mandated commissions . .

issues that are regularly raised in debates on family - based immigration policy include the supply - demand imbalance for u.s. lawful permanent residence , the per - country ceilings , limitations on foreign nationals who wish to visit u.s. - based relatives , the impetus to violate u.s. immigration laws , aging out of certain legal status categories , the marriage timing of immigrant children , and policies toward unaccompanied alien children .

long - standing debates over the level of annual permanent immigration have regularly placed scrutiny on family - based immigration and revived debates over whether its current proportion of total lawful permanent immigration is appropriate .

the following section discusses a set of broad immigration policy questions that have been raised by two congressionally mandated commissions as well as other observers .

legislative options to address selected stand - alone policy issues surrounding family - based immigration — the supply - demand imbalance for u.s. lawful permanent residence , the per - country ceilings , limitations on foreign nationals who wish to visit u.s. - based relatives , the impetus to violate u.s. immigration laws , aging out of certain legal status categories , the marriage timing of immigrant children , and policies toward unaccompanied alien children — have been debated by scholars and policymakers as well as addressed in a range of legislative proposals .

a broader policy question , in the context of current immigration debates , may be whether and how to address overall levels of legal immigration .

options at this level can generally be characterized as expanding , contracting , or revising family - based immigration .

such options revolve around classifying family categories as numerically limited or unlimited , decreasing or increasing current numerical limits , expanding or reducing the number of family preference categories , revising priorities among the different family - based categories , and using different selection procedures and criteria for admitting lawful permanent residents .

examples of recent legislative proposals that focus on altering the level of permanent immigration include s. 744 , the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act introduced in the 113 th congress and s. 1720 , the reforming american immigration for a strong economy ( raise ) act introduced in the 115 th congress .

s. 744 , which passed the senate in the 113 th congress , would have , among other things , reclassified spouses and minor unmarried children of lprs as immediate relatives , thus exempting them from family preference numerical limits .

it would have reallocated family preference visas and eliminated the 4 th family preference category for adult siblings of u.s. citizens .

the bill would have also provided additional visas to allow pending immigrants in the immigrant visa queue to all receive lpr status within seven years .

in contrast , the raise act would reduce the number of immediate relative and family preference category immigrants within family - sponsored immigration and eliminate the immigrant visa queue by invalidating most pending immigrant petitions .

these two proposals are not the only approaches being considered to address levels of permanent immigration but they illustrate alternative perspectives on the goals of u.s. immigration policy from which these proposals arise .

