between 1998 and 2005 , the monsanto company field - tested a variety of genetically engineered ( ge ) wheat that was tolerant of glyphosate , a widely used , broad - spectrum herbicide marketed by the monsanto company under its trade name , roundup .

many crop varieties , including soybeans , cotton , alfalfa , sugar beets , and canola , have been similarly engineered to be tolerant of glyphosate .

these varieties constitute the largest acreage of ge plants globally .

in 2005 , monsanto halted its field trials of ge wheat and withdrew its application for deregulated status .

there was concern that the canadian and australian wheat boards might not approve the glyphosate - tolerant variety , leading monsanto to reevaluate the marketability of the ge wheat variety at that time .

with monsanto's withdrawal of its application to deregulate and commercialize the ge wheat , no ge wheat varieties have been approved by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , the principal regulator of ge plants released into the environment .

in spring 2013 , an eastern oregon farmer , spraying glyphosate in preparation for planting , discovered volunteer wheat plants in part of the 80-acre field that were not killed by the herbicide .

on april 30 , 2013 , the grower took samples of the plants to be tested at oregon state university .

preliminary tests by a scientist at the university indicated the possible presence of ge glyphosate - tolerant wheat plants .

on may 3 , the scientist notified aphis of the preliminary test results , and aphis began a formal investigation .

subsequent test results by aphis indicated the presence of a glyphosate - tolerant wheat variety tested by monsanto under aphis approval at approximately 100 field trials in 16 states between 1998 and 2005 .

the agency had approved field testing of ge wheat in oregon in 2001 , but not on the site where the rogue ge wheat was discovered .

aphis stated at the time that there was no evidence that ge wheat had entered commerce .

the agency's investigation report confirmed that early finding .

initial tests of wheat imported by japan , south korea , and european union also found no evidence of the unapproved ge trait .

aphis has concluded that the incident is a single isolated incident in a single field on a single farm , although they were unable to determine exactly how the ge what came to be in that field .

aphis also interviewed wheat seed suppliers to the producer , and obtained samples of the wheat seed sold to the producer and other growers .

aphis also obtained samples of the producer's wheat harvests , including a sample of the producer's 2012 harvest .

none of these samples of seed and grain tested positive for the presence of ge material .

the basic federal guidance for regulating biotechnology products is the coordinated framework for regulation of biotechnology published in 1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) .

a key regulatory principle in the u.s. biotechnology regulatory structure is that genetically engineered products should continue to be regulated according to their characteristics and unique features , not their production method — that is , whether or not they were created through biotechnology .

the framework provides a regulatory approach intended to ensure the safety of biotechnology research and products using existing statutory authority and previous agency experience with traditional breeding techniques .

three lead federal agencies regulate genetically modified organisms: usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) ; the department of health and human services , food and drug administration ( fda ) ; and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

aphis regulates plants engineered to be herbicide - tolerant .

epa , with aphis , regulates plants that contain pesticides , such as the many corn varieties that are engineered with bacillus thuringiensis to be resistant to certain pests ( eg , corn borer ) .

fda has regulatory authority under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act for the safety and nutritional quality of ge foods and feeds .

aphis regulates the importation , interstate movement , and field testing of ge plants and organisms that are or might be plant pests under the plant protection act ( ppa ; 7 u.s.c .

7701 et seq. ) .

aphis also regulates animal biologics ( i.e. , viruses , serums , toxins for animal vaccines ) under the virus , serum , and toxins act ( 21 u.s.c .

151 et seq. ) .

specifically , ge plants that are or might be plant pests are considered "regulated articles" under aphis regulations ( 7 c.f.r .

340-340.9 ) .

aphis authorization must be obtained prior to import , interstate movement , or environmental release , including field testing .

more specifically , a "regulated" plant cannot be introduced into the environment , or even field tested , unless its developer obtains aphis authorization through ( 1 ) the permit process or ( 2 ) the notification process .

permits impose restrictions on movement and planting to prevent escape of plant material that may pose a pest risk .

sponsors follow aphis guidance on testing and movements to ensure that the plant will not damage agriculture , human health , or the environment .

most ge crops have been developed under the notification option , an expedited procedure that is less rigorous than permitting .

notification can be used in lieu of permitting when the plant species is not considered a noxious weed ( or weed in the release area ) , and other aphis standards are met .

regardless of the process chosen , after testing is completed , a developer next seeks "non - regulated status" from aphis , the typical route to full commercialization and no further formal oversight .

the developer must provide aphis with extensive information on plant biology and genetics , and potential environmental and plant pest impacts that may result from the modification .

aphis conducts a formal environmental assessment ( ea ) under the national environmental protection act and has public comment periods before deciding whether to approve the developer's request for "non - regulated status. .

once the ge plant is deregulated , it is no longer subject to aphis regulation under 7 c.f.r .

part 340 .

while a plant remains under aphis regulatory control ( i.e. , it remains a "regulated article" ) , aphis imposes conditions on field testing , harvesting , and transporting ge materials .

aphis could also impose penalties up to $1 million for violations under the ppa .

should tests show the presence of an unapproved ge trait in shipments of grains or in commercial seed , aphis would determine whether remedial action was necessary to protect plant health or the environment under the authority of the ppa .

given that fda concluded that there were no health or safety concerns from consuming food or feed derived from the ge wheat ( see below ) , aphis stated at the time that it would not take steps to remove low - level presence ( llp ) of this variety from the food supply .

low - level presence is the commingling of genes and gene products from unintended plant sources , whether conventionally bred plants or those derived from biotechnology .

aphis's llp policy was clarified in march 2007 and considers six safety - related criteria when determining a ge plant material's potential to pose a risk to plant health or to the environment .

while the glyphosate - tolerant ge wheat was never deregulated by aphis , monsanto had submitted materials to fda on the biological characteristics of the ge variety for a determination of the variety's safety .

fda completed a voluntary consultation on the safety of food and feed derived from the glyphosate - tolerant ge wheat in 2004 , and agreed with monsanto that the ge wheat was not "materially different in composition , safety , or any other relevant parameter from wheat now grown , marketed , and consumed. .

in other words , fda concluded that food and feed derived from ge wheat was as safe as and nutritionally equivalent to food and feed derived from non - ge wheat .

once a determination is made by fda on the substantial equivalence of a ge variety compared to a non - ge variety , fda's role in the regulatory process typically ends .

although the united states produces only about 10% of the world's wheat , it is consistently the world's largest wheat exporter .

the united states exports about 50% of its wheat crop , and oregon exports nearly 90% of its wheat crop .

in its march 2013 national agricultural statistical service ( nass ) prospective plantings report , usda projected u.s. winter wheat seedings in fall 2012 for harvest in 2013 of 56.44 million acres , up 1.3% ( or 704,000 acres ) from 55.74 million acres in 2012 , and also up from 54.409 million acres in 2011 .

aphis stated in june 2013 that there was no evidence that ge wheat had entered commerce .

initial tests of wheat imported by japan , korea , and the european union found no evidence of the unapproved ge trait .

aphis's final report on its investigation confirmed these early findings .

many countries have zero - tolerance policies regarding imports of unapproved ge varieties .

after the announcement of the ge wheat discovery , japan ( the largest buyer of u.s. wheat ) and south korea temporarily suspended new purchases of u.s. soft white wheat grown in oregon and the pacific northwest .

those purchases resumed within several months .

in june 2013 , aphis validated an event - specific assay pcr ( dna - based ) method for detecting mon71800 , the variety of ge wheat discovered in oregon .

the aphis validation process included a specificity study and a sensitivity study .

usda determined that the method could reliably detect the specific genetic trait — named the mon71800 genetic event — when it is present at a frequency of 1 in 200 kernels .

additionally , aphis provided this validated dna test method to detect this specific ge variety to u.s. trading partners that requested it .

according to a monsanto spokesman , the test allows governments to test for the original ge trait while distinguishing it from similar traits approved and used in other crops .

in september 2014 , aphis announced that its investigation of the oregon incident was closed , and the agency released its findings .

the investigation indicated that the incident appeared to be an isolated occurrence , limited to the single field .

no ge wheat was detected in commerce .

aphis concluded that the genetic characteristics of the ge wheat volunteers suggested that it was a variety representative of a wheat breeding program .

however , aphis stated that it was unable to determine precisely how the ge wheat came to be growing in the single oregon field .

in july 2014 , aphis launched a new investigation into the discovery of ge wheat volunteers growing at the montana state university southern agricultural research center in huntley , where monsanto grew ge wheat in field trials between 2000 and 2003 .

the variety discovered in montana is different from that of oregon , although both are glyphosate - tolerant varieties .

aphis has determined that the ge wheat in montana was not the source of the ge wheat contamination in oregon , or vice versa .

none of the montana ge wheat grown in the field trials entered commerce , and none was sold as seed .

in november 2014 , monsanto reached a settlement with u.s. wheat farmers who had sued the company .

while not admitting liability , monsanto agreed to pay a total of $250,000 to several wheat growers' associations .

monsanto also will pay $2.1 million into a settlement fund for soft white wheat farmers in washington , oregon , and idaho who sold wheat between may 30 , 2013 , and november 30 , 2013 .

the settlement also reimburses plaintiff's attorneys for costs associated with the litigation .

as part of the settlement , three pending class action suits will be dismissed .

the oregon and montana incidents are not unique in aphis's ge regulatory history .

commingling of unauthorized ge crops in exports , contamination of food products with unauthorized ge material , and plant residue from ge field trials have been continuing issues .

in december 2008 , a small amount of unapproved ge cotton was harvested along with commercially available ge cotton .

the unapproved ge cotton variety produces a pesticide that is a plant - incorporated protectant ( pip ) .

in august 2006 , traces of an unapproved variety of ge rice — liberty link — were reported in commercial rice samples from parts of the southern united states .

aphis subsequently retroactively approved the variety , but not before rice prices fell and the european union and japan refused to buy from the united states .

in 2001 , a variety of ge corn known as starlink was discovered in taco shells made by kraft foods .

the ge corn had been approved by aphis , but only as an animal feed and not for human consumption .

in that case , hundreds of corn products were recalled , and aventis , the developer of the ge corn , paid over $120 million to settle various lawsuits .

such incidents of regulatory noncompliance continue to raise concerns about the limitations of aphis's biotechnology regulatory structure .

critics of ge crops have pointed to these incidents as evidence of aphis's lax oversight and inadequate field trial protocols , although the industry would like to see the regulatory process more streamlined .

the trade impacts that occurred with the oregon wheat incident , as well as earlier trade impacts from unauthorized ge rice and corn noted above , suggest that these incidents are perhaps inherent to the introduction of ge materials into the environment .

with the global food and commodity supply chains so integrated , comingling of non - approved ge varieties is almost certain to occur from time to time .

the implications of the oregon wheat and liberty rice incidents for international trade demonstrate that these events can be disruptive and costly .

aphis is currently evaluating its regulations for the introduction of ge plants into the environment , but has yet to publish a final rule on its proposed revisions .

the proposed revisions are the first since the regulations were established in 1987 .

aphis stated in their investigative report that they do not know how the ge wheat appeared in the oregon field .

that field was not the site of any authorized field trials of the wheat .

in september 2014 , a different variety of monsanto's ge wheat was also discovered growing in a montana field .

the montana discovery calls into question aphis's original statement that they found nothing to indicate that the oregon incident was more than a single isolated incident .

if aphis's ongoing investigations show that the ge wheat is isolated to these two fields and a few volunteer plants , trade implications are likely to remain minimal .

should subsequent analysis show that the contamination came from commingled seed , and that ge wheat or seed could be more widely dispersed , the trade implications are likely to be more significant .

until aphis completes its investigation of the montana wheat and issues a final report , wheat growers will remain concerned .

the incidents are also likely to continue fueling criticism of those opposed to ge crops in general , and who question the strength and reliability of aphis's regulatory oversight of the introduction of ge plants into the environment .

