the psychological health of active duty servicemembers has been an issue of significant concern for congress in recent years , with particular attention to the links between deployments and psychological health concerns , such as post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) .

news stories have emphasized the challenges faced by some servicemembers returning from deployments , but psychological health is a salient issue for the entire active duty force .

it should also be pointed out that mental health issues are not unique to servicemembers or military service .

research suggests that an estimated 26.2% of americans ages 18 and older experience a diagnosable mental disorder in any given year .

within the department of defense ( dod ) , the office of the assistant secretary of defense ( health affairs ) is primarily responsible for the medical aspects of mental health issues .

the individual military services ( army , navy , marine corps , and air force ) also conduct a variety of mental health programs and suicide prevention efforts .

in 2012 , a defense suicide prevention office was opened to provide suicide prevention services across all the services .

this report will discuss the prevalence of different psychological health concerns within the armed forces , current mental health screening and treatments , and dod responses .

it will also provide an overview of the recommendations of key reports and studies , past congressional actions and funding , and current issues for congress .

finally , the report discusses specific mental health issues , including ptsd , alcohol and drug use disorders , depressive disorders , traumatic brain injury , and suicide in more detail .

this report does not address veterans .

veteran's mental health issues are addressed in crs reports crs report r41921 , mental disorders among oef / oif veterans using va health care: facts and figures , by [author name scrubbed] , crs report r40941 , traumatic brain injury among veterans , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r42340 , suicide prevention efforts of the veterans health administration , by [author name scrubbed] .

as discussed elsewhere in the report and as listed in appendix b , numerous laws have been enacted with provisions intended to address military mental health issues .

these efforts include provisions to improve screening for mental health conditions and tbi , and providing for additional mental health providers , improved reporting , and continued research .

while congress has taken significant interest in issues related to the psychological health of the active duty forces , including ptsd , alcohol and substance abuse , depression , traumatic brain injury , and other mental health concerns , significant areas for potential congressional oversight remain .

these include .

within the active duty forces , psychological health issues include diagnosed mental disorders , such as depression or ptsd , as well as other mental health problems , such as problems with personal relationships or family circumstances .

other mental health issues facing the armed forces include traumatic brain injuries ( tbi ) and the suicides of servicemembers .

mental health issues in the active duty force have an impact not only on the individual servicemembers and their families , but also on the services as a whole .

the reasons for the higher rates in mental health diagnoses and suicide rates among army and marine personnel are not clear .

while repeated ground combat tours would be a possible answer , according to u.s. military medical researchers , "to date no study has definitively confirmed an independent variation" of ground combat tours with servicemember suicides .

researchers suggest that "the cumulative strain from the protracted war effort , across both deployed and garrison environments" may be "causing higher population prevalence of mental disorders," leading to higher suicide rates .

many members of congress , military leaders , and health providers have expressed concern that increased numbers of deployments and shorter "dwell" times between deployments have increased the stress and mental health toll on u.s. servicemembers .

however , studies of deployed servicemembers have reached varying conclusions regarding the links between deployment ( s ) and various psychological health concerns , including ptsd , depression , anxiety , and stress .

while several studies have found higher rates of mental health problems among repeat deployers than among first - time deployers , other studies have found little evidence of a causal link between repeated deployments and various mental health problems .

one possible explanation is that servicemembers who are more negatively affected by deployments are less likely to deploy again , and may leave the armed forces .

therefore , the servicemembers who deploy repeatedly may be more resilient .

additionally , servicemembers with repeated deployments may gain additional knowledge , skills , and confidence in combat environments , also increasing their psychological resilience .

according to an analysis of diagnoses received by previously deployed active component servicemembers , rates of diagnoses of anxiety disorders and adjustment reactions ( including ptsd ) rose after the first , second , and third deployments , before falling sharply for the fourth and fifth deployments .

a follow - up study , focusing specifically on mental health diagnoses received in the year after a servicemember returns from combat , found that among male servicemembers , diagnoses of ptsd , adjustment reactions , anxiety - related disorders , and depressive disorders were more common after second , third , and fourth deployments than first deployments .

among male servicemembers , a greater proportion was diagnosed with alcohol or drug disorders , suicidal ideation / self - inflicted injuries , and psychosocial problems after the first deployment than all following deployments .

the results among female servicemembers were somewhat different .

like among male servicemembers , ptsd diagnoses increased following the second , third , and fourth deployments .

however , the percentage of female servicemembers diagnosed with other mental disorders , including depressive disorders , alcohol / drug disorders , suicidal ideation / self - inflicted injury , adjustment reactions , anxiety disorders , and psychosocial problems all declined after repeated deployments .

 ( see figure 25 . ) .

overall , for all deployed active component servicemembers , larger percentages received diagnoses of ptsd and anxiety - related disorders after the second and / or third deployment than after the first deployment .

the rates of ptsd diagnoses fall sharply after the fourth and fifth deployments .

however , for other mental disorders than anxiety disorders and ptsd , a greater proportion of deployed servicemembers receive diagnoses after their first deployment than subsequent deployments .

quickened deployment cycles and the shorter "dwell" time between deployments are often cited as a risk factor leading to greater stress and higher rates of mental disorders among deployed servicemembers .

however , a recent analysis by the armed forces health surveillance center found that the percentages of deployed servicemembers diagnosed with a mental disorder were greater among servicemembers with longer dwell times between deployments .

however , the study cautions that personal circumstances can greatly influence the nature , magnitude , duration , and effects of stresses related to transition and readjustment periods , such as preparing for or following a deployment .

the armed forces health surveillance center study also speculates that the double transition from "warrior" to being fully adjusted as non - deployed back to "warrior" status may play a role .

they also note that servicemembers with medical conditions associated with recent deployments may have very long dwell times and be at a higher risk of recurrent or related conditions following their deployment .

deployed servicemembers in health care occupations consistently had the highest rates of ptsd diagnoses , as well as diagnoses of other anxiety disorders , adjustment reactions , and depressive disorder than servicemembers in other occupations , including combat - specific occupations .

 ( see figure 26 . ) .

one possible explanation is that the consistent exposure of servicemembers in health care occupations to traumatic injuries suffered by others leads to higher rates of ptsd , as compared to the more intermittent , but more intense and personal exposures to life - threatening experiences among combat - specific occupations .

additionally , servicemembers in health care occupations likely have a higher utilization of health care , including mental health care , than servicemembers in combat - specific occupations .

appendix a .

diagnostic codes appendix b .

legislation national defense authorization for fiscal year 2013 the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) contained several sections addressing military mental health issues , including: section 580 required the secretary of defense , acting through the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , to establish within the office of the secretary of defense a position with responsibility for oversight of all suicide prevention and resilience programs of dod and each of the military departments .

section 581 amended chapter 1007 of title 10 , united states code , to codify the suicide prevention and community health and response program for national guard and reserve component members , to require the secretary of defense to provide training on suicide prevention , resilience , and community healing and response at yellow ribbon reintegration program events and activities , to move the program from within the office for reintegration programs to the office of the secretary of defense , and to repeal subsection ( i ) of section 582 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( 10 u.s.c .

10101 note ) .

the program would terminate on october 1 , 2017 .

section 582 required the secretary of defense , acting through the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , to develop within the department of defense a comprehensive policy on the prevention of suicide among servicemembers .

section 583 required the secretary of the army to conduct a study of resilience programs within the army that would draw upon professionally accepted measurements and assessments to evaluate the impact of these programs .

section 703 amended section 1074m ( a ) of title 10 , united states code , to align mandatory post - deployment person - to - person mental health assessments for certain servicemembers with other existing health assessments by changing the required assessment period from between 180 days after deployment to 1 year after deployment , to between 180 days after deployment to 18 months after deployment .

section 706 authorized the secretary of defense to carry out a pilot program to enhance the efforts of dod in research , treatment , education , and outreach on mental health , substance use disorders , and traumatic brain injury in members of the national guard and reserves , their family members , and their caregivers through agreements with community partners .

section 723 required the secretary of defense and the secretary of veterans affairs to jointly enter into a memorandum of understanding providing for the sharing between departments of the results of examinations and other records on members of the armed forces that are retained and maintained with respect to the medical tracking system for members deployed overseas .

section 724 required the secretary of defense and the secretary of veterans affairs to jointly enter into a memorandum of understanding providing for certain members of the armed forces to volunteer or be considered for employment as peer counselors under certain peer support counseling programs carried out by the secretary of veterans affairs .

section 725 required the secretary of defense to provide for the translation of research on the diagnosis and treatment of mental health conditions into policy on medical practices .

section 726 required the secretary of veterans affairs to develop and implement a comprehensive set of measures to assess mental health care services provided by the department of veterans affairs .

section 727 authorized the secretary of veterans affairs to provide counseling and mental health services to certain members of the armed forces and their family members at vet centers .

section 729 required the secretary of veterans affairs to carry out a national program of outreach to societies , community organizations , nonprofit organizations , and government entities in order to recruit mental health providers to provide mental health care services for the va on a part - time , without compensation basis .

section 730 amended section 1720f ( j ) of title 38 , united states code , to require the secretary of veterans affairs to establish and carry out a peer support counseling program as a part of the existing comprehensive program designed to reduce the incidence of suicide among veterans .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( p.l .

112-81 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 703 authorized the secretary of defense to provide to any reserve member performing inactive - duty training during scheduled unit training assemblies access to mental health assessments with a licensed mental health professional who would be available for referrals during duty hours at the principal duty location of the member's unit .

the provision further required each reserve member participating in annual training or individual training to have access to behavioral health support programs .

section 711 directed the secretary of defense to prescribe and maintain regulations relating to commanding officer and supervisor referrals of members for mental health evaluations .

the provision required that these regulations seek to eliminate any perceived stigma associated with seeking and receiving mental health services .

the provision further outlined procedures for mental health evaluations , and prohibited using such referrals to retaliate against whistleblowers .

section 723 required the secretary of defense to report to the defense and appropriations committees assessing the benefits of neuroimaging in an effort to identify and improve the diagnosis of ptsd .

section 724 directed the secretary of defense to report to the defense and appropriations committees on the implementation of dod policy related to the management of concussion and mild traumatic brain injury in the deployed setting .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( p.l .

111-383 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 712 required the current dod medical tracking system for members deployed overseas to include the use of pre - and post - deployment medical examinations and health reassessments to ( 1 ) reflect the medical condition of members before their deployment ; ( 2 ) record any changes to their condition during their deployment ; and ( 3 ) identify health concerns , including mental health concerns , that may become manifest several months following their deployment .

the provision further required that these medical records include information on the prescription and administration of psychotropic medications .

section 713 provided license requirements for health care professionals who are members of the national guard performing training or duty in response to an actual or potential disaster while operating in their state role .

section 722 required the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) develop and implement a comprehensive policy on consistent automated neurological cognitive assessments of members before and after deployment ; and ( 2 ) revise the policy on a periodic basis in accordance with experience and evolving best practice guidelines .

section 723 directed the military department secretaries to assess and report on the incidence of ptsd by military occupation .

it further required the secretary of defense to ensure that all such assessments , findings , plans , and reports are transmitted to the centers of excellence for the treatment and prevention of ptsd and traumatic brain injury , as established under the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 .

section 724 requires the secretary to prescribe regulations concerning requirements that mental health counselors must meet in order to practice independently under tricare .

s.rept .

111-201 requested the secretary of defense to submit a report on cognitive rehabilitation therapy for tbi .

in response , on april 30 , 2012 , the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness submitted a report to congress entitled "cognitive rehabilitation therapy for traumatic brain injury. .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 ( p.l .

111-84 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 52 1 authorized the secretary of each military department to detail officers as students at accredited schools of psychology in the united states for training leading to a degree of doctor of philosophy in clinical psychology .

section 595 amended the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 to direct the office for reintegration programs ( part of the yellow ribbon reintegration program under such act ) to establish a program to provide national guard and reserve members and their families , and assist local communities , with training in suicide prevention and community healing and response to suicide .

section 596 directed the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) conduct a comprehensive review and assessment of dod programs and activities for the prevention , diagnosis , and treatment of substance abuse disorders in members , as well as dod policies relating to the disposition of substance abuse offenders in the armed forces ; ( 2 ) report findings and recommendations to the defense committees ; and ( 3 ) submit to the defense and appropriations committees a plan for the improvement and enhancement of such programs , activities , and policies .

the section also requires such plan to include a comprehensive dod statement of policy , mechanisms to ensure the availability of services and treatment as well as the prevention and reduction of substance abuse disorders , and specific instructions on the prevention , diagnosis , and treatment of substance abuse in members .

it also requires confidentiality for members with respect to treatment .

this section also directs the ( 1 ) secretary of defense to provide for an independent study on substance use disorders programs for servicemembers by the institute of medicine of the national academy of sciences or other independent entity ; and ( 2 ) the results of this report must be reported to the secretary of defense and the defense and appropriations committees .

section 708 directed the secretary of defense to issue guidance for the provision of a person - to - person mental health assessment for each member deployed in connection with a contingency operation within specified periods before and following deployment .

it excludes from assessment requirements members determined not to have been subjected or exposed to operational risk factors during such deployment .

section 712 directed the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) report to the defense and appropriations committees on the implementation of dod policy guidance regarding deployment - limiting psychiatric conditions and medications ; and ( 2 ) establish and implement a policy for the use of psychotropic medications for deployed members .

section 714 directed each military department secretary to increase by a specified amount the number of active - duty mental health care personnel authorized for that department .

requires the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) report to the defense and appropriations committees on the appropriate number of such personnel required to meet the mental health care needs of members ; ( 2 ) develop and implement a plan to significantly increase the number of such personnel by the end of fy2013 ; and ( 3 ) report to such committees on the feasibility and advisability of establishing one or more military mental health specialties for officers or enlisted members in order to better meet the mental health care needs of members and their families .

in response to these reporting requirements , dod submitted a report entitled "mental health personnel required to meet mental health care needs of service members , retired members , and dependents. .

section 71 5 required the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) conduct a study on the management of medications for physically and psychologically wounded members ; and ( 2 ) report study results to the defense committees .

section 722 directed the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) conduct a comprehensive review of the mental health care and counseling services available to dependent children of members ; ( 2 ) report review results to the defense committees ; and ( 3 ) develop and implement a comprehensive plan for improvements in access to quality mental health care and counseling services for military children .

section 723 required the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) provide for a clinical trial to assess the efficacy of cognitive rehabilitative therapy for members and former members who have been diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury incurred in the line of duty in operations iraqi freedom or enduring freedom and are referred for such therapy ; and ( 2 ) provide an initial and final assessment report to the defense and appropriations committees .

section 726 directed the secretary of defense to provide for a study on the treatment of ptsd , to be conducted by the institute of medicine of the national academy of sciences or other independent entity .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 733 required dod to establish a task force to examine matters relating to the prevention of suicide by members of the armed forces .

the task force was required to report to the secretary recommendations on a comprehensive policy designed to prevent such suicides .

in response to language in h.rept .

110-652 to the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 , on august 26 , 2010 , dod reported to congress on the possibility for providing a referral for a second opinion to potentially suicidal servicemembers in combat .

this report stated that dod has decided not to develop a policy to mandate consultation or second opinion for suicidal patients in theater .

in response to additional language in the same house report , on june 2 , 2009 , dod reported to congress on dod progress on suicide prevention .

the report stated that the rand national defense research institute as well as the dod suicide prevention task force were undertaking evaluations of matters related to suicide prevention .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( p.l .

110-181 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 708 included mental health care within the definition of "health care" under the tricare program .

it also required a report from the secretary of defense to the defense committees on the adequacy of access to mental health services under the tricare program .

section 716 required the secretary to conduct a comprehensive review of ( 1 ) the need for gender - and ethnic group - specific mental health treatment and services for members ; and ( 2 ) the efficacy and adequacy of existing gender - and ethnic group - specific mental health treatment programs and services for members .

section 717 directed the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) establish criteria that licensed or certified mental health counselors must meet in order to independently provide care to tricare beneficiaries ; ( 2 ) contract for an independent study of the credentials , preparation , and training of such individuals ; and ( 3 ) report study results to the defense committees .

section 1621 required the secretary to establish in dod a center of excellence in the prevention , diagnosis , mitigation , treatment , and rehabilitation of ( 1 ) tbi ; ( 2 ) ptsd ; and ( 3 ) military eye injuries section 1661 directed the secretary to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences ( nas ) for a study on the physical and mental health and other readjustment needs of members and former members who deployed in operations iraqi freedom or enduring freedom ( and their families ) as a result of such deployment .

requires the ( 1 ) nas to report to the secretaries and the defense and appropriations committees upon the completion of each of the two phases of such study ; and ( 2 ) secretaries to develop a final dod - va response to such findings and recommendations .

section 1634 required a joint report from the secretaries to the defense committees on dod - va changes to ensure that traumatic brain injury victims receive a medical designation concomitant with such injury , rather than a designation which assigns a generic classification such as "organic psychiatric disorder. .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 ( p.l .

109-364 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 721 directed the secretary of defense to ( 1 ) conduct a 15-year longitudinal study on the effects of traumatic brain injury incurred by members of the armed forces in operations iraqi freedom and enduring freedom ; and ( 2 ) provide periodic and final reports to congress on study results .

section 735 amended the ndaa for fiscal year 2006 to require the task force on mental health established under such act to consider , as part of its assessment of dod mental health services provided to military personnel , the specific needs of members deployed in operations iraqi freedom or enduring freedom upon their return from deployment .

section 738 required additional elements for pre - deployment and post - deployment medical examinations , including current treatment and an assessment of traumatic brain injury , and provides criteria for referral for further evaluation .

it also directs the secretary of defense to prescribe minimum mental health standards for eligibility of a member for deployment to a combat or contingency operation .

requires the ( 1 ) comptroller general to conduct a study of , and report to the defense committees on , the implementation of the requirements of this section ; and ( 2 ) the secretary of defense to implement the requirements and report to such committees on such implementation .

section 741 directed the secretary to carry out no less than three one - year pilot projects to evaluate the efficacy of various approaches to improving the capability of the military and civilian health care system to provide early diagnosis and treatment of post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) and other mental health conditions .

requires one of such projects to be ( 1 ) designed to evaluate diagnostic and treatment approaches for use by primary care providers to improve the diagnosis and treatment of ptsd ; ( 2 ) focused on members of the national guard or reserve located more than 40 miles from a military medical facility , and whose personnel are served primarily by civilian community health resources ; and ( 3 ) designed to provide outreach to family members on ptsd and other mental health conditions .

section 744 required the secretary to establish within dod a panel to develop curricula for training family members in the provision of care and assistance to members and former members with traumatic brain injuries .

it designated this panel as the traumatic brain injury family caregiver panel .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 594 required a member's pre - separation counseling to include information concerning ( 1 ) the availability of mental health services and the treatment of post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , anxiety , depression , suicide , and other mental health conditions associated with service in the armed forces ; ( 2 ) veterans' training and hiring priorities ; ( 3 ) veterans' small business ownership and entrepreneurship programs ; ( 4 ) employment and reemployment rights ; ( 5 ) veterans' preference in federal employment ; ( 6 ) available housing counseling assistance ; and ( 7 ) a description of veterans' health care and other benefits .

section 721 required the secretary to develop a program to improve awareness of the availability of mental health services for , and warning signs about mental health problems in , dependents of members who served or will serve in a combat theater during the previous or next 60 days .

it also directs the secretary to ( 1 ) carry out a pilot project to evaluate the efficacy of various approaches to improving the capability of the military and civilian health care systems to provide early diagnosis and treatment of ptsd and other mental health conditions ; and ( 2 ) report to the defense and appropriations committees on the project .

section 722 authorized the secretary to carry out pilot projects on improving the early diagnosis and treatment of ptsd and other mental health conditions .

authorizes at least one such project at a national guard or reserve facility located at least 40 miles from a military medical facility and whose personnel are served primarily by civilian community health resources .

section 723 required ( 1 ) the secretary to establish within dod a task force to examine matters relating to mental health and the armed forces ; ( 2 ) the task force to report to the secretary , including an assessment of , and recommendations for improving , mental health care provided by the military departments ; ( 3 ) the task force to report to the secretary on all activities undertaken under this section ; and ( 4 ) the latter report to be transmitted to the defense and veterans' committees .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 ( p.l .

108-375 ) contained provisions that addressed military mental health issues: section 723 required the comptroller general to study , and report to congress on , mental health services available to members of the armed forces , including: ( 1 ) the availability and effectiveness of existing mental health treatment and screening resources ; and ( 2 ) obstacles preventing members and their families from obtaining needed services .

