bees , both commercially managed honey bees and wild unmanaged bees , among many other types of insect pollinators , play an important role in global food production .

in the united states , the value of pollination by bees and other insects to u.s. agricultural production is estimated at $16 billion annually .

most of this estimated value ( about 75% ) is attributable to honey bees .

given the importance of bees and other types of pollinators to food production , many have expressed concern about whether a "pollinator crisis" has been occurring in recent decades .

worldwide reports indicate that populations of both managed honey bees and native bees have been declining , with colony losses in some cases described as severe or unusual .

in europe , managed honey bee colony numbers have been declining since the mid - 1960s , and individual beekeepers have reported "unusual weakening and mortality in colonies," particularly during the period spanning winter through spring .

according to the united nations , many insect pollinator species may be becoming rarer , causing some to question whether this is a sign of an overall global biodiversity decline .

in the united states , honey bee colony losses due to bee pests , parasites , pathogens , and disease are not uncommon .

this situation gained increased attention in 2006 as some commercial beekeepers began reporting sharp declines in their honey bee colonies .

because of the severity and unusual circumstances of these colony declines , scientists named this phenomenon colony collapse disorder ( ccd ) .

this issue was legislatively active in the 110 th congress and resulted in increased funding for pollinator research , among other types of farm program support to protect pollinators , as part of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

years later , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports that u.s. beekeepers continue to lose honey bee colonies each year .

since 2006 , usda estimates that overwinter colony losses have averaged more than 30% annually .

however , usda reports that bee colonies have continued to decline each winter for reasons not solely attributable to ccd , which is characterized by colony populations that are suddenly lost but no dead bees are present .

 ( for more information on ccd , see text box on next page .

additional discussion is provided in " factors affecting bee health ." ) .

usda claims that "beekeepers did not report ccd as a major cause of colony loss" for overwinter losses in most recent surveys .

to date , the precise reasons for honey bee colony losses are still unknown .

reasons cited for honey bee population losses include a wide range of possible factors .

potential identified causes include bee pests and disease , diet and nutrition , genetics , habitat loss and other environmental stressors , agricultural pesticides , and beekeeping management issues , as well as the possibility that bees are being negatively affected by cumulative , multiple exposures and / or the interactive effects of several of these factors .

aside from the range of potential identified causes for bee colony declines , crs report r42855 , bee health: the role of pesticides , addresses what role , if any , pesticides play in influencing the health and wellness of bees .

given continued concerns about the health and well - being of honey bees and other pollinators , this issue has continued to be legislatively active in congress .

various proposals addressing managed bees and native pollinators were enacted in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) and reauthorized and expanded as part of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , in the law's research , conservation , specialty crop , and miscellaneous title provisions .

more than 200,000 species of insects ( bees , butterflies , moths , flies , wasps , beetles , and ants ) , bats ( and other small mammals ) , and birds ( including hummingbirds ) are plant pollinators .

this report focuses on bees — both managed honey bees and wild ( mostly unmanaged ) bee species .

worldwide , the contribution of bees and other insects to worldwide crop production for human food is valued at about $190 billion each year .

in the united states alone , the value of insect pollination to u.s. agricultural production is estimated at $16 billion annually , of which about three - fourths of the value is attributable to honey bees .

expressed somewhat differently , another widely cited estimate is that bee pollination of agricultural crops is said to account for about one - third of the u.s. diet , contributing to the production of a diverse range of high - value fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , forage crops , some field crops , and other specialty crops .

both managed and wild bees are critical to plant pollination and are economically valuable to u.s. agricultural production .

bee pollination of agricultural crops is said to contribute to the production of as many as 90 agricultural crops .

a number of agricultural crops are almost totally ( 90% - 100% ) dependent on animal pollination , including apples , avocados , blueberries , cranberries , cherries , kiwi fruit , macadamia nuts , asparagus , broccoli , carrots , cauliflower , celery , cucumbers , onions , legume seeds , pumpkins , squash , and sunflowers .

other specialty crops also rely on pollination , but to a lesser degree .

usda reports that native bees also provide pollination services for a number of food crops .

in addition to some of the aforementioned crops , these include alfalfa seeds , almonds , canola , chokecherries , grapefruit , pears , plums , prunes , soybeans ( hybrid seed production ) , tomatoes , vegetable seeds , and watermelons .

the role of bee pollination in enhancing agricultural productivity and crop yields for many types of fruit , vegetable , tree nut , and field crops was also noted in a series of published studies as part of the united nations' global pollination project .

native bees are thought to be more efficient at pollination than honey bees and are known to pollinate native plants , such as cherries , blueberries , and cranberries , as well as other commercial crops including almonds , among other fruiting and flowering plants .

among the factors that are thought to be harming bee health are ( listed in no particular order ) : parasites , pathogens , and diseases ( for a detailed listing , see text box ) ; bee genetics including lack of genetic diversity and lineage of bees , and increased susceptibility and lowered disease resistance ; miticide resistance ; diet and nutrition including poor nutrition due to apiary overcrowding , pollination of crops with low nutritional value , and pollen or nectar scarcity associated with invasive plants ; bee management issues including transportation stress from migratory beekeeping , overcrowding , feeding practices , chemicals used by beekeepers to control mites ( antibiotics and miticides ) , confinement and temperature fluctuations , susceptibility to disease , potential for cumulative exposure to diseases and parasites , use of bees for honey production versus pollination , chemical residue or contamination in the wax , and reliability of the queen source ; habitat loss , and other environmental or biological stressors including loss of foraging area , interspecific competition between honey bees and native bees , pathogen spillover effects , and climate change ; pesticides including acute or cumulative exposure to new types or combinations of agricultural pesticides through a variety of media including dust , water droplets , pollen , and nectar ; other agricultural practices including the use of genetically incorporated pesticides in seeds or treated seeds , such as with bioengineered crops ; and potential cumulative and interactive effects of each of these factors .

many of these factors were among those initially thought to be contributing to ccd .

as outlined in usda's 2011 progress report , the available research over the past years has led usda and university researchers to conclude that "no single factor or specific combination of factors has been identified" as a 'cause' for ccd .

this has led researchers to consider ccd may be "a syndrome caused by many different factors , working in combination or synergistically" ; it may also involve "an interaction between pathogens and other stress factors. .

according to usda: "despite a number of claims in the general and scientific media , a cause or causes of ccd have not been identified by researchers. .

however , ccd may not be the single leading cause of honey bee colony losses in recent years .

usda reports that in 2012 / 2013 , "there were more colonies that dwindled away" rather than suffering from the onset of ccd , which is characterized by a sudden loss in bee colony populations .

whether colony loss is attributable to ccd may also be based , in part , on reported colony losses "with no dead bees present , which is indicative of ccd" ( i.e. , the absence of dead bees ) .

usda also claims that "beekeepers did not report ccd as a major cause" of overwinter losses in its 2012-2013 and 2011-2012 surveys .

honey bee colony losses are not uncommon .

the nrc study documents the extensive literature on honey bee population losses due to bee pests , parasites , pathogens , and disease .

most notable are declines due to two parasitic mites , the so - called vampire mite ( varroa destructor ) and the tracheal mite ( acarapis woodi ) , and also colony declines due to the pathogen paenibacillus larvae .

other reasons for bee colony declines reported by the nrc include interspecific competition between native and introduced bees , pathogen spillover effects , habitat loss , invasive plant species that reduce nectar - and pollen - producing vegetation , bee genetics , and pesticides , among other factors .

mite infestations are a relatively new occurrence .

the 1980s saw two periods of large die - offs due to varroa and tracheal mites: the first varroa mite infestation was reported in 1987 ; tracheal mites were first detected in 1984 .

varroa mites are also said to have eliminated most feral bee colonies in the mid - 1990s .

varroa parasitism affects both worker bees and male larvae and can affect the ability of the queen to reproduce .

it is associated with viral pathogens and if left untreated can cause colony mortalities usually within six months to two years after the initial infestation .

less is known about the effects of the tracheal mite .

the pathogen paenibacillus larvae is the most serious honey bee pathogen and causes american foulbrood ( afb ) , which is a disease of larval honey bees .

afb resulted in large colony losses in the 1940s , but its incidence has been reduced by the use of antibiotics and increased apiary inspection programs .

nevertheless , mite and pathogen infestations have likely raised beekeeper operating costs to pay for miticides and / or antibiotics , labor and expenses for treatment , improved management and inspection , and colony replacement of dead bees .

according to usda , the cost of mite controls and hive replacement every 1-2 years , as opposed to every 3-5 years previously , calls into question whether beekeeping on the united states will continue to be financially viable .

symptoms similar to those observed for ccd have also been described in the past , and heavy losses have been documented .

it is still not clear whether the current colony losses are being caused by the same factors or if new contributing factors are involved .

previously , similar conditions have been termed autumn collapse , may disease , spring dwindle , disappearing disease , and fall dwindle disease .

following concerns over honey bee colony losses in 2006-2007 , congress provided for increased funding for bee research , among other types of farm program support to protect pollinators , as part of the 2008 farm bill .

given continued concerns about the health and well - being of honey bees and other pollinators , this issue has continued to be legislatively active in congress , and various proposals were again considered as part of farm bill debates in both the house and senate in 2013 .

for the 114 th congress , the incoming chairman of the house agriculture subcommittee on biotechnology , horticulture , and research has said that bee health will be a top issue for his subcommittee .

in addition , various other legislative proposals have been considered outside the farm bill debate that could broadly support other types of bee and pollinator protections and habitat areas .

the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 , h.rept .

113-333 ) , referred to here as the "2014 farm bill," is the most recent omnibus farm bill .

it was enacted in february 2014 and succeeded the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , "2008 farm bill" ) .

the 2014 farm bill reauthorized and expanded many of the 2008 farm bill provisions that address honey bees and pollinators as part of the law's research , conservation , specialty crop , and miscellaneous title provisions .

overall , regarding managed honey bees and native pollinators , the 2014 farm bill: extends through 2018 various usda research and conservation provisions directed at protecting pollinators , enacted in the 2008 farm bill ( see " research provisions " and " conservation provisions ," below , for more information ) ; expands annual reporting requirements on ccd along with other health disorders ; requires usda to publish guidance on enhancing long - term pollinator health and long term viability of pollinators , including addressing habitat and forage needs for native pollinators and managed honey bees ; and requires usda to assess federal efforts to mitigate pollinator losses and threats to the u.s. commercial beekeeping industry , and to recommend how to better coordinate federal agency efforts to address the decline of managed honey bees and native pollinators .

some proposed provisions were not included in the 2014 farm bill .

in particular , a house - passed provision , protection of honey bees and other pollinators , would have required usda , in consultations with the department of the interior and epa , to take measures to improve federal coordination in addressing the documented decline of managed and native pollinators and promote the long - term viability of honey bee , wild bees and other beneficial insects in agriculture .

the provision also would have required usda to establish a federal task force on bee health and commercial beekeeping to coordinate and assess efforts to mitigate pollinator losses , and the task force is to submit a report to congress within 180 days of enactment of the farm bill , as well as conduct a study to consider relocating and modernizing pollinator research labs .

the research title of the 2008 farm bill identified pollinator protection among its so - called high - priority research and extension areas ( p.l .

110-246 , §7204 ) .

it provided for research and extension grants ( 1 ) to survey and collect data on bee colony production and health ; ( 2 ) to investigate pollinator biology , immunology , ecology , genomics , and bioinformatics ; ( 3 ) to conduct research on various factors that may be contributing to or associated with colony collapse disorder and other serious threats to the health of honey bees and other pollinators , including parasites and pathogens of pollinators , and the sublethal effects of insecticides , herbicides , and fungicides on honey bees and native and managed pollinators ; ( 4 ) to develop mitigative and preventative measures to improve native and managed pollinator health ; and ( 5 ) to promote the health of honey bees and native pollinators through habitat conservation and best management practices .

the 2008 farm bill authorized appropriations for grants at $10 million annually for fy2008-fy2013 .

the research provisions also directed usda to increase its capacity and infrastructure to address colony collapse disorder and other long - term threats to pollinator health ( including hiring additional personnel ) and to conduct research on colony collapse disorder and other pollinator issues at usda's facilities .

as amended , annual appropriations were authorized at $7.25 million ( fy2008-fy2013 ) , with another $2.75 million annually ( fy2008-fy2013 ) for honey bee pest and pathogen surveillance .

this authorized funding has supported honey bee and pollinator research efforts at usda's ars in recent years ( see " funding " ) .

the 2008 farm bill also directed usda to submit an annual report to congress on its response to ccd , indicating that the report should investigate the cause ( s ) of honey bee colony collapse and recommend appropriate strategies to reduce colony loss ( see " ccd action plan " ) .

the 2014 farm bill reiterated that usda should continue to focus its research efforts on honey bees and native pollinators ( p.l .

113-79 , §7209 ) .

first , the farm bill reauthorized and expanded the "high - priority research and extension initiatives" at usda regarding honey bees , including the requirement that usda conduct a nationwide "honey bee pest , pathogen , health , and population status surveillance" program , among other efforts intended to counteract the declining honey bee health and declining populations of honey bees and native pollinators .

second , the farm bill reauthorized and expanded on the requirement that usda submit an annual report describing honey bee colony collapse and honey bee health disorders , and find appropriate strategies , including best management practices ( bmps ) to reduce colony losses , and address the decline of managed honey bees and native pollinators .

usda's report must also assess federal efforts to mitigate pollinator losses and threats to the united states commercial beekeeping industry and recommend to congress how to better coordinate federal agency efforts .

the 2014 farm bill provision in the research title extended each of the authorized appropriations in the 2008 farm bill .

total authorized appropriations are $20 million annually through fy2018 , and include research and extension activities ( $10 million annually ) ; usda capacity and infrastructure ( $7.25 million annually ) ; and honey bee surveillance ( $2.75 million annually ) .

third , the farm bill directed usda to consult with the department of the interior and epa , and publish "guidance on enhancing pollinator health and the long - term viability of populations of pollinators," including recommendations related to allowing for managed honey bees to forage on national forest system ( nfs ) lands .

under current law , honey bees can be allowed on nfs lands under a "special use authorization permit. .

the conservation title of the 2008 farm bill included language that broadly encourages habitat development and protection among the administrative requirements for native and managed pollinators under usda's conservation programs ( p.l .

110-246 , §2708 ) , and ensures that usda's conservation technical assistance includes standards that account for native and managed pollinators ( p.l .

110-246 , §2706 ) .

these provisions could broaden the focus of usda's farm conservation programs to include pollinator habitats and habitat improvement among their goals , as well as require usda to review its conservation practice standards with respect to managed and native pollinators .

the 2014 farm bill generally continued these types of protections .

in february 2014 , usda's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) announced that it would provide nearly $3 million in technical and financial assistance for farmers and ranchers through the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) to help promote the health of honey bees by implementing conservation practices that provide bees with forage areas while providing other environmental benefits .

this funding is targeted in five midwestern states: michigan , minnesota , north dakota , south dakota , and wisconsin .

in october 2014 , usda will be providing more than $4 million in technical and financial assistance to farmers and ranchers in these states to improve honey bee health .

usda notes that this effort contributes to the efforts of the presidential memorandum to create a federal strategy to promote the health of honey bees and other pollinators .

the need for habitat and forage areas for native pollinators and managed honey bees — to supply pollen and nectar to address the nutritional needs of bees and other pollinators — continues to be an important policy issue .

some advocacy groups asked usda to convene a "honey bee nutrition and forage summit" to examine the importance of nutrition and forage to the health of honey bees and sustainable agricultural pollination services , which usda hosted in october 2014 .

forage efforts are also being considered in some state legislatures including in california to help address pollination service needs .

usda is also focusing on forage areas as part of its conservation programs ; see " national pollinator health strategy ( "presidential memorandum" ) . .

other provisions in the 2008 farm bill supported pollinators through the bill's crop insurance and other disaster assistance provisions .

one such provision identifies honey farms as possible beneficiaries of the bill's supplemental agricultural disaster assistance ( p.l .

110-246 , §12033 ) ; another provision provides contracts for additional policies and studies to carry out research and development regarding insurance policies that cover loss of bees ( p.l .

110-246 , §12023 ) .

as authorized by the 2008 farm bill , usda established the emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) .

this program , administered by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) , provides emergency relief to producers of livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish to aid in the reduction of losses caused by disease , adverse weather , or other natural disaster conditions , such as blizzards and wildfires .

eligible honey bee producers — those who incur physical losses of honey bees and honey bee hives because of colony collapse disorder — must provide documentation , and / or a certification that the loss of honey bees was due to ccd , from one or more of the following: registered entomologist ; cooperative extension specialist ; and / or land grant university .

supplemental agricultural disaster assistance under elap initially covered certain losses that occurred on or after january 1 , 2008 , and before october 1 , 2011 .

elap expired in 2011 .

the 2014 farm bill reinstated elap retroactively to a period covering october 2011 through september 2018 , providing up to $20 million annually in mandatory funding to compensate producers for disaster losses not covered under other disaster programs ( p.l .

113-79 , §1501 ) .

beekeepers with dead bees may be eligible for payments under elap .

among eligible causes of bee loss are those that are a "direct result of an eligible adverse weather or loss condition , including but not limited to , colony collapse disorder ( ccd ) ( colony loss only ) , earthquake , eligible winter storm ( colony loss only ) , excessive wind , flood , hurricane , lightning , tornado , volcanic eruption or wildfire natural disasters as well as colony collapse disorder. .

eligible honeybees under elap include "bees housed in a managed hive and used for honey production , pollination or honeybee breeding" and do not include "wild , feral honeybees , leaf cutter bees or other bee species that are not used for producing honey , pollinating or breeding honeybees. .

under elap , fsa provides payments for honey bee colony or hive losses: elap payments for honey bee colony losses are based on a minimum of 75% of the number of honeybee colonies lost in excess of normal mortality ( 17.5% ) due to an eligible adverse weather or loss condition , multiplied by the average fair market value per honeybee colony for the applicable program year .

elap payments for honey bee hive losses are based on a minimum of 75% of the number of honeybee hives lost due to an eligible adverse weather or loss condition , multiplied by the average fair market value per honeybee hive for the applicable program year .

for the 2012-2014 program years , the fsa - established average fair market values ranged from $75 to $85 per colony , and ranged from $210 to $230 per hive .

elap also compensates eligible beekeepers based on a minimum of 60% of the actual cost of purchased or harvested feed that was intended for honey bees but damaged due to an eligible adverse weather or loss condition .

certain payment eligibility and limits may apply .

in november 2014 , usda announced that nearly 2,500 applicants will receive disaster assistance aid through elap for losses suffered from october 1 , 2011 , through september 30 , 2013 .

the 2014 farm bill also requires that usda submit to the food and drug administration a report that describes an appropriate federal standard for the identity of honey , including consideration of the march 2006 standard of identity citizens petition filed with fda ( p.l .

113-79 , §10012 ) .

the agency published a notice to solicit public comments on "how a federal standard of identity for honey would be in the interest of consumers , the honey industry , and u.s .

agriculture. .

 ( "standard of identity" broadly refers to establishing definitions and standards for commodities such as honey. ) .

the 2008 farm bill also contained provisions that generally support honey production .

these include , for example , provisions pertaining to the national honey board ( p.l .

110-246 , §§10401-10402 ) ; provisions covering rates for marketing assistance loans for certain commodities , including honey ( p.l .

110-246 , §1202 ) ; and provisions covering certain nutrition title provisions ( such as p.l .

110-246 , §4231 ) .

additional legislative proposals regarding honey bees and other pollinators have been offered outside of the farm bill debate .

in the 113 th congress , representative alcee hastings introduced h.r .

4790 , highways bettering the economy and environment act ( or highways bee act ) .

the bill would promote conservation practices on 17 million acres of highway "rights - of - ways" ( managed by state departments of transportation or state dots ) , and would promote native plantings that provide improved habitat , forage , and migratory corridors for pollinators , ground nesting birds , and other small wildlife , as well as encourage reduced mowing and overall maintenance costs to state dots .

roadsides are also recognized as a potential habitat for native wildlife , including pollinating insects .

the proposed bill language was not included as part of broader transportation legislation considered during the 112 th congress .

the bill was also introduced in the 112 th congress as h.r .

2381 , and has been actively promoted by pollinator partnership / north american pollinator protection campaign ( nappc ) .

in the 113 th congress , representatives earl blumenauer and john conyers , jr. introduced h.r .

2692 , saving america's pollinators act of 2013 .

the bill would suspend registrations of neonicotinoids and ban new registrations of any pesticide for use on "bee attractive plants , trees , and cereals" until the epa determines that the insecticide will not cause "unreasonable adverse effects" on pollinators , including native bees , honey bees , and other beneficial insects , as well as birds and bats .

the bill also would require the department of the interior to coordinate with epa in monitoring the health and populations of native bees , and annually report to congress on their health and population status .

this bill is in part a response to reports that 50,000 bees were found dead in a suburban shopping - center parking lot in oregon in june 2013 , reportedly due to exposure to pesticides used on trees near the parking lot to control aphids .

also in the 113 th congress , representative austin scott introduced h.r .

5447 , which would amend u.s. pesticide laws to provide for expedited registration of pesticides that "improve managed pollinator bee health , including managing resistance to parasitic pests," and for expedited application for a pesticide registration that is "reasonably expected to improve the health of managed pollinator bees , including managing resistance to parasitic pests of managed pollinator bees. .

the bill would also require usda and epa to submit reports to congress on the "extent and scope of the threat to the health of managed pollinator bees" and the availability of pesticides to manage bee pests , particularly the varroa mite .

