this report presents an analysis of the discretionary appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fiscal year 2014 ( fy2014 ) .

it compares unsequestered enacted fy2013 appropriations for dhs , the president's request for fy2014 funding for dhs , and the appropriations legislation crafted in response to that request .

the first portion of this report provides an overview and historical context for reviewing dhs appropriations , highlighting various aspects including the comparative size of dhs components , the amount of non - appropriated funding the department receives , and trends in the timing and size of the department's appropriations legislation .

the second portion of the report outlines the legislative chronology of major events in funding the department for fy2014 .

the third portion of the report provides detailed information on dhs appropriations , broken down by component , with discussing of associated policy issues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of unique budgetary concepts .

appendix a to this report explains a variety of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act .

this report pays particular attention to discretionary funding amounts .

the report does not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically track any other legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

title i of the dhs appropriations bill provides funding for the department's management activities , analysis and operations ( a&o ) account , and the office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

the administration requested $1,239 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $883 million in title i , a decrease of 28.0% from the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $1,054 million in title i , 14.9% below the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $1,037 million in title i , 16.3% below the requested level .

table 5 lists the pre - sequester enacted amounts for the individual components of title i for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

the heavy lines in this table and in similar ones later in the report serve as a reminder that direct comparisons between the pre - sequester fy2013 funding and fy2014 proposals are not comparisons of current levels of actual spending and proposals for the coming fiscal year , as one would normally see in this type of report .

title ii of the dhs appropriations bill , which includes more than three - quarters of the budget authority provided in the legislation , contains the appropriations for u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

the administration requested $30,283 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $30,768 million , an increase of 1.60% from the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have included $30,289 million , an increase of less than 0.1% from the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $30,877 million in title ii , 2.1% above the requested level .

both the senate - reported bill and the enacted annual appropriations act also included an additional $227 million in funding for overseas contingency operations of coast guard , compensated for by an adjustment in the discretionary spending limits outlined through the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act , as amended .

table 7 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title ii for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

title iii of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the administration requested $5,383 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $5,928 million , an increase of 10.1% above the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $5,955 million , an increase of 10.6% above the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $5,952 million in title iii , 10.6% above the requested level .

in addition , all three versions of this title included a requested $5,626 million for disaster relief that was offset by an adjustment under the budget control act .

table 14 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iii for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

title iv of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office .

the administration requested $2,214 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $1,890 million , a decrease of 14.7% below the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $1,885 million , a decrease of 15.0% below the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $1,878 million in title iv , 15.2% below the requested level .

table 18 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iv for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

title v of the dhs appropriations bill contains the general provisions for the bill .

these typically include a variety of provisions that apply generally to the bill , as opposed to a single appropriation .

however , general provisions may carry additional appropriations , rescissions of prior - year appropriations , limitations on the use of funds , or permanent legislative language as well .

broadly speaking , this section of the report limits its discussion to new general provisions not mentioned elsewhere in the report and those with a direct impact on the budgetary scoring of the bill .

the administration's request was made in relation to the general provisions for dhs included in the fy2012 appropriations act ( division d of p.l .

112-74 ) , because the fy2013 appropriations process had not been concluded while the fy2014 request was being developed .

the administration proposed dropping 36 general provisions , most of which it had proposed eliminating in fy2013 .

eleven of those were already eliminated in the final fy2013 appropriations bill .

the administration also proposed adding 10 provisions and modifying 10 others .

while many of those modifications were simple date changes , one represented a significant change from previous practices .

the administration proposed modifying section 503 , which governs reprogramming of funds , to provide transfer authority that would allow funds to be moved among appropriations accounts within dhs to expedite response to a catastrophic event .

the administration generally requests rescissions in the accounts where they are made , rather than in this title , and requested no direct funding through general provisions for fy2014 .

house - passed h.r .

2217 included $460 million in rescissions in title v , all of which reduced the net scoring of the bill .

under this title , $34 million would have been appropriated for dhs's data center consolidation effort , which had been funded in the past in the general provisions of the legislation .

these were the only provisions in this title that affected the score of the bill ; however , fee revenues of $50 million from section 563 of p.l .

113-6 were reflected in the comparative statement of budget authority at the back of the house report accompanying the bill , further reducing the score of the bill by $50 million .

the house concurred with the administration's request to drop three general provisions beyond the 11 that were dropped from the fy2013 dhs appropriations act .

the house appropriations committee did not add any of the general provisions requested by the administration — with the exception of a rescission provision that it deepened — and rejected the expansion of reprogramming authority .

the house added 19 general provisions to the bill during floor action , bringing the total number of general provisions to 84 .

eighteen of these newly added general provisions would have prohibited the use of funds provided in the bill for specific activities , including the following: changing the list of sharp objects prohibited from being carried by passengers through passenger screening checkpoints or into airport sterile areas and the cabins of a passenger aircraft ; buying american flags made overseas ; contracting with a firm if it or its principals have been convicted in the past three years of a number of crimes , including fraud or tax evasion , are presently indicted of the same , or have been delinquent on their taxes in the last three years ; buying , operating , or maintaining armed unmanned aerial vehicles ; contravening section 236 ( c ) of the immigration and nationality act ( 8 u.s.c .

1226 ( c ) ) , which outlines the authority of the attorney general to detain and release criminal aliens ; restricting a government official from sending or receiving information regarding an individual's immigration status to or from the immigration and naturalization service , in violation of current law ; restricting the secretary's discretion to use federal air marshals on inbound international flights ; implementing , carrying out , administering , or enforcing section 1308 ( h ) of the national flood insurance act of 1968 ( 42 u.s.c .

4015 ( h ) ) , which allows for an increase in premiums for the program ; contracting for the purposes of purchasing ammunition before the date a report required from dhs on ammunition procurement and stockpiles is submitted to congress ; enforcing a section of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) that prohibits the government from contracting for alternative transportation fuels ( other than for research ) that do not produce less greenhouse gases over their lifecycle than the equivalent conventional petroleum fuel ; conducting customs and border protection preclearance operations at abu dhabi international airport in the united arab emirates ; for the dhs secretary's office , using funds for reception or representational activities until an entry - exit visa system is implemented ; and finalizing , implementing , administering , or enforcing three policy memos issued by the director of ice that establish priorities for civil immigration enforcement activities .

two amendments were adopted stating funds in the bill could not be used in contravention of the first , second , fourth , fifth , and fourteenth amendments to the constitution of the united states , or in violation of several laws intended to protect individuals' civil rights .

the only general provision added as a floor amendment in the house that was not a restriction on funding would have moved $10 million from the office of the chief financial officer to fema's state homeland security grant program .

the senate - reported version of h.r .

2217 included $241 million in rescissions .

it also included $54 million for dhs's data center consolidation effort through a general provision , as well as $43 million for dhs headquarters consolidation at st. elizabeths .

the senate - reported bill also included legislative language to allow dhs to use fee revenues collected under the colombia free trade act , which added $110 million to the overall cost of the legislation .

these are the only provisions in this title that affected the score of the bill ; however , as in the house report , fee revenues of $50 million from section 563 of p.l .

113-6 were reflected in the comparative statement of budget authority at the back of the senate report accompanying the bill , further reducing the score of the bill by $50 million .

the senate appropriations committee chose to agree with the administration and drop one general provision that the house retained , regarding restrictions on the appointment of a "principal federal official" in conjunction with a federal coordinating officer to coordinate response to a major disaster declared under the stafford act .

it also would have kept four general provisions proposed for removal that the house did not — regarding the civil engineering program , operations systems center , and national vessel documentation center of the coast guard and the use of u.s. - flagged vessels to move crude oil from the strategic petroleum reserve — and added several others .

it added two provisions requested by the administration — one authorizing the use of reimbursable fee agreements to fund cbp services and a modified provision that would have allowed dhs to receive donations to construct , alter , operate , or maintain land ports of entry .

the senate - reported bill included 72 general provisions in all .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $693 million in rescsissions in title v. it also included $3 million for a uscis immigrant integration grant program , as well as $42 million for data center migration , $35 million for dhs headquarters consolidation , and $30 million for financial systems modernization .

the division included the legislative language concerning cbp fees as proposed by the senate .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included 77 general provisions in all .

seven provisions of the 74 general provisions carried in the fy2013 homeland security appropriations act were dropped , and 10 were added .

the division retained the provision discussed above regarding the appointment of an official to coordinate disaster response , as well as the four provisions listed above that the house had dropped but the senate - reported bill had retained .

section 559 of the division included a modified version of the administration's requested authority to enter into reimbursable fee agreements and to receive donations .

as in the house and senate versions of h.r .

2217 , the division did not include the requested expansion of reprogramming authority .

appendix a. appropriations terms and concepts budget authority , obligations , and outlays federal government spending involves a multi - step process that begins with the enactment of budget authority by congress .

federal agencies then obligate funds from the enacted budget authority to pay for their activities .

finally , payments are made to liquidate those obligations ; the actual payment amounts are reflected in the budget as outlays .

budget authority is established through appropriations acts or direct spending legislation and determines the amounts that are available for federal agencies to spend .

the antideficiency act prohibits federal agencies from obligating more funds than the budget authority that was enacted by congress .

budget authority may also be indefinite in amount , as when congress enacts language providing "such sums as may be necessary" to complete a project or purpose .

budget authority may be available on a one - year , multi - year , or no - year basis .

one - year budget authority is only available for obligation during a specific fiscal year ; any unobligated funds at the end of that year are no longer available for spending .

multi - year budget authority specifies a range of time during which funds can be obligated for spending ; no - year budget authority is available for obligation for an indefinite period of time .

obligations are incurred when federal agencies employ personnel , enter into contracts , receive services , and engage in similar transactions in a given fiscal year .

outlays are the funds that are actually spent during the fiscal year .

because multi - year and no - year budget authorities may be obligated over a number of years , outlays do not always match the budget authority enacted in a given year .

additionally , budget authority may be obligated in one fiscal year but spent in a future fiscal year , especially with certain contracts .

in sum , budget authority allows federal agencies to incur obligations and authorizes payments , or outlays , to be made from the treasury .

discretionary agencies and programs , and appropriated entitlement programs , are funded each year in appropriations acts .

discretionary and mandatory spending gross budget authority , or the total funds available for spending by a federal agency , may consist of discretionary and mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is not mandated by existing law and is thus appropriated yearly by congress through appropriations acts .

the budget enforcement act of 1990 defines discretionary appropriations as budget authority provided in annual appropriation acts and the outlays derived from that authority , but it excludes appropriations for entitlements .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , consists of budget authority and resulting outlays provided in laws other than appropriation acts and is typically not appropriated each year .

however , some funds for mandatory entitlement programs must be appropriated each year and are included in the appropriations acts .

within dhs , the coast guard retirement pay is an example of appropriated mandatory spending .

offsetting collections offsetting funds are collected by the federal government , either from government accounts or the public , as part of a business - type transaction , such as offsets to outlays or collection of a fee .

these funds are not counted as revenue .

instead , they are counted as negative outlays .

dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , consists of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending .

some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority .

other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .

these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility .

the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .

some entitlements are funded by permanent appropriations , others by annual appropriations .

the secret service retirement pay is a permanent appropriation and as such is not annually appropriated , whereas the coast guard retirement pay is annually appropriated .

in addition to these entitlements , the dhs budget contains offsetting trust and public enterprise funds .

these funds are not appropriated by congress .

they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority .

302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process .

in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget .

subsequently , these amounts are allocated among the appropriations committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations .

they include discretionary totals available to the house and senate committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills .

in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations .

these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order .

the house or senate appropriations committee may adjust its 302 ( b ) allocations during the year by issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress towards final enactment .

the fy2012 appropriations bills were the first appropriations bills affected by the budget control act ( bca ) , which established discretionary spending caps for fy2012 through fy2021 .

for fy2014 , the bca initially set a separate cap for security spending , defined to include the departments of defense and veterans affairs , budget function 150 for all international affairs programs , the national nuclear security administration , and the intelligence community management account that funds the offices of the director of national intelligence .

with the failure of the supercommittee process to produce $1.2 trillion in deficit reduction and amendments made by the american taxpayer relief act , the bca now expresses its discretionary spending caps in terms of defense ( $497 billion for fy2014 ) and non - defense ( $469 billion for fy2014 ) .

dhs is included in the latter category .

in addition , the bca allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and for controlling health care fraud and abuse .

when no agreement is reached between the house and senate on a budget resolution to provide a common 302 ( a ) , each body generally takes its own approach to developing 302 ( b ) allocations .

in the house , 302 ( b ) s were developed based on the house - passed budget resolution ( h.con.res .

25 ) , while in the senate , they announced 302 ( b ) s based on the non - sequester - adjusted allocations under the bca .

table a - 1 shows dhs's initial 302 ( b ) allocations for fy2014 , and comparable figures for fy2013 , the president's request for fy2014 , and the enacted net discretionary spending for dhs in p.l .

113-76 .

adjustments to the caps under bca three of the four justifications outlined in the bca for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process .

two of these — emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror — are not limited .

the third justification — disaster relief — is limited .

under the bca , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , using the following formula: limit on disaster relief cap adjustment for the fiscal year = rolling average of the disaster relief spending over the last ten fiscal years ( throwing out the high and low years ) + the unused amount of the potential adjustment for disaster relief from the previous fiscal year .

for fy2014 , omb determined the upper limit of the allowable adjustment for disaster relief would be $12,143 million .

the administration has requested $5,785 million in disaster relief through dhs and the small business administration ( sba ) to be subject to the cap adjustment .

p.l .

113-76 included $5,626 million in appropriations through dhs to be paid for by the allowable adjustment , but not the requested disaster relief funding for the sba .

unlike in fy2013 , there was no carryover of unused disaster relief adjustment to be carried forward into fy2014 .

appendix b. dhs appropriations in context federal government - wide homeland security funding since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been increasing interest in the levels of funding available for homeland security efforts .

the office of management and budget , as originally directed by the fy1998 national defense authorization act , has published an annual report to congress on combating terrorism .

beginning with the june 24 , 2002 , edition of this report , homeland security was included as a part of the analysis .

in subsequent years , this homeland security funding analysis has become more refined , as distinctions ( and account lines ) between homeland and non - homeland security activities have become more precise .

this means that while table b - 1 is presented in such a way as to allow year - to - year comparisons , they may in fact not be strictly comparable due to the increasing specificity of the analysis , as outlined above .

with regard to dhs funding , it is important to note that dhs funding does not account for all federal spending on homeland security efforts .

in fact , while the largest component of federal spending on homeland security is contained within dhs , the dhs homeland security budget for fy2012 accounted for over 51% of total federal funding for homeland security .

the department of defense accounted for the next highest proportion at nearly 26% of all federal spending on homeland security .

the department of health and human services and the department of justice at 6% , and the department of state at nearly 4% rounded out the top five agencies in spending on homeland security .

these five agencies collectively accounted for approximately 93% of all federal spending on homeland security .

it is also important to note that not all dhs funding is classified as pertaining to homeland security activities .

the legacy agencies that became a part of dhs also conduct activities that are not homeland security - related .

therefore , while the enacted fy2012 budget bills and existing law included total homeland security budget authority of $35.1 billion for dhs , the total budget authority for dhs was $52.5 billion .

moreover , the amounts shown in table b - 1 will not be consistent with total amounts shown elsewhere in the report .

this same inconsistency between homeland security budget authority and requested total budget authority is also true for the budgets of the other agencies listed in the table .

due to the fact that the administration's fy2014 budget request was released without an estimate for fy2013 that accounted for p.l .

113-6 or the impact of sequestration , no authoritative data for fy2013 are available as of march 1 , 2014 .

