managing stormwater is one of the biggest and most expensive problems facing cities across the united states .

stormwater is in part a water quantity problem , and for decades the focus of local governments and public works officials was on how to engineer solutions to move rainwater rapidly away from urban areas to avoid the economic damages of flooding .

stormwater also is a pollution problem .

as it moves across the surface of the land , stormwater picks up toxic contaminants , oil and grease , organic material , and other substances , which may be directly discharged into streams , thus delivering pollutants into nearby waterways .

or , it may enter the public sewer system through storm drains , and then the water quantity and water quality problems are joined in the water infrastructure system .

cities face dual challenges in managing stormwater — how to prevent or minimize stormwater entering sewers in the first place , thus preventing overflows from the start , and how to remediate overflows that occur .

for a variety of reasons , many communities are exploring the use of so - called "green infrastructure" to address both types of challenges .

green infrastructure systems and practices use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate , evapotranspire , and / or harvest stormwater on or near the site where it is generated in order to reduce flows to municipal sewers .

there are many success stories in communities around the country , each different , but there also are a number of issues about feasibility , sustainability , and cost - effectiveness .

when rainwater falls , some of the water is absorbed into the ground , and the rest flows along the surface as runoff into rivers and streams .

in forested areas , with porous and varied terrain , about half of rainfall infiltrates into the ground , where it recharges groundwater .

about 40% returns to the atmosphere through evapotranspiration , and the remaining 10% flows along the surface as runoff .

unlike forested areas , urbanized areas often have around 45% or more of land surface that is impervious to rainfall , due to hard surfaces such as parking lots , roads , and rooftops .

when rain hits impervious cover , it is unable to absorb into the ground and instead flows quickly into sewers and ditches and directly into rivers and streams .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) estimates that because of impervious surfaces such as pavement and rooftops , a typical city block generates five times more runoff than a woodland area of the same size , while only about 15% infiltrates into the ground for groundwater recharge .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

further , the increased amount of runoff also increases pollutant loads that are harmful to aquatic life and public health into streams , rivers , and lakes .

pollutants can include sediment ; oil , grease , and toxic chemicals from motor vehicles ; road salts ; pesticides and nutrients from lawns and gardens ; bacteria and pathogens from pet waste and failing septic systems ; and heavy metals from roofs , cars , and other sources .

stormwater runoff that does not directly enter streams and rivers instead enters public sewer systems .

two types of public sewer systems predominate in the united states: combined sewer systems and sanitary sewer systems .

combined sewers convey domestic and industrial wastewaters and stormwater runoff through a single pipe system to a wastewater treatment facility .

nationally , about 750 cities operate combined sewer systems .

most of these are located in the upper midwest , mid - atlantic states , and new england .

during wet weather events , such as rainfall and snowmelt , the combined volume of wastewater and stormwater runoff entering combined sewers often exceeds conveyance capacity .

most combined systems are designed to discharge when the capacity of the sewer is exceeded .

when this occurs , the untreated overflow is discharged directly to nearby surface waters , onto city streets , or as backups in basements prior to the wastewater treatment plant .

overflows pose particularly significant risks to human health when the discharges occur near sources of drinking water .

some combined sewer systems discharge infrequently , while others discharge every time that it rains .

combined sewer overflows ( csos ) are subject to permit requirements under the clean water act ( cwa ) .

permits authorizing discharges from cso outfalls must include technology - based effluent limits .

since the beginning of the 20 th century , u.s. municipalities have generally constructed sanitary sewer systems , rather than combined sewer systems .

sanitary sewer systems convey domestic and industrial wastewater , but not large amounts of stormwater runoff , to a wastewater treatment works .

separate sanitary sewers are located in all 50 states , but are concentrated in the eastern half of the united states and on the west coast .

areas served by sanitary sewer systems often have a municipal separate storm sewer system ( ms4 ) to collect and convey runoff from rainfall and snowmelt .

overflows from sanitary sewers and separate storm sewers also can occur , as a result of blockages , line breaks , or sewer defects that allow excess stormwater and groundwater to overload the system .

discharges from ms4s serving more than 100,000 persons and smaller ms4 systems in urbanized areas also are subject to cwa permit requirements .

operators of these systems must implement stormwater best management practices that include public education , eliminating illicit discharges , and control of construction site and post - construction runoff .

epa's support for green infrastructure was apparent in the 1990s , but was initially slowed by concern about how water quality improvements could be verified .

an important concern is that , because compliance with the clean water act is a legal matter , there is little room for an approach that cannot guarantee results .

by the mid - 2000s , as reports increased of successful performance in u.s. cities , as well as examples of including green infrastructure solutions in ms4 permits and enforcement actions , epa policies reflected growing endorsement .

in 2007 , epa signed a memorandum of understanding with state water quality regulators , a group representing publicly owned wastewater utilities in large cities , and environmental groups to formalize the use of green technology approaches .

the agency subsequently issued a series of policy memos and released a green infrastructure strategic agenda in 2013 ( see appendix b ) .

the 2013 strategic agenda , which updated earlier policy statements , identifies five major focus areas: federal coordination ; cwa regulatory support ; research and information exchange ; funding and financing ; and capacity building .

today , green infrastructure "is a clear priority for the administration. .

epa has awarded funds to a number of communities to implement stormwater management through green infrastructure techniques .

since 2012 , the agency has awarded grants ranging from $400,000 to $950,000 to 37 communities in 23 states for projects such as developing tools and guidance to identify green infrastructure opportunities and reviewing local codes and ordinances to identify barriers to green infrastructure .

in 2012 , epa announced a $4 million grant to the national fish and wildlife foundation to administer a green infrastructure showcase project grant program in communities of the chesapeake bay region .

the agency has been supporting research: in 2014 , epa awarded grants to five universities to evaluate innovative green infrastructure practices in urban areas , using philadelphia as the pilot area .

epa also has supported research evaluating green infrastructure bmps .

the obama administration's support for green infrastructure extends beyond epa .

several other federal agencies administer programs that can assist green infrastructure projects , but none is as focused on green infrastructure and stormwater management as epa .

for example , at the u.s. department of housing and urban development , the office of community planning and development administers programs that support a wide range of community initiatives ; many communities have identified or used these programs to implement green infrastructure projects .

through its energy efficiency and conservation block grant program , the u.s. department of energy encourages the use of green infrastructure techniques to improve energy efficiency in transportation , building , and other sectors .

at the u.s. department of agriculture , the forest service focuses activities on urban sustainability including green infrastructure , urban forest sustainability , stormwater management , and smart growth .

the white house has shown interest and support , as well .

epa and the council on environmental quality hosted a 2012 white house conference on green infrastructure "to explore pathways to more broadly implement green infrastructure. .

in 2013 , the white house announced support for green infrastructure , saying that the administration would prioritize smart infrastructure to create jobs and build a strong future for u.s. cities and would align federal agency resources to aid municipalities in building and investing in green infrastructure .

also in 2013 , the white house held meetings that discussed financing water infrastructure improvements generally , including green and traditional gray approaches .

administration officials have promoted green infrastructure approaches as a way to help communities become more sustainable and their infrastructure more resilient in the face of changing climatic conditions .

congressional interest in these issues is reflected in legislation and oversight hearings in recent congresses .

in addition , as described previously , epa appropriations acts since 2009 have directed a portion of funds that states receive for wastewater and drinking water improvements and upgrades to go to projects that address green infrastructure , water or energy efficiency , or other environmentally innovative activities .

legislation titled the innovative stormwater infrastructure act of 2015 has been introduced in the 114 th congress to support research and implementation of green / innovative stormwater infrastructure ( h.r .

1775 / s. 896 ; and title ii , subtitle c , of h.r .

2893 / s. 1837 ) .

the legislation directs epa to provide assistance to establish centers for excellence to conduct research on green / innovative stormwater infrastructure and authorizes development and implementation grants .

it directs the epa administrator to ensure the promotion of green infrastructure in epa offices and programs and would require .

in addition , the legislation directs epa to establish voluntary measurable goals , to be known as the "innovative stormwater control infrastructure portfolio standard," to increase the percentage of water managed using such techniques .

similar legislation was introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses .

two other bills in the 114 th congress , s. 2768 and s. 2848 , include provisions calling for epa to promote green infrastructure .

federal funding for all types of water infrastructure is a long - standing issue in congress .

more generally , recent legislative proposals also have addressed existing cwa funding provisions to assist traditional water infrastructure projects , but not with a particular green infrastructure focus .

for example , the 113 th congress enacted certain amendments to the cwa in the water resources reform and development act ( title v of wrrda , p.l .

113-121 ) .

the legislation allows use of cwa state revolving fund ( srf ) monies "for measures to manage , reduce , treat , or reuse municipal stormwater," but it does not expressly mention green infrastructure .

in the 111 th congress , the house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee on water resources held an oversight hearing on the growing use of green infrastructure .

at the hearing , witnesses expressed some concern that green infrastructure enthusiasm by epa , some local government officials , and environmental advocates may not be giving adequate attention to questions of cost — especially long - term maintenance costs — feasibility , and demonstrated environmental improvements .

the most specific legislative action on green infrastructure is reflected in recent epa appropriations acts , which have mandated a set - aside from funds for clean water and drinking water srf capitalization grants ( see " paying for green infrastructure " ) .

environmental advocates have recommended actions that congress could take to encourage and support green infrastructure , including enactment of legislation to assist demonstration projects and help improve the knowledge base about performance , cost - effectiveness , and similar topics ( see " congressional interest " ) .

some support legislation to require federally funded roads and highways to control runoff pollution to an objective retention standard ( similar to provisions in the energy independence and security act of 2007 applicable to federal facilities ) .

environmental advocates also have supported legislation to authorize federal assistance for water and wastewater infrastructure investment , and on appropriations legislation to fully fund capitalization grants for state revolving funds , since these funds can be a vehicle for green infrastructure investments .

states , too , support assistance through the srf programs to finance green infrastructure projects , as reflected in a resolution adopted by the environmental council of states ( ecos ) , but they do not support prescriptive approaches that would mandate green infrastructure .

the kinds of federal policies and programs favored by stakeholder groups do have associated costs — for example , costs for grant or other types of infrastructure assistance , or for epa or other federal agencies to research green infrastructure practices , develop guidance and model codes , or provide technical and other types of information to decisionmakers .

in the current budgetary context , securing funds for both existing and new programs is a significant challenge .

further , many who are hesitant about investing in green infrastructure approaches , such as some engineers , consultants , and water utility officials , argue that the risk and uncertainty over whether green infrastructure will truly help achieve water quality objectives also involve costs .

nevertheless , advocates argue that without funding for green infrastructure practices , the economic damages and water quality impacts of stormwater will be more costly than if such practices are supported .

appendix a .

selected green infrastructure practices the images below illustrate some green infrastructure practices and techniques being utilized by cities .

appendix b .

selected green infrastructure bibliography the following references are a representative selection of the growing literature on green infrastructure .

many include case studies .

david c. rouse and ignacio f. bunster - ossa , green infrastructure: a landscape approach , american planning association , report number 571 , january 2013 , 160 p. american rivers , water environment federation , american society of landscape architects , and econorthwest , banking on green: a look at how green infrastructure can save municipalities money and provide economic benefits community - wide , april 2012 , 41 p. the nature conservancy , greening vacant lots: planning and implementation strategies , december 2012 , 129 p. christopher kloss and crystal calarusse , rooftops to rivers , green strategies for controlling stormwater and combined sewer overflows , natural resources defense council , june 2006 , 54 p. noah garrison and karen hobbs , rooftops to rivers ii , green strategies for controlling stormwater and combined sewer overflows , natural resources defense council , 2011 , 134 p. alisa valderrama , lawrence levine , eron bloomgarden , ricardo bayon , kelly wachowicz , and charlotte kaiser , creating clean water cash flows , developing private markets for green stormwater infrastructure in philadelphia , natural resources defense council , eko asset management partners , and the nature conservancy , report r:13-01-a , january 2013 , 87 p. jeffrey odefey , permitting green infrastructure: a guide to improving municipal stormwater permits and protecting water quality , report of american rivers , january 2013 , 40 p. noah garrison , robert c. wilkinson , and richard horner , a clear blue future , how greening california cities can address water resources and climate challenges in the 21 st century , natural resources defense council , nrdc technical report , august 2009 , 53 p. clean water america alliance , barriers and gateways to green infrastructure , september 2011 , 38 p. center for neighborhood technology and american rivers , the value of green infrastructure: a guide to recognizing its economic , environment and social benefits , 2010 , 80 p. charles t. driscoll , caitlin g. eger , david g. chandler , et al , green infrastructure: lessons from science and practice , a publication of the science policy exchange , june 2015 , 32 p. environmental finance center network , green infrastructure resource directory , june 2012 , 11 p. nell green nylen and michael kiparsky , accelerating cost - effective green stormwater infrastructure: learning from local implementation , uc - berkeley school of law center for law , energy & the environment , february 2015 , 51 p. u.s. environmental protection agency , low impact development ( lid ) "barrier busters" fact sheet series , a seven - part series of fact sheets for state and local decisionmakers , http: / / water.epa.gov / polwaste / green / bbfs.cfm .

u.s. environmental protection agency , green infrastructure permitting and enforcement series , six factsheets plus four supplemental materials on integrating green infrastructure concepts into permitting , enforcement , and water quality standards actions , at http: / / www.epa.gov / infrastructure / greeninfrastructure / gi_regulatory.cfm .

u.s. environmental protection agency , reducing stormwater costs through low impact development ( lid ) strategies and practices , epa 841-f - 07-006 , december 2007 , 30 p. u.s. environmental protection agency , managing wet weather with green infrastructure municipal handbooks , including funding options , september 2008 , 14 p. , green infrastructure retrofit policies , december 2008 , 23 p. , green streets , december 2008 , 17 p. , rainwater harvesting policies , december 2008 , 14 p. , and incentive mechanisms , june 2009 , 33 p. u.s. environmental protection agency , green infrastructure strategic agenda 2013 , 7 p. u.s. environmental protection agency , greening cso plans: planning and modeling green infrastructure for combined sewer overflow ( cso ) control , epa 832-r - 14-001 , march 2014 , 38 p. benjamin grumbles , assistant administrator , epa office of water , memorandum , "using green infrastructure to protect water quality in stormwater , cso , nonpoint source and other water programs," march 5 , 2007 , 2 p. linda boornazian , director , epa water permits division , and mark pollins , director , epa water enforcement division , memorandum , "use of green infrastructure in npdes permits and enforcement," august 16 , 2007 , 2 p. nancy stoner , acting assistant administrator , epa office of water , and cynthia giles , assistant administrator , epa office of enforcement and compliance , memorandum , "protecting water quality with green infrastructure in water permitting and enforcement programs," april 20 , 2011 , 5 p. additional epa and other resources on green infrastructure can be found at http: / / water.epa.gov / infrastructure / greeninfrastructure / index.cfm#tabs - 6 .

