the subject matter covered within this report is european union ( eu ) renewable electricity generation — specifically onshore wind and solar photovoltaic ( pv ) electricity — and does not include discussion about the broader renewable energy sector ( i.e. , alternative transportation fuels , heating / cooling , and energy efficiency ) .

onshore wind and solar pv were selected as they have experienced the largest amounts of deployment in the eu to date .

european union energy policy is complex and multi - dimensional .

furthermore , each of the 28 member countries has a unique set of policies and incentives that add further complexity to the policy structure .

it is beyond the scope of this report to provide a comprehensive overview and analysis of all energy polices at the eu and member - country level .

rather , the scope of this report is designed to focus on certain aspects of energy policy at the eu - level and for three specific countries — germany , spain , and italy .

however , other eu members have implemented renewable electricity support policies with various designs and objectives .

finally , renewable electricity policies for three specific eu member countries provide a country - level comparison of the unique policy types , implementation strategies , and financial mechanics used by different eu members .

germany , spain , and italy were selected for further review based on the amount of onshore wind and solar pv deployment in these countries .

although the scope of this report has been narrowed , material contained in this report is naturally complex and technical with many caveats and nuances .

where possible , information contained in the report has been generalized .

for additional information and detail about specific policies , please contact the author directly .

the european union has a multi - decade history of supporting and promoting renewable energy as a means of addressing two primary energy - related concerns: ( 1 ) energy import dependency , and ( 2 ) greenhouse gas emissions .

eu net imports of natural gas , solid fuels , and oil / petroleum products represented 54% of total primary energy consumption in 2010 .

starting as early as 1986 , eu communications and directives have been aimed at reducing fossil fuel consumption , diversifying the eu energy mix , reducing greenhouse gas emissions , and encouraging the use of renewable energy for electricity , heating / cooling , and transportation .

in 1997 , in preparation for the upcoming "third council of parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change" held in kyoto , japan , the european commission published a white paper that , among other things , called for the eu community to obtain 12% of its energy needs from renewable sources by 2010 .

subsequently , eu members became kyoto protocol signatories and eventually ratified commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .

in 2001 the european parliament and the eu council published directive 2001 / 77 / ec , which set out non - binding national indicative targets for eu members that would result in the eu , as a whole , sourcing 12% of total energy , including 22.1% of electricity , from renewable sources by 2010 .

however , the non - binding nature of renewable energy targets in the 2001 directive did not provide the degree of certainty needed to motivate the development and investment necessary to achieve the targets .

not until the passage of the 2009 climate and energy package did the eu and its members have binding renewable energy targets .

in 2007 , the european commission published a renewable energy roadmap that set energy and emissions targets with the goal of transforming europe into an energy - efficient and low carbon economy .

these targets were included in eu legislation , known as the climate and energy package .

the eu targets are commonly referred to as the "20-20-20" targets as they focus on three key objectives to be met by the year 2020: ( 1 ) binding target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20% compared to 1990 levels , ( 2 ) binding target to increase to 20% the portion of final eu energy consumption that is produced from renewable energy sources , and ( 3 ) non - binding target to improve energy efficiency in the eu by 20% compared to 2020 projections .

in 2009 the eu adopted directive 2009 / 28 / ec to promote and encourage the use of renewable energy resources in member countries .

the directive codified the eu goal that 20% of total final eu energy consumption be produced from renewable energy sources by 2020 .

to achieve the 2020 goal , the directive established binding renewable energy targets for each eu member country .

each national renewable energy target is different , with some national targets higher than 20% and some lower .

country - specific renewable energy targets were established based on a number of factors , including the quality of renewable energy resources , country economies , energy resource mix , and others ( for a list of all eu member country 2020 targets , see the appendix ) .

in order to comply with the 2020 goal , countries can use renewable energy sources for heating / cooling , electricity , and transport , although each member country is required to source a minimum of 10% of transport energy from renewable sources by 2020 .

each eu member country has discretion to decide what policies and incentives are offered that might motivate renewable energy development in order to achieve the binding eu renewable energy targets .

the eu directive also allows for the transfer of renewable energy between member countries , joint projects among member countries , and projects with developing countries outside the eu , as long as they meet certain qualifying criteria .

extending climate and energy targets past 2020 is being debated in the eu and the european commission published a march 2013 concept paper regarding a 2030 policy framework that would increase eu renewable energy targets .

for renewable electricity generation , eu countries have used several different types of incentive mechanisms to stimulate the development and investment required to meet eu 2020 targets .

generally , each country uses a unique mix of policy incentives .

the application of those policy tools is customized to suit the objectives of each eu member .

also , each eu country has discretion with regard to the types of financial incentives offered to renewable electricity projects .

the most commonly cited and referenced eu financial incentive is the feed - in tariff , described below , which has been used in several eu countries to encourage deployment of renewable electricity generation projects .

however , there are other incentive mechanisms used to support renewable power in the eu .

some member countries have started to transition from feed - in tariffs to other incentive types as a way to control costs , manage capacity installations , and integrate renewable electricity with power markets .

the following sections provide a brief overview of four primary types of financial incentive mechanisms used by eu member countries to stimulate renewable electricity generation .

renewable electricity policy history , evolution , incentives , financial mechanics , and market impacts are dependent on a particular country's situation .

germany , spain , and italy are eu member countries that have been quite active in terms of renewable electricity policy , development , and technology deployment .

as of the end of 2012 , germany and italy were the top two countries in the world in terms of cumulative installed solar pv capacity , with 32,000 megawatts ( mw ) and 17,000 mw , respectively .

as recently as 2008 , spain was one of the most active renewable electricity markets in the world .

nearly 3,000 mw of solar pv was installed in spain that year , more than in any other country .

each of these countries has employed different policy frameworks and incentive mechanisms to encourage investment in , and deployment of , renewable electricity generation .

in some cases , renewable electricity policies were designed to be reviewed periodically in order to adjust incentives based on changes to economic and market conditions .

in other cases , governments made unscheduled policy adjustments in order to respond to fiscal , economic , market , and political demands .

over the last decade germany , spain , and italy have modified their policies on multiple occasions .

an examination of their respective renewable electricity policies provides some perspective regarding how different countries implement and adjust policies based on changing market , economic , and political conditions .

the following sections provide a policy overview for each country .

renewable electricity has multiple policy dimensions .

congress determines the types and amounts of federal financial incentives that are available to support renewable electricity deployment in the united states .

tax credit policies — production and investment — are the primary federal incentives that support renewable electricity deployment in the united states .

generally , congress debates whether to extend , eliminate , or phase out either investment tax credits or production tax credits that incentivize deployment of renewable power generation assets .

in the 113 th congress , several bills — including h.r .

2081 , h.r .

2502 , and h.r .

2538 — have been introduced that would either extend or phase - out tax incentives for wind and solar power generation .

should debates and discussions continue , congress may examine policy design and implementation in other countries during deliberations .

the following considerations and issues are provided in order to help inform future discussions about u.s. renewable electricity policies .

one of the stated objectives for eu renewable policies is to improve energy security within the eu by reducing the amount of energy imports .

according to the european commission , approximately 54% of eu energy demand was supplied by energy imports in 2010 .

energy imports to the united states , on the other hand , supplied roughly 16% of u.s. energy demand in 2012 — u.s .

energy imports continue to decline .

import situations in the united states and eu are , therefore , quite different .

energy supply motivations may be relatively more compelling in the european union .

additionally , energy resource endowments , ownership , and regulatory structures in the united states and eu are also very different .

these factors can influence energy markets , resource development , and policy decisions .

finally , some fuels used for power generation are priced differently in the united states and eu .

for example , natural gas , which typically sets the value of electricity during peak demand periods , is much more expensive in the eu than in the united states .

in 2012 , the average price of natural gas paid by u.s. electric power generators was $3.52 per million british thermal units ( mmbtu ) .

however , eu industrial natural gas consumers were paying , on average , more than $12.00 per mmbtu in 2012 .

the combination of the above factors may provide the eu with more economic motivation to stimulate renewable electricity generation deployment when compared to other countries .

electricity markets in the united states and eu countries are also different .

while the united states does not have a single national market — rather , multiple regional markets with different operating models and pricing structures — many eu member countries do have national electricity markets .

in some eu countries ( i.e .

spain and italy ) the national government has ownership and / or control rights of electricity markets and transmission infrastructure .

additionally , eu national governments may also control electricity rates charged to consumers .

in the united states , there are multiple regional electricity / transmission markets with different operating models and pricing structures .

further , some u.s. electricity markets are based on competitive market dynamics and some are based on cost - of - service models .

also in the united states , consumer electricity price levels are influenced by state - level commissions that regulate and monitor electric power utilities .

these fundamental u.s. and eu market structure and regulation differences may result in difficulties — technical and political — associated with applying eu member - country incentive policies to the united states at a national level .

arguably , eu countries and electricity consumers paid for a large part of the development and scale - up of the global solar pv industry .

as a result , significant equipment and system cost declines have been realized since 2008 .

germany , spain , and italy set incentives at high enough levels to support adequate investment returns based on solar equipment and installation costs using a baseline set of assumptions .

incentives in some countries were generous enough to support high investment returns , which created opportunities for manufacturers to offer value - based pricing in order to capture substantial profit margins from the sale of pv equipment .

these margin opportunities caused the manufacturing base to expand rapidly as more companies , many of them located in asia , entered the market .

due to a number of circumstances — including fiscal and economic challenges and declining policy support for renewable electricity — the solar module manufacturing market reached an over - supply situation ( i.e. , manufacturing capacity exceeded solar pv demand ) and prices began a precipitous decline in 2009 .

figure 6 compares annual solar pv installations in the united states and eu since 2001 with solar pv module costs over the same period .

as indicated in figure 6 , eu solar pv installations started increasing in 2004 and peaked in 2011 .

solar pv module costs began a rapid decline in 2009 , reaching less than $1 per watt in 2012 .

as module costs came down , u.s. pv installations increased .

annual pv installations in the us are projected to continue rising out to 2015 , while eu installations are forecasted to decline in the near term .

in essence , as the u.s. solar pv market is growing , u.s. solar pv buyers are now paying much less for pv modules than eu buyers did in the period between 2007 and 2011 .

both the eu and the united states offer a number of incentives that support deployment of renewable electricity generation .

some policies are at the eu and u.s. national level and some policies are available only in specific eu member - countries and individual u.s. states .

generally , the european union sets binding renewable electricity requirements for each member , and each member country provides a unique set of financial incentives to motivate deployment of renewable power systems that will achieve the eu - level targets .

in the united states , the federal government provides financial incentives for renewable electricity — production tax credits for wind and investment tax credits for solar , for example — and some states have established renewable portfolio standards that mandate a certain percentage of electricity be generated from renewable energy sources .

as of june 2013 , 29 states and the district of columbia had binding renewable electricity targets .

details of the policy landscape in both the eu and u.s. are much more complicated than this general description .

additionally , an analysis of the relative success and effectiveness of each renewable electricity support model is beyond the scope of this report .

however , it should be noted that the u.s. and eu member - countries , to date , have consistently been two of the world's largest markets for renewable electricity deployment .

feed - in tariffs , depending on the policy design details , stimulate deployment of renewable electricity generation projects .

solar pv market growth in eu countries provides an illustrative example .

generally speaking , deployment follows incentives ; countries with the most generous incentives — in combination with solar resources , access to financial capital , and regulatory conditions — typically experience the largest amounts of deployment .

up until 2012 , eu countries such as germany and italy were installing more solar pv capacity each year than any other country in the world .

in 2008 , spain had more solar installations that year than any other country .

each of these countries utilized generous fit and market premium incentives as a solar pv financial support mechanism .

however , managing and controlling fit incentive programs can be difficult , especially in a dynamic and rapidly changing market like solar pv .

germany and italy were the largest solar pv markets between 2010 and 2012 , but installations in these countries were far exceeding plans and implied targets for annual solar pv capacity additions .

germany reacted by rapidly and frequently reducing incentives offered to new projects .

italy imposed an annual expenditure limit for new solar pv systems ; this limit was reached in june 2013 and solar pv fits are no longer available as of july 2013 .

ultimately , actions by germany and italy will reduce annual solar capacity additions in each respective country .

following several years of significant renewable electricity deployment , especially solar pv , some eu countries are changing financial support mechanisms to encourage electricity market integration — i.e. , selling electricity in the wholesale market , allowing for curtailment under certain circumstances — instead of electricity generation .

to date , fits and declining equipment prices have resulted in significant solar pv deployment in the eu , most notably in germany and italy .

however , concerns with electric power system reliability are prompting these countries to incentivize the integration of renewables into electric power markets .

integration incentives are generally motivated by high levels of renewables penetration into the electric power system and countries are looking for ways to address the output variability of renewable power systems .

market integration incentives could potentially create a situation whereby renewable electricity generators respond to market and price signals , which could help to manage the power production variability from renewable energy sources .

analysis of germany's renewable electricity production highlights the variability of wind and solar during certain time periods throughout the year ; renewable electricity output in germany ranged from approximately 10 gigawatts to nearly 70 gigawatts in 2012 .

this variability not only causes challenges with grid system operations , but also with wholesale electricity price levels that can potentially strain the economics of power generation assets that may be needed to maintain system reliability .

as a result , countries may need to consider different market designs that support various types of generation and services that might be necessary to ensure stable and reliable electric power system operations .

additionally , germany started offering an energy storage subsidy for solar pv projects to encourage investment in battery storage that might support the integration of solar pv with the electric power system .

germany has indicated that it plans to shift from feed - in tariffs to market premiums as a way to better integrate renewables with the grid and power market .

additionally , germany now provides a flexibility premium for electricity generated from non - intermittent renewable sources like biogas , which has the ability to ramp production up and down based on grid system needs .

germany also provides bonus incentives for wind and solar projects that are remotely controlled , thereby allowing the grid system operator to control and manage electricity output from variable renewable power sources .

italy's national energy strategy ( nes ) states that the "growing amount of production from intermittent , non - programmable sources is increasingly becoming a challenge for the network infrastructure and for the market. .

the nes also indicates that italy aims to "gradually integrate renewable electricity with the market and grid. .

germany's renewable electricity support policy , the eeg , was designed to gradually reduce incentives in order to stimulate cost reductions that would , in turn , result in renewable electricity being cost competitive on an unsubsidized basis .

italy also introduced a degression plan to reduce incentives over time and its national energy strategy states that "it is expected that incentives will gradually be reduced ( and eventually cease ... ) , the eventual aim being the full integration with the electricity market and the grid. .

generally , the goal of incentive reductions is to match the evolutionary pace of economies of scale and deployment experience to push down system costs , thereby allowing a lower incentive level to stimulate demand for new renewable electricity capacity .

however , experience in germany and italy indicates that incentive reductions can be challenging to adapt to rapidly changing market circumstances .

for example , solar pv installations in germany and italy were well above government plans and targets between 2010 and 2012 .

germany responded by applying degression every six months to solar pv fit incentives , instead of once a year , and then instituted monthly fit degression in order to better manage and control annual solar pv capacity additions .

both germany and italy have also instituted policies that eliminate financial incentives for solar pv once certain capacity and cost milestones are reached ; germany's incentives will cease once 52,000 mw of capacity is installed and italy's incentives will no longer be available when annual support costs reach €6.7 billion .

once these milestones are reached — italy reached its milestone in june 2013 — annual pv capacity additions may decline and it seems unlikely that they could return to 2010-2012 levels in the near future .

balancing incentive availability , policy costs , and renewable electricity market growth is a difficult challenge for policy makers .

multiple eu member - countries have made policy decisions to retroactively reduce financial incentives for renewable electricity projects .

as discussed earlier in this report , spain has introduced retroactive incentive reductions that change the baseline financial performance on which project investment decisions were made .

other eu countries , such as greece , bulgaria , and romania , have also made retroactive cuts to renewable power incentives .

in early 2013 , germany proposed a renewable electricity incentive modification plan , which included a one - year 1.5% fit reduction for all operating renewable projects .

this plan was not approved and future policy direction in germany is not expected until after national elections in september 2013 .

retroactive incentive cuts immediately impact the economics of existing projects that are subject to the reduction .

however , future projects are also affected and the cost of electricity from renewables will likely increase , all else being equal .

retroactive incentive reductions introduce an element of policy risk and uncertainty into the finance and investment decision matrix .

this additional investment risk is likely to increase the cost of capital used to finance future renewable electricity projects .

higher financing costs generally result in renewable electricity generation cost increases .

further , as renewable electricity generation costs increase , so does the cost of the certain incentive programs since these costs are calculated as the difference between renewable generation costs and electricity market prices .

