p ortions of all 50 states and the district of columbia are vulnerable to earthquake hazards , although risks vary greatly across the country and within individual states .

seismic hazards are greatest in the western united states , particularly in california , washington , oregon , alaska , and hawaii .

alaska is the most earthquake - prone state , experiencing a magnitude 7 earthquake almost every year and a magnitude 8 earthquake every 13 years , on average , since 1900 .

because of its low population and low infrastructure density , most of the state of alaska has a relatively low risk for large economic losses from an earthquake .

in contrast , a larger portion of california has more earthquake risk than any other state because of its frequent seismic activity , large population , and extensive infrastructure .

however , on november 30 , 2018 , a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck just north of anchorage , ak , causing extensive damage .

the federal government has supported efforts to assess and monitor earthquake hazards and risk in the united states under the national earthquake hazards reduction program ( nehrp ) since 1977 .

four federal agencies responsible for long - term earthquake risk reduction coordinate their activities under nehrp u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) ; national science foundation ( nsf ) ; federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; and national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) .

on november 27 , 2018 , congress passed the national earthquake hazards reduction program reauthorization act of 2018 , and president trump signed the bill into law on december 11 as p.l .

115-307 .

the new act combined two nearly identical bills , s. 1768 and h.r .

6650 , introduced by senator feinstein and representative rohrabacher , respectively .

prior to passage of p.l .

115-307 , congress last made changes to nehrp under the national earthquake hazards reduction program reauthorization act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-360 ; 42 u.s.c .

7704 ) .

the 2018 nehrp reauthorization act largely leaves the overall program structure in place , but modifies some of the intents and purposes of the original legislation , such as removing references to the goal of earthquake prediction , and substituting instead the goal of issuing early warnings and earthquake alerts .

the new law also authorizes appropriations for nehrp activities for each of the four nehrp agencies through fy2023 .

authorization for appropriations under p.l .

108-360 expired in 2009 ; however , congress continued to appropriate funds for nehrp activities during the intervening nine years until enactment of p.l .

115-307 .

in 1977 , congress passed the earthquake hazards reduction act ( p.l .

95-124 ) , establishing nehrp as a long - term earthquake hazard reduction program for the united states .

the program , led by usgs and nsf , initially focused on research toward understanding and ultimately predicting earthquakes .

however , earthquake prediction has proved insoluble over time , and nehrp shifted its focus in 1990 to minimizing losses from earthquakes .

agency leadership of nehrp has also changed since the program's inception .

fema was created in 1979 under president carter and designated as the lead agency for nehrp .

in 1980 , congress passed amendments to the earthquake hazards reduction act ( p.l .

96-472 ) , which defined fema as the lead agency for nehrp .

the amendments also authorized additional funding for earthquake hazard preparedness and mitigation for fema and the national bureau of standards ( now nist ) .

the 2018 nehrp reauthorization act largely leaves the current four - agency nehrp program intact , while providing some new areas of emphasis and specific authorization of appropriations levels for the member agencies .

it is the product of two nearly identical bills: s. 1768 , introduced by senator feinstein on september 6 , 2017 , with seven original cosponsors ; and h.r .

6650 , introduced by representative rohrabacher on august 3 , 2018 , with three original cosponsors .

upon introduction , s. 1768 was referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , which held a markup on december 13 , 2017 .

an amendment in the nature of a substitute , introduced by senator gardner , was accepted by the committee , the bill was reported favorably out of committee , and the senate passed the bill by unanimous consent on september 27 , 2018 .

upon introduction , h.r .

6650 was referred to the house science , space , and technology committee ; the house natural resources committee ; and the house transportation and infrastructure committee .

the senate - passed bill in its final form was nearly identical to h.r .

6650 , and the house passed s. 1768 by unanimous consent on november 27 , 2018 .

the bill became law on december 11 , 2018 , as p.l .

115-307 ) .

the sections below discusses changes to the nehrp program authorized by p.l .

115-307 .

at present , earthquakes cannot be accurately predicted .

for example , although historically alaska has experienced a magnitude 7 earthquake nearly every year , it has proved impossible to predict exactly when and where an earthquake will occur .

the november 30 , 2018 , anchorage earthquake was no exception , although as the most earthquake - prone state , alaska has a relatively high probability of experiencing earthquakes every year compared to many other western states .

in its 1990 reauthorization , nehrp shifted its program emphasis from prediction to hazards reduction .

since then , the program's focus has been on understanding the earthquake hazard and its risk to populations and infrastructure in the united states , developing effective measures to reduce earthquake hazards , and promoting the adoption of earthquake hazard reduction measures in vulnerable areas .

legislation to modify nehrp in the 108 th congress ( p.l .

108-360 ) reflected congressional concerns about how well the four nehrp agencies coordinated their efforts to maximize the program's potential .

the national earthquake hazards reduction program reauthorization act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-307 ) leaves the program largely intact , while emphasizing activities to promote greater resilience to earthquakes and activities that would enhance the effectiveness of an earthquake early warning system , among other changes .

the new act authorizes annual appropriations levels for nehrp at slightly higher levels than the amount of enacted appropriations for the program in fy2017 , but slightly lower than the amount enacted in fy2018 .

p.l .

115-307 also removes statutory language regarding earthquake prediction .

since nehrp shifted its emphasis toward reducing losses during an earthquake , one persistent question has been how to establish a more precise relationship between nehrp activities and reduced earthquake risk and actual losses from earthquakes .

section 4 of p.l .

115-307 appears to address that question by requiring the comptroller general of the united states to review the activities of the program and produce a report for congress that addresses the earthquake risks and hazards in the nation .

the review and report are to examine how federal activities are addressing those risks and hazards , including how states , tribes , and local governments are using nehrp - generated information and implementing measures to reduce their earthquake risk .

