the agriculture appropriations bill — formally known as the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — provides funding for: all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) except the forest service , which is funded in the interior appropriations bill , the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services , and in the house , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

in the senate , the financial services bill contains cftc appropriations .

in even - numbered fiscal years , cftc appears in the enacted agriculture appropriation .

jurisdiction is with the house and senate committees on appropriations , and their respective subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies .

the bill includes both mandatory and discretionary spending , although most decision - making concerns discretionary spending .

see appendix a for more on scope and terminology .

the primary focus of this report is the fy2014 appropriation .

however , due to the timing of the fy2013 appropriation and budget sequestration , this report also presents the final fy2013 data .

the fy2013 agriculture and related agencies appropriation was enacted as division a of the fy2013 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , p.l .

113-6 — an omnibus appropriation for 5 of the 12 appropriation subcommittee bills and a year - long continuing resolution for the other 7 appropriations subcommittee bills ( table 2 ) .

the senate explanatory statement was filed on march 11 , 2013 , passed in the senate in an exchange of amendments to an earlier - passed house version , and later was adopted in the house .

the bill was signed by the president on march 26 , 2013 .

both the house and the senate reported bills for fy2013 agriculture appropriations , but in the previous congress .

the senate full committee moved first , reporting s. 2375 ( s.rept .

112-163 ) on april 26 , 2012 .

the house subcommittee marked up its bill on june 6 , 2012 , followed by full committee action on h.r .

5973 ( h.rept .

112-542 ) on june 19 , 2012 .

in preparation for floor action , an open rule for the bill was passed on the floor june 26 , 2012 , but floor proceedings for the bill did not occur .

no further action occurred on the agriculture appropriations bills .

fy2013 began under a continuing resolution ( cr ; p.l .

112-175 ) that lasted until march 27 , 2013 .

the cr funded discretionary operations at fy2012 levels plus 0.612% .

it continued mandatory programs at needed funding levels , and continued other conditions and limits from fy2012 .

the agriculture and related agencies appropriations bill covers all of usda except for the forest service .

this amounts to nearly 95% of usda's total appropriation .

the forest service is funded through the interior appropriations bill .

the order of the following sections reflects the order that the agencies are listed in the agriculture appropriations bill ( except for the portion of fda appropriations for food safety , which is discussed in a comprehensive section on food safety ) .

see table 3 and tables in some of the following sections for more details on the amounts for specific agencies .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates the safety of foods and cosmetics ; the safety and effectiveness of drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices ; and public health aspects of tobacco products .

although fda has been a part of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) since 1940 , the committee on appropriations does not consider fda within hhs under its subcommittee on labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies .

jurisdiction over fda's budget remains with the subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies , reflecting fda's beginnings as part of the department of agriculture .

fda's program level , the amount that fda can spend , is composed of direct appropriations ( also referred to as budget authority ) and user fees .

the fy2014 appropriation provided fda a total program level of $4.387 billion .

that total is $356 million ( +8.8% ) more than what the agency received in fy2013 and is $3 million ( +0.1% ) more than what the president requested for fy2014 .

the enacted conference agreement for fy2014 provided the agency with a total direct appropriation of $2.561 billion .

this amount is $175 million ( +7.3% ) higher than the fy2013 appropriation and $3 million ( +0.1% ) more than the president's fy2014 request .

for user fees , the enacted fy2014 appropriation includes $1.827 billion in user fees , accounting for 41.6% of fda's total program level .

the fee total includes authorized collections to support specified agency activities regarding prescription drugs , medical devices , animal drugs , animal generic drugs , tobacco products , generic human drugs , biosimilars , mammography quality , color certification , and export certification , food reinspection , and food recall .

the fy2014 enacted total for fees is $181 million ( +11% ) more than fy2013 and equals the amount requested for authorized user fee programs .

in addition to the $1.827 billion in user fees from those currently authorized programs , the president's request included $269 million for as yet unauthorized fees for medical product reinspection , international courier , food establishment registration , food imports , cosmetics , and food contact notification .

with those proposed fees , the president's total user fee request was $2.1 billion , bringing the total program level request to $4.654 billion .

in the reports that accompanied their respectively reported bills ( h.rept .

113-116 and s.rept .

113-46 ) , the house and senate committees on appropriations laid out their concerns with specific fda activities .

the reports , along with the explanatory statement that accompanied the enacted legislation , include 34 statements that direct and 39 statements that encourage specific action .

the committees addressed most ( 58 out of 73 ) of these to fda , spreading the others to the hhs secretary , the administration , and a specific office within fda ( the office of colors and cosmetics ) .

the directions and encouragements covered most fda programs , with the majority ( 43 out of 73 ) involving foods ( such as implementation of the 2010 fda food safety and modernization act ( fsma , p.l .

111-353 ) — also discussed earlier in this report under the heading " food safety " ) and agency - wide topics ( such as communicating with stakeholders , spending of user fees , and building international relationships ) .

while directions and suggestions in the committee reports do not have statutory stature , they convey to the agency the concerns of committees that determine future appropriations .

the topics the committees raise indicate both the broad range of responsibilities congress has given fda and a hint of the level of scientific expertise necessary to regulate items that touch many aspects of u.s. consumers' lives .

one topic in particular , raised in the senate and house reports and the explanatory statement accompanying the final agreement ( p.l .

113-76 ) , directly relates to appropriations and budget calculations .

that is the treatment of user fee collections and revenue in sequester calculations under the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) has interpreted the bca , which governs sequestration action , as requiring that user fees be included in the sequestrable base along with directly appropriated budget authority .

the fda commissioner estimated that fda would lose about $83 million in user fees in fy2013 .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca , 21 u.s.c .

301 et seq. ) .

sections authorizing fda user fees for drugs and medical devices limit the use of fee revenue to specified agency activities .

because the sequestered user fee collections may not be used for other purposes , they have remained untouchable in the fda account .

the fda commissioner , some members of congress , industry , and others have urged that fees be exempted from sequestration .

members of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees working on a fy2014 bill stated their intentions to work together to find a way to avoid fee sequestering for that year .

the committees addressed this twice in the final documents .

first , section 747 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 reads: sec .

747 .

fees deposited under the heading ''department of health and human services — food and drug administration — salaries and expenses'' in fiscal year 2013 and sequestered pursuant to section 251a of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act , as amended ( 2 u.s.c .

901a ) shall be available until expended for the same purpose for which those funds were originally appropriated .

second , an item in the accompanying explanatory statement encouraged the administration to "reconsider the inclusion of fda user fees when calculating sequester. .

table 19 displays , by program area , the budget authority ( direct appropriations ) , user fees , and total program levels for fda in fy2010 ( actual ) , fy2011 ( actual ) , fy2012 ( as calculated for the agency's june 2013 operating plan ) , fy2013 ( as calculated by the june 2013 operating plan ) , the president's fy2014 request , and the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , signed by the president on january 17 , 2014 .

the final column shows the percentage change from fy2013 to fy2014 .

consistent with the administration and congressional committee formats , each program area in table 19 includes funding designated for the responsible fda center ( eg , the center for drug evaluation and research or the center for food safety and applied nutrition ) and the portion of effort budgeted for the agency - wide office of regulatory affairs to commit to that area .

it also apportions user fee revenue across the program areas as indicated in the administration's request ( eg , 90% of the animal drug user fee revenue is designated for the animal drugs and feeds program , with the rest going to the categories of headquarters and office of the commissioner , general services administration ( gsa ) rent , and other rent and rent - related activities ) .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is the independent regulatory agency charged with oversight of derivatives markets .

the cftc's functions include oversight of trading on the futures exchanges , oversight of the swaps markets , registration and supervision of futures industry personnel , self - regulatory organizations and major participants in the swaps markets , prevention of fraud and price manipulation , and investor protection .

the dodd - frank act ( p.l .

111-203 ) brought the bulk of the previously - unregulated over - the - counter swaps markets under cftc jurisdiction as well as the previously - regulated futures and options markets .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) was created in 1974 as part of the commodity futures trading commission act ( p.l .

93-463 ) to regulate commodities futures and options markets .

these markets at the time were poised to expand beyond their traditional base in agricultural commodities to encompass contracts based on financial variables , such as interest rates and stock indexes .

the agency administers the commodity exchange act ( cea ; p.l .

74-765 , 7 u.s.c .

§1 et seq .

 ) , which was enacted in 1936 .

prior to 1974 , trading in agricultural commodities regulated by the cea was overseen by an office within the u.s. department of agriculture called the commodity exchange administration , which also was formed in 1936 .

following the financial crisis of 2008 , concerns over the largely unregulated nature of the over - the - counter swaps markets led to various reforms passed in title vii of the dodd - frank act .

passage of the dodd - frank act resulted in the cftc's oversight of the economically - significant swaps markets with an estimated notional value of roughly $240 trillion in the united states .

this newly regulated market comes on top of the cftc's prior jurisdiction over the futures and options markets , with an estimated $34 trillion notional value in the united states .

former cftc chairman gary gensler and others have argued that the agency is understaffed , and requires additional funds in order to keep up with the much larger market it is tasked with overseeing , as well as with changing technologies .

in particular , he noted that the cftc requires more staff and technology to review and analyze information on swaps trades now to be provided to swap data repositories .

in addition , the cftc requires staff to oversee the trading activities of newly - registered swap dealers and major swap participants , and to regularly examine clearinghouses that will now clear swaps as well as futures , he noted .

furthermore , he stressed the need for cftc technology upgrades to ensure adequate market surveillance and to enhance customer fund protection programs .

in fy2013 , the cftc's post - sequestration appropriation was $194 million .

the fy2014 appropriation provides the cftc with $215 million , up 10.8% from fy2013 .

appendix a .

background on scope and terms usda activities and relationships to appropriations bills the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) carries out widely varied responsibilities through about 30 separate internal agencies and offices staffed by about 100,000 employees .

usda spending is not synonymous with farm program spending , nor are agriculture appropriations completely correlated with usda spending .

usda divides its activities into "mission areas. .

food and nutrition programs , with more than three - fourths of usda's budget , comprise the largest mission area , supporting the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) ; the women , infants , and children ( wic ) program ; and child nutrition programs .

the second - largest usda mission area , with about one - eighth of usda's budget , is farm and foreign agricultural services .

this broad area includes the farm commodity price and income support programs , crop insurance , certain mandatory conservation and trade programs , farm loans , and foreign food aid programs .

five other mission areas share one - eighth of usda's budget , including natural resources , rural development , research and education , marketing and regulatory programs , and food safety .

comparing usda's organization and budget data to the agriculture appropriations bill in congress is not always easy .

usda's "mission areas" do not always correspond to the titles or categories in the agriculture appropriations bill .

foreign agricultural assistance is a separate title in the appropriations bill ( title v ) , but is joined with domestic farm support in usda's "farm and foreign agriculture" mission area .

title i in the appropriations bill covers four of usda's mission areas: agricultural research , marketing and regulatory programs , food safety , and the farm support portion of farm and foreign agriculture .

the forest service is about half of the natural resources mission area but is funded in the interior appropriations bill .

it also accounts for about one - third of usda's personnel , with about 34,000 staff years in fy2011 .

the type of funding ( mandatory vs. discretionary ) also is an important difference between how the appropriations bill and usda's mission areas are organized .

conservation in the appropriations bill ( title ii ) includes only discretionary programs .

the mandatory funding for conservation programs is included in title i of the appropriation as part of the commodity credit corporation .

conversely , the non - forest service part of usda's natural resources mission area includes both discretionary programs and some mandatory conservation programs .

related agencies in addition to the usda agencies mentioned above , the agriculture appropriations subcommittees have jurisdiction over appropriations for two related agencies: the food and drug administration ( fda ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc , an independent financial markets regulatory agency ) — in the house only .

the combined share of fda and cftc funding ( title vi ) in the overall agriculture and related agencies appropriations bill is about 2% .

jurisdiction over cftc appropriations is assigned differently in the house and senate .

before fy2008 , the agriculture subcommittees in both the house and senate had jurisdiction over cftc funding .

in fy2008 , senate jurisdiction moved to the financial services appropriations subcommittee .

placement in the enacted version now alternates each year .

in even - numbered fiscal years , cftc has resided in the agriculture appropriations act .

in odd - numbered fiscal years , cftc has resided in the enacted financial services appropriations act .

these agencies are included in the agriculture appropriations bill because of their historical connection to agricultural markets .

however , the number and scope of non - agricultural issues has grown in recent decades .

some may argue that these agencies no longer belong in the agriculture appropriations bill .

others say that despite the growing importance of non - agricultural issues , agriculture and food issues are still an important component of each agency .

at fda , food safety responsibilities that are shared between usda and fda have been in the media during recent years and have been the subject of legislation and hearings .

at cftc , volatility in agricultural commodity markets has been a subject of recent scrutiny at cftc and in congress .

discretionary vs .

mandatory spending discretionary and mandatory spending are treated differently in the budget process .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and consumes most of the attention during the appropriations process .

amounts needed for mandatory programs — under the jurisdiction of authorizing committees — generally are advanced without change , based on action by the authorizing committees in the farm bill .

eligibility for participation in mandatory programs ( sometimes referred to as entitlement programs ) is usually written into authorizing laws ; any individual or entity that meets the eligibility requirements is entitled to the benefits authorized by the law .

in fy2014 , about 14% of the agriculture appropriations bill was for discretionary programs ( about $21 billion ) , and the remaining balance of 86% was classified as mandatory ( about $125 billion ) .

most agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) are financed with discretionary funds .

major discretionary programs include certain conservation programs ; most rural development programs ; research and education programs ; agricultural credit programs ; the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; the food for peace international food aid program ; meat and poultry inspection ; and food marketing and regulatory programs .

the discretionary accounts also include fda and cftc appropriations .

the largest component of usda's mandatory spending is for food and nutrition programs — primarily the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly food stamps ) and child nutrition ( school lunch and related programs ) — along with the farm commodity price and income support programs , the federal crop insurance program , and various agricultural conservation and trade programs .

some mandatory spending , such as for the farm commodity programs , is highly variable and is driven by program participation rates , economic and price conditions , and weather patterns .

programs and policies are set in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

in recent years , mandatory spending has tended to rise , particularly as nutrition benefits have risen because of the recession .

although mandatory programs generally are outside the scope of the appropriations debate , amounts for these programs are included in the annual agriculture appropriations act .

in terms of budget enforcement , though , mandatory spending decisions are governed in the authorizations process via the congressional budget office baseline .

for example , the snap and child nutrition programs are funded by an annual appropriation based on projected spending needs .

in fact , snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement," and requires an annual appropriation .

in contrast , the commodity credit corporation operates on a line of credit with the treasury , but receives an annual appropriation to reimburse the treasury and to maintain its line of credit .

budget authority , obligations , outlays , and program levels in addition to the difference between mandatory and discretionary spending , four other terms are important to understanding differences in discussions about federal spending: budget authority , obligations , outlays , and program levels .

1 .

budget authority = how much money congress allows a federal agency to commit to spend .

it represents a limit on funding and is generally what congress focuses on in making most budgetary decisions .

it is the legal basis to incur obligations .

most of the amounts mentioned in this report are budget authority .

2 .

obligations = how much money agencies commit to spend .

obligations represent activities such as employing personnel , entering into contracts , and submitting purchase orders .

3 .

outlays = how much money actually flows out of an agency's account .

outlays may differ from appropriations ( budget authority ) because , for example , payments on a contract may not flow out until a later year .

for construction or delivery of services , budget authority may be committed ( contracted ) in one fiscal year and outlays may be spread across several fiscal years .

4 .

program level = sum of the activities supported or undertaken by an agency .

a program level may be much higher than its budget authority for several reasons .

user fees support some activities ( eg , food or border inspection ) .

the agency makes loans ; for example , a large loan authority ( program level ) is possible with a small budget authority ( loan subsidy ) that accounts for defaults and interest rate assistance , assuming most loans are repaid .

transfers from other agencies , or funds are carried forward from prior years .

appendix b .

agriculture appropriations timelines in the past 20 years ( the time period for this analysis that begins in fy1995 , see table b - 1 ) , agriculture appropriations bills were enacted as stand - alone measures nine times: fy1995-fy1998 , fy2000-fy2002 , fy2006 , and fy2010 .

omnibus appropriations were used nine times: fy1999 , fy2003-fy2005 , fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2012-fy2014 .

year - long continuing resolutions were used twice , in fy2007 and fy2011 .

at the subcommittee level , the agriculture appropriations subcommittees in both the house and senate have passed drafts out of subcommittee every year in this time period .

in the house , subcommittee passage usually occurs in may or june ; in the senate , subcommittee action usually follows the house , often in june or july .

the full appropriations committees usually report an agriculture appropriations bill once one is passed by the subcommittee .

the house appropriations committee has reported an agriculture appropriations bill every year except for fy2009 and fy2011 .

the senate appropriations committee has reported an agriculture appropriations bill every year during this analysis .

floor action in each chamber is somewhat less predictable , with house floor action not taking place for appropriations years fy2003 , fy2009 , fy2011 , fy2013 , and fy2014 .

in the senate , floor action did not occur during those same five years , and also not for fy2005 , fy2007 , and fy2008 ( when the house did pass bills ) .

thus , floor action on agriculture appropriations has not occurred since the fy2012 bill ( that carried the "minibus" bill in 2011 ) .

a stand - alone agriculture appropriation has not occurred since the fy2010 bill in 2009 .

in addition to listing the public laws and dates of action for various steps in each year's appropriations process , table b - 1 also lists the crs report for each fiscal year .

key policy staf .

