on june 25 , 2013 , president obama announced a national plan to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and other greenhouse gases ( ghg ) , as well as to encourage adaptation to expected climate change .

the president stated a willingness to work with congress on a bipartisan , market - based scheme to reduce ghg emissions .

however , the president had earlier stipulated that the set of actions he announced would not require congressional approval .

this announcement followed up on his vow in the 2013 state of the union address: i urge this congress to pursue a bipartisan , market - based solution to climate change , like the one john mccain and joe lieberman worked on together a few years ago .

but if congress won't act soon to protect future generations , i will .

i will direct my cabinet to come up with executive actions we can take , now and in the future , to reduce pollution , prepare our communities for the consequences of climate change , and speed the transition to more sustainable sources of energy .

the president had been under increasing pressure from environmental allies to exercise greater leadership on the climate change issue , after the congress did not enact "waxman - markey" ( h.r .

2454 in 2009 ) or other comprehensive bills to reduce ghg emissions .

also , some states and non - governmental organizations gave notice that they would file suit when the environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed but did not finalize greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission standards for new power plants by april 2013 .

the president's plan is accompanied by a white house "infographic" covering extreme weather events , u.s. ghg emissions , and elements of the president's plan .

members of congress continue to be divided in their views on whether climate change risks merit raising current costs to the economy in exchange for benefits that would mostly accrue to future generations , people in other countries , and stability of earth systems .

the prospect of continued congressional divisions in part has prompted the president's use of existing executive branch authorities .

the president affirmed his commitment to his 2009 policy pledge to reduce u.s. ghg emissions by 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 if all other major economies agreed to limit their emissions as well .

in 2012 , the united states' gross ghg emissions were approximately 10% below their 2005 levels , or about 5% above 1990 levels .

u.s. ghg emissions peaked in 2007 .

during the period 1990 to 2012 , u.s. economic activity , measured as gross domestic product ( gdp ) , rose 73% , while population increased 26% .

the u.s. energy information administration projected u.s. energy - related co 2 emissions , about 78% of all u.s. ghg emissions , to grow 3.5% from 2012 to 2020 , under existing regulations and policies — not taking into account the new guidelines for co 2 reductions from existing power plants .

under this reference scenario , transportation sector emissions fall by 2% , industry co 2 emissions grow by 14% , and electricity sector emissions rise almost 4% .

an independent study estimated in late 2012 that the united states is on a path to reduce all ghg emissions to 16% below 2005 levels in 2020 , including effects of the new source performance standards for co 2 emissions from power plants that epa proposed in 2012 ( more below ) .

the researchers cite assumptions about promulgated and proposed standards , trends in the relative prices of coal and natural gas , and state and local ghg mitigation programs as main drivers of the projected reductions .

to fill the gap between the president's pledge and the current emissions trajectory , president obama identified a series of actions to abate ghg emissions and to facilitate resilience to the effects of climate change .

these are outlined below in three broad categories from the president's plan , which describes his three "pillars" as 1. cut carbon pollution in america ; 2. prepare the united states for the impacts of climate change ; 3. lead international efforts to combat global climate change and prepare for its impacts .

this summary emphasizes the incremental additions in the plan announced june 25 , 2013 , beyond programs and other executive branch actions already under way .

few of the listed measures specify the timing of executive branch actions , or the quantitative ghg reductions that should be achieved .

the president's plan mostly envisions actions that do not require further authority from congress to accomplish , although some would rely on appropriations of funds to specific programs .

an initial review of the climate action plan raises a few initial questions some in congress may wish to explore .

1 .

the cumulative impacts of existing measures and the president's announced plan have not been assessed , in terms of accomplishments in reducing ghg emissions or in terms of costs and savings that may result .

in addition to net costs or benefits , distributional impacts across regions , sectors , and segments of the population may be of interest .

some in congress and , more generally , in the american public oppose regulation of ghg emissions under the clean air act .

some legislators have proposed resolutions or bills to curtail executive authority in advance of epa finalization of rules .

once a rule is finalized , congress may use the congressional review act ( cra , 5 u.s.c .

§§801 et seq. ) .

to overturn the rule by enacting a joint resolution of disapproval .

the cra allows for the use of expedited procedures when considering such a joint resolution , and , if the joint resolution were to be enacted , the rule would no longer have force or effect .

however , the resolution of disapproval would require the signature of the president , who would be unlikely to sign a bill overturning his own agency's rule .

a two - thirds vote in both house and senate could overcome a presidential veto .

in may 2013 , the administration released an updated range for the "social costs of carbon" ( scc ) — dollar values representing the benefits of avoiding damages of climate change , expressed as dollars per ton of co 2 released in particular years .

these scc estimates have been , and will be used , to compare the benefits with the costs of prospective regulations , though cost - benefit analysis has not typically been a determinative factor in regulatory choices .

while the interagency group that developed the scc acknowledged the difficulties of providing such values , the 9 th circuit court ruled in 2007 that estimating the benefits of rules without including such values for climate damages is "arbitrary and capricious. .

some observers have expressed concern that the new scc values could be used to justify tighter standards , while others have criticized the methods for understating the scc .

congress may wish to consider the process by which the scc have been developed , the role of public and congressional input , and how the scc may affect future actions .

2 .

some in congress may seek to enact a more cohesive alternative to epa regulation of ghg emissions and the assortment of administration measures in the obama plan .

some policy makers have proposed that fees on ghg emissions ( eg , "carbon taxes" ) would be a preferable alternative , while others oppose this option .

the keystone xl pipeline , to transport canadian oil sands crude across the u.s. border , requires a presidential permit from the president .

while many support approval of the pipeline , some environmental proponents have called the project the "line in the sand" on climate change and urge the president to deny the permit .

pursuant to the president's statement that "[our] national interest will be served only if this project does not significantly exacerbate the impacts of carbon pollution," congress may wish to examine systematically the trade - offs to national interest of the project .

a number of crs reports are available with background relating to some of president obama's announced policies on climate change .

additional reports are available at http: / / www.crs.gov , and at the crs climate change science , technology , and policy web page .

crs report r43127 , epa standards for greenhouse gas emissions from power plants: many questions , some answers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42613 , climate change and existing law: a survey of legal issues past , present , and future , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41561 , epa regulations: too much , too little , or on track ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42532 , carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) : a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41103 , federal agency actions following the supreme court's climate change decision in massachusetts v. epa: a chronology , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32240 , the federal rulemaking process: an overview , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40913 , renewable energy and energy efficiency incentives: a summary of federal programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40806 , energy projects on federal lands: leasing and authorization , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43011 , u.s. and world coal production , federal taxes , and incentives , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42986 , an overview of air quality issues in natural gas systems , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40506 , cars , trucks , and climate: epa regulation of greenhouse gases from mobile sources , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42721 , automobile and truck fuel economy ( cafe ) and greenhouse gas standards , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40155 , renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) : overview and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41985 , renewable energy programs and the farm bill: status and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40813 , methane capture: options for greenhouse gas emission reduction , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r42611 , oil sands and the keystone xl pipeline: background and selected environmental issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42537 , canadian oil sands: life - cycle assessments of greenhouse gas emissions , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40001 , a u.s. - centric chronology of the united nations framework convention on climate change , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41845 , the global climate change initiative ( gcci ) : budget authority and request , fy2010-fy2015 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41302 , international climate change financing: the climate investment funds ( cifs ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

