end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) is the final phase of chronic kidney disease — a gradual loss in kidney function over time .

in the final phase of chronic kidney disease , the loss in kidney function appears irreversible and a regular course of dialysis treatments ( approximately three times a week ) is needed to survive .

a kidney transplant procedure , whereby an individual receives a healthy donor kidney to replace a non - functioning kidney , is an alternative form of treatment .

after undergoing a kidney transplant , patients are usually required to take immunosuppressive drugs for the rest of their life to minimize the risk of their immune system rejecting the donor kidney .

medicare is a federal program that pays for covered health care services , which include kidney transplantation for eligible beneficiaries .

generally , individuals are eligible for medicare if they are at least 65 years old , a citizen or permanent resident of the united states , and have met the prior work requirements .

individuals may also be eligible to enroll in medicare under the age of 65 if they are permanently disabled and receive disability benefits from social security ( or the railroad retirement board ) .

with the passage of the social security amendments of 1972 ( p.l .

92-603 ) , medicare provides coverage for certain individuals who are diagnosed with esrd .

specifically , an individual medically determined to have esrd can be eligible to enroll in medicare if he or she , or his or her spouse , parent , or guardian , has earned at least six social security credits over the past three years .

originally , for esrd beneficiaries , medicare eligibility was limited to 12 months following a successful kidney transplant ( if the individual no longer required dialysis ) .

the 12 months of post - transplant medicare eligibility was extended to 36 months with the passage of p.l .

95-292 in 1978 .

for beneficiaries who are eligible for medicare due to esrd , medicare may provide coverage on the first month of eligibility if the beneficiary is admitted to a medicare - approved hospital to undergo a kidney transplant procedure or elects to receive dialysis treatment at home .

for beneficiaries who do not elect to receive dialysis at home , medicare coverage begins on the fourth month of receiving dialysis treatment .

with few exceptions , medicare is a secondary payer for the first 30 months of eligibility for beneficiaries who become entitled to medicare due to esrd and are insured under a union or employer - sponsored health plan .

as of december 31 , 2010 , according to usrds , roughly 489,000 individuals were estimated to be diagnosed with esrd and were eligible for some form of medicare coverage .

for beneficiaries who qualify for medicare due to esrd , medicare eligibility is limited to 36 months following a successful kidney transplant .

of the individuals under the age of 65 that have received a successful kidney transplant at a prior date and no longer required dialysis treatment in 2010 ( 142,923 patients ) , roughly 41% were not eligible for medicare coverage ( 58,728 patients ) ; see figure 1 .

roughly 25% of patients under the age of 65 were covered under original medicare , and an additional 15% were covered under both medicare and medicaid .

an additional 15% of individuals under the age of 65 who received a kidney transplant had medicare as a secondary payer and 4% were enrolled in an ma plan .

individuals with a functioning kidney transplant usually require immunosuppressive drugs for life to minimize the risk of their immune system rejecting the "foreign" donor kidney .

for the most part , the standard of care for immunosuppressant therapy in kidney transplant recipients is a combination of a calcineurin inhibitor and an antimetabolite ( with or without a corticosteroid ) .

the most commonly prescribed calcineurin inhibitor is a daily dose of tacrolimus , and the more commonly prescribed antimetabolite is a daily dose of mycophenolate mofetil ( mmf ) .

the first generic of tacrolimus was approved in 2009 , and generics for mmf were approved in 2008 .

in addition to tacrolimus and mmf , other prescribed immunosuppressants may include azathioprine , cyclosporine , mycophenolic sodium , prednisone , and sirolimus .

currently , medicare provides coverage for immunosuppressive drugs under part b if the transplant was covered by medicare and in an approved facility .

medicare part b does not provide coverage for immunosuppressive drugs if the beneficiary was not eligible for medicare at the time of the transplant or the transplant was not in a medicare - covered facility .

medicare first allowed coverage of immunosuppressive drugs under part b to beneficiaries following a medicare - covered organ transplant in a medicare - approved facility in 1987 , with the passage of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 ( obra 86 ; p.l .

99-509 ) .

obra 86 limited medicare immunosuppressive drug coverage for all beneficiaries to 12 months following an organ transplant .

the 12-month time limitation may have been included because , according to a committee report referenced in the house's fy1986 budget resolution report , there was already "a significant amount of insurance coverage for immunosuppressive drugs available" for individuals with esrd .

under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) , immunosuppressive drug coverage for beneficiaries who received an organ transplant was gradually extended from 12 months following a covered transplant to 36 months beginning on january 1 , 1998 , and subsequent years .

the medicare , medicaid , and schip benefits improvement and protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-554 ) eliminated the 36-month time limitation of immunosuppressive drug coverage after covered kidney transplants .

while medicare coverage of immunosuppressive drugs is no longer time - limited , for beneficiaries who qualified for medicare due to esrd , medicare eligibility ( and therefore medicare immunosuppressive drug coverage ) is still limited to 36 months following a successful kidney transplant if they do not qualify for medicare due to age ( 65 years or older ) or disability ( generally , a social security disability insurance recipient ) .

after 36 months , the individual is no longer eligible for medicare , and must find some other form of payment for the immunosuppressive drugs ( eg , private insurance , out - of - pocket ) .

individuals who are unable to adhere to their medication regimen , possibly due to the costs of immunosuppressive drugs , may cause their donor kidney to fail .

in 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that the percentage of beneficiaries whose kidney transplants failed roughly doubled when increasing the timeframe from 36 months following the transplant to seven years .

while continuity of insurance coverage may affect a beneficiary's access to immunosuppressive drugs , insurance coverage alone may not be the sole contributing factor to failed kidney transplants .

in addition , gao notes in its report , " ( w ) hile a lack of health insurance is one reason transplant recipients may stop taking their medication , studies have reported that there are numerous other reasons for medication noncompliance , including avoidance of adverse side effects associated with immunosuppressive medications and difficulty following complex treatment regimens. .

beginning january 1 , 2014 , beneficiaries with a functioning kidney transplant who are no longer entitled to medicare may have greater access to health insurance in the private market ( and therefore potential coverage of immunosuppressive drugs ) , due to provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) that prohibit excluding coverage for preexisting conditions and pricing health insurance premiums based on health factors .

while there is no adequate estimate of the percentage of private health plans that currently offer immunosuppressive coverage , a non - random selective sample of publically available prescription drug formularies among health plans offered by a number of large health insurers suggests that the more commonly used immunosuppressive drugs by individuals with esrd are often covered .

further , beginning in 2014 , aca requires private health plans offered through the new health insurance exchanges to cover essential health benefits ( ehb ) , which are based on a state - specific benchmark health plan .

based on the preliminary 2012 ehb - benchmark plan designs across all states , each state would require health plans offered in the exchanges to cover drugs in the "immunosuppressive agent" class .

state ehb - benchmark plans vary between requiring at least 3 and as many as 24 different immunosuppressive drug products , but roughly half of all states would require at least 20 different immunosuppressive drug products to be covered in health plans offered through their state's health insurance exchange .

the total number of drug products in the immunosuppressive agent class may not be much larger than 20 , which may suggest that , in states that require a large number of immunosuppressive drug products to be covered , health plans offered in these exchanges would cover immunosuppressive drugs commonly used by transplant recipients .

some experts have noted that limiting medicare coverage to 36 months after a successful covered kidney transplant for beneficiaries entitled on the basis of esrd may be counterproductive .

some beneficiaries may not be able to afford immunosuppressive medication on an out - of - pocket basis .

transplant recipients who do not adhere to their prescribed immunosuppressive medication could cause their donor kidneys to fail and thus require a much more expensive dialysis treatment for their esrd or they may need another transplant .

the 36-month time limitation may adversely affect beneficiaries' health status and quality of life .

while beneficiaries with esrd who received a functioning kidney transplant no longer require dialysis treatment to survive , such individuals are not considered "cured" of the disease — instead requiring immunosuppressant therapy rather than dialysis as a form of treatment .

since the 105 th congress , legislation has been introduced in each congress to extend some form of medicare coverage after the 36 months following a kidney transplant for individuals who are not otherwise eligible to enroll in medicare .

most recently , s. 323 and h.r .

1428 were introduced in the 113 th congress to provide medicare part b as a secondary payer of only immunosuppressive drugs for kidney transplant recipients who are no longer eligible for medicare coverage and are enrolled in a group health plan ( i.e. , a health plan contributed to by an employer or employee organization ) beginning january 1 , 2014 .

under these proposals , medicare would be the primary payer of immunosuppressive drugs for individuals who are not enrolled in a group health plan ( i.e. , purchase an individual health plan in the private market ) .

individuals who would be eligible to enroll in part b for only immunosuppressive drug coverage would pay a slightly lower monthly part b premium than the standard monthly premium ( $104.90 in 2013 ) .

in addition , in 2014 , individuals with a functioning kidney transplant may have greater access to immunosuppressive drug coverage from private health plans in the individual and small business marketplace .

a number of factors that could have a positive impact for individuals looking to obtain immunosuppressive drug coverage include ( 1 ) aca provisions that prohibit excluding coverage for preexisting conditions and pricing health insurance premiums on health factors , ( 2 ) the preliminary 2012 state ehb - benchmark plans , which require some coverage of immunosuppressive drugs in the new health insurance exchanges , and ( 3 ) a recent decline in the price of commonly used immunosuppressive drugs ( tacrolimus and mmf ) .

