head start is a federal program that has provided comprehensive early childhood development services ( eg , education , health , nutrition , and social services ) to low - income children and their families since 1965 .

these services are intended to promote the school readiness of children by enhancing their cognitive , social , and emotional development .

most children served in head start programs are three - and four - year - olds , but in the mid - 1990s head start was expanded to include early head start programs targeted to infants , toddlers , and expectant parents .

in this report , the term head start is inclusive of the early head start program , unless otherwise specified .

at the federal level , the head start program is administered by the office of head start ( ohs ) within the administration for children and families ( acf ) at the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

hhs provides federal head start funds directly to local public and private non - profit and for - profit agencies ( called "grantees" ) , rather than through states .

head start programs are locally designed and are administered by roughly 1,600 grantees .

since the program's inception , head start grantees have generally been given grant awards for indefinite periods ( i.e. , awards with no end date ) .

however , the 2007 head start reauthorization law ( p.l .

110-134 ) changed this by instituting a five - year designation period for head start grantees .

under the new law , at the end of its five - year designation period , a grantee must demonstrate that it is delivering high - quality and comprehensive services , or else the grant is to be opened for re - competition .

the law refers to the process of identifying grantees for re - competition as the designation renewal system ( drs ) .

hhs was tasked with establishing the drs , based on certain parameters specified within the law .

this report provides an overview of the major milestones leading up to the early implementation of the drs .

table 1 outlines a chronology of these milestones and serves as a preview to the remainder of the report , which discusses these events and activities in greater detail .

the bulk of the report is focused on the drs itself , including the indicators used to identify grantees for re - competition and the status of competitions to date .

the report concludes with a discussion of additional issues related to the drs , including legal challenges and evaluation plans .

in the years leading up to the 2007 reauthorization law , congress demonstrated a growing interest in introducing more competition to the head start program .

a government accountability office ( gao ) report published in february 2005 recommended that hhs begin re - competing grants in cases where a grantee had failed to meet program , financial management , or other requirements .

in response , hhs expressed concerns over the legal authority for entering into such competitions and gao suggested that congress may wish to "clarify" these authorities .

subsequently , the idea of limiting grantee designation periods to five years and requiring "low performing" grantees to re - compete was raised at congressional hearings and in various draft reauthorization bills throughout the 109 th and 110 th congresses .

however , it was not until december 2007 that congress ultimately enacted legislation requiring hhs to carry out these activities .

hhs published the drs final rule on november 9 , 2011 .

under the terms of the final rule , the drs became effective on december 9 , 2011 , thirty days after the rule was published in the federal register .

this section of the report explores the contents of the final rule , with emphasis on the indicators selected for identifying grantees for re - competition .

under the final rule , any new grant awarded after the rule's effective date ( december 9 , 2011 ) is to be designated for a five - year period , instead of an indefinite period .

for existing grantees , the final rule called for the drs to be phased - in over a three - year transition period ( i.e. , december 9 , 2011 , to december 9 , 2014 ) .

during the first year of the transition period , hhs reviewed all existing grantees against five of the seven indicators ( school readiness goals / data and class: pre - k scores were excluded ) .

during the following two years , hhs planned to evaluate any grantees that had not triggered re - competition in the first year against all seven drs indicators .

at some point prior to the end of the three - year transition period , any grantee that has not triggered re - competition is to be notified that they have been deemed eligible for five years of renewed funding without competition .

under the terms of the final rule , grantees designated for re - competition do not have the right to appeal , meaning that all drs decisions are final .

some comments on the nprm requested that the final rule include procedures for these decisions to be appealed , but hhs did not adopt this policy .

hhs addressed this decision in the preamble to the final rule , noting that the 2007 reauthorization law had not required an appeals procedure for drs decisions .

hhs noted that provisions elsewhere in the head start act require appeals procedures to be in place for specified circumstances .

for instance , the law states that grantees must be able to appeal decisions by hhs to terminate or reduce a grant award or to suspend a grantee for more than 30 days .

following publication of the drs final rule , several non - profit associations filed a lawsuit challenging the lawfulness of the "single deficiency trigger" in the final regulations .

in ohio head start v. dep't .

health and human serv .

 , the plaintiffs , three separate associations whose membership included some head start agencies required to compete for new five - year head start grants because of one or more deficiency findings , argued that the single deficiency trigger was invalid on several grounds: ( 1 ) it was impermissibly retroactive because it applied to groups that had already received funding ; ( 2 ) it deprived grantees of their protected property and liberty interests in grant renewals without due process ; and ( 3 ) it was arbitrary and capricious under the administrative procedure act .

the federal district court dismissed the challenges on summary judgment , concluding that the head start associations failed on all claims .

the court first noted that the drs applies to future grants , not current grants , so it is not retroactive .

as to due process , the court ruled that the plaintiffs did not identify a protected property or liberty interest that needed to be protected , and even if they had , the agency provides sufficient constitutional due process .

finally , under the administrative challenge , the court held that the rule was not arbitrary or capricious because , while the secretary had to provide a reasonable explanation for why the agency decided not to follow the recommendation of the hhs secretary's advisory committee regarding deficiencies ( i.e. , to re - compete programs with deficiencies equal to or exceeding two standard deviations from the mean ) , it was not foreclosed from going with a single deficiency trigger instead .

following this decision , the plaintiffs filed for an injunction to stop hhs from implementing the drs pending appeal .

the district court denied the injunction on the grounds that the plaintiffs failed to show any likelihood of success on the merits .

the court also held that the plaintiffs could not show that they would suffer irreparable harm if they were not granted the injunction .

in addition , the delay would require hhs to expend significant additional resources , and would require a new round of applications and reviews .

the plaintiffs appealed the ruling of the district court , and on may 21 , 2013 , a three judge panel of the district of columbia court of appeals affirmed the lower court's ruling without an opinion .

hhs has undertaken ( via contract ) an evaluation of the drs to explore how and whether it is meeting goals of "transparency , validity , reliability," and "overall program quality improvement. .

the evaluation will examine the effectiveness of the drs in differentiating between higher and lower performing grantees and in improving the overall quality of head start programs by the introduction of competition .

hhs awarded the evaluation contract in 2012 .

the evaluation is slated to run through 2015 .

