science and technology ( s&t ) play an increasingly important role in our society .

advances in science and technology can help drive economic growth , improve human health , increase agricultural productivity , and help meet national priorities .

federal policies affect scientific and technological advancement on several levels .

the federal government directly funds research and development activities to achieve national goals or support national priorities such as funding basic life science research through the national institutes of health ( nih ) or new weapons of mass destruction detectors through the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the federal government establishes and maintains the legal and regulatory framework that affects science and technology activities in the private sector .

federal tax , intellectual property , and education policies can have large effects on private sector s&t activity performance .

the federal government also directly regulates certain aspects of science and technology such as limiting who is allowed to perform research with certain dangerous biological pathogens through the select agent program or who is allowed to use portions of the radio frequency spectrum for commercial purposes .

many science and technology policy issues may come before the 113 th congress .

this report is designed to serve as a brief introduction to many of these issues .

each issue section provides some background information and outlines the policy issues that may be considered .

each issue includes a heading entitled "for further information" that provides the author's contact information and the titles of relevant crs reports to pursue more detailed policy analysis and information .

several issues of potential congressional interest apply to federal science and technology policy in general .

this section begins with a brief introduction to the roles each branch of the federal government plays in s&t policymaking , then discusses overall federal funding of research and development and its effect on innovation .

additional sections address issues in intellectual property , tax policy , and public access to federally supported research results .

maintaining a rapid pace of scientific and technological advancement requires a sufficient workforce of scientists and engineers .

this section discusses some workforce - related issues that may come before the 113 th congress , including the adequacy of the current workforce and efforts to develop the future workforce .

the federal government supports billions of dollars of agricultural research annually .

the 113 th congress is likely to face issues related to the budget for this research and specific issues arising from advances in agricultural biotechnology .

congress has long supported biomedical research and development .

some of the biomedical research and development issues that the 113 th congress may face include the budget and oversight of the national institutes of health and the relationship of federal r&d to the cost and availability of prescription drugs .

this section focuses on policy issues relating to federal efforts supporting research and development in the physical and material sciences .

some of the policy issues in this area that the 113 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting the research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology .

issues relating to the department of energy office of science and arpa - e , both of which support science and technology in physical and material sciences , are discussed in the "energy" section of this report .

science and technology play an important role in national defense .

the department of defense relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems .

issues that may come before the 113 th congress regarding the department of defense's science and technology include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition s&t findings into fielded products .

congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues .

two space topics that may come before the 113 th congress include the reauthorization of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and issues related to earth observing satellites .

science and technology play an increasingly large role in environmental issues .

science - and technology - related environmental issues that may come before the 113 th congress include climate change science , carbon sequestration , and national ocean policy .

the science and technology related - energy issues that may come before the 113 th congress include the funding and role of the advanced research projects agency - energy and the department of energy office of science , reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel , and the development of biofuels and of ocean energy technology .

the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland .

some of the issues that the 113 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development and issues regarding its programs to detect smuggled nuclear material and biological terrorism .

this section also includes issues regarding the development of medical countermeasures against chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear agents ; oversight of who is permitted to perform research on certain dangerous biological pathogens ; and how to communicate scientific results that may pose a security risk .

the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including cybersecurity , potential changes to how the internet is governed , issues related to broadband access , and issues related to the allocation of spectrum to support wireless services .

for more than a decade , experts have expressed concerns about the security of information and communications systems — often referred to as cybersecurity — in the united states and abroad .

the frequency , impact , and sophistication of attacks on those systems have added urgency to the concerns .

the federal role in cybersecurity is complex , involving both securing federal systems and fulfilling the appropriate federal role in protecting nonfederal systems .

no overarching framework legislation is in place , but many enacted statutes address various aspects of cybersecurity .

consensus has grown that the federal policy framework take into account the diversity and continuing evolution of the technology and threats , and the increasing role of the internet in the u.s. economy and the lives of citizens .

among the issues congress continues to confront are cybersecurity for critical infrastructure , given that most of it is owned by the private sector ; prevention of and response to cybercrime , especially given its international character ; the relationship between cyberspace and national security ; and how federal funding should be invested to protect information systems .

proposed legislation has focused largely on issues in 10 broad areas: national strategy and the role of government , reform of the federal information security management act ( fisma ) , protection of critical infrastructure ( especially the electricity grid and the chemical industry ) , information sharing and cross - sector coordination , breaches resulting in theft or exposure of personal data such as financial information , cybercrime offenses and penalties , privacy in the context of electronic commerce , international efforts , research and development ( r&d ) , and the cybersecurity workforce .

several bills addressing those issues were considered in the 112 th congress , but none were enacted .

some have been reintroduced , and additional proposals are expected .

the white house issued an executive order in february 2013 designed to improve the cybersecurity of u.s. critical infrastructure .

citing repeated cyber - intrusions into critical infrastructure and growing cyberthreats , executive order 13636 , improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity , attempts to enhance security and resiliency of critical infrastructure through voluntary , collaborative efforts involving federal agencies and owners and operators of privately owned critical infrastructure , as well as use of existing federal regulatory authorities .

several bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress , and additional proposals are expected .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , senior specialist in science and technology ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) [author name scrubbed] , analyst in national security policy and information operations ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report r42114 , federal laws relating to cybersecurity: overview and discussion of proposed revisions , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r42984 , the 2013 cybersecurity executive order: overview and considerations for congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

the internet is comprised of international and decentralized networks largely owned and operated by private sector entities .

as the internet becomes more pervasive in all aspects of modern society , the question of how it should be governed becomes more pressing .

currently , an important aspect of the internet is governed by a private sector , international organization called the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers ( icann ) , which manages the domain name system and internet addressing .

icann makes its decisions using a multistakeholder model of governance , in which a collaborative policy development process is open to all internet stakeholders .

national governments have increasingly recognized the importance of icann policy decisions , especially in cases where internet policy intersects with national laws addressing such issues as intellectual property , privacy , law enforcement , internet freedom , and cybersecurity .

some governments are advocating greater intergovernmental influence over the way the internet is governed , while other governments ( such as the united states and the european union ) oppose intergovernmental jurisdiction over the internet .

this debate surfaced during consideration of the revised international telecommunication regulations ( itr ) treaty held by the international telecommunication union ( a united nations agency ) during the december 2012 world conference on international telecommunications ( wcit ) in dubai .

ultimately , the united states ( and 54 other nations ) chose not to sign the final treaty , citing an unacceptable expansion of itr jurisdiction over the internet .

as part of its input into the wcit debate , the 112 th congress unanimously passed s.con.res .

50 , which expressed the sense of congress that the administration should promote a global internet free from intergovernmental control , and should preserve and advance the successful multistakeholder model of internet governance .

on may 14 , 2013 , the house unanimously passed h.r .

1580 , which states that it is "the policy of the united states to preserve and advance the successful multistakeholder model that governs the internet. .

a key issue for the 113 th congress is whether and how the u.s. government should continue to maximize its influence over icann's multistakeholder internet governance process , while at the same time effectively resisting proposals for an increased role by international governmental institutions such as the united nations .

an ongoing concern is: to what extent will future international telecommunications and internet conferences constitute an opportunity for some nations to increase intergovernmental control over the internet , and how effectively will the administration work to counteract that threat ? .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report r42351 , internet governance and the domain name system: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report 97-868 , internet domain names: background and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed .

broadband — whether delivered via fiber , cable modem , copper wire , satellite , or wirelessly — is increasingly the technology underlying telecommunications services such as voice , video , and data .

since the initial deployment of broadband in the late 1990s , congress has viewed broadband infrastructure deployment as a means towards improving regional economic development , and in the long term , to create jobs .

according to the federal communications commission's ( fcc's ) national broadband plan , the lack of adequate broadband availability is most pressing in rural america , where the costs of serving large geographical areas , coupled with low population densities , often reduce economic incentives for telecommunications providers to invest in and maintain broadband infrastructure and service .

the national broadband plan also identified broadband adoption as a problem , whereby 1 in 3 americans have broadband available but choose not to subscribe .

populations continuing to lag behind in broadband adoption include people with low incomes , seniors , minorities , the less - educated , non - family households , and the non - employed .

the 113 th congress is addressing a range of broadband - related issues .

these include the transition of the telephone - era universal service fund to the broadband - focused connect america fund , reauthorization of broadband loan programs in the 2013 farm bill , and the development of new wireless spectrum policies .

additionally , the 113 th congress may choose to examine our existing regulatory structure and consider possible revision of the 1996 telecommunications act and its underlying statute , the communications act of 1934 .

both the convergence of telecommunications providers and markets and the transition to an internet protocol ( ip ) based network have , according to a growing number of policymakers , made it necessary to consider revising the current regulatory framework .

how a possible revision might create additional incentives for investment in , deployment of , and subscribership to , our broadband infrastructure is likely to be just one of many issues under consideration .

to the extent that congress may consider various options for further enhancing broadband deployment , a key issue is how to develop and implement federal policies intended to increase the nation's broadband availability and adoption , while at the same time minimizing any deleterious effects that government intervention in the marketplace may have on competition and private sector investment .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in telecommunications policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) [author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report r42524 , rural broadband: the roles of the rural utilities service and the universal service fund , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl30719 , broadband internet access and the digital divide: federal assistance programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33816 , broadband loan and grant programs in the usda's rural utilities service , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r40616 , access to broadband networks: the net neutrality debate , by [author name scrubbed .

congress passed the high - performance computing and communications program ( hpcc ) act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-194 ) to enhance the effectiveness of federally - funded information technology ( it ) research and development ( r&d ) programs , as well as encourage coordination among agencies conducting such research .

proponents of federal support of it r&d assert that it has produced positive outcomes for the country and played a crucial role in supporting long - term research into fundamental aspects of computing .

such fundamentals may provide broad practical benefits , but generally take years to realize .

additionally , the unanticipated results of research are often as important as the anticipated results .

another aspect of government - funded it research is that it often leads to open standards , something that many perceive as beneficial , encouraging deployment and further investment .

industry , on the other hand , is more inclined to invest in proprietary products and will diverge from a common standard when there is a potential competitive or financial advantage to do so .

supporters believe that the outcomes achieved through the various funding programs create a synergistic environment in which both fundamental and application - driven research are conducted , benefitting government , industry , academia , and the public .

critics , however , assert that the government , through its funding mechanisms , may be picking "winners and losers" in technological development , a role more properly residing with the private sector .

for example , the size of the nitrd program may encourage industry to follow the government's lead on research directions rather than selecting those directions itself .

the nitrd program is funded through appropriations to its individual agencies , so support for it will likely be part of the federal budget debate in congress .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in internet and telecommunications policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report rl33586 , the federal networking and information technology research and development program: background , funding , and activities , by [author name scrubbed .

the rapid growth in mobile voice and data technologies has created new demands for advanced communications infrastructure and radio frequency spectrum capacity that can support high - speed , content - rich uses .

forging new policies for managing radio frequency spectrum may be the subject of far - reaching debates during the 113 th congress .

by statute , spectrum is treated as a natural resource , but it is considered by many as a form of property , through the assignment of licenses .

electro - magnetic , or radio frequency , spectrum is segmented into bands of radio frequencies and typically measured in cycles per second , or hertz .

spectrum allocations and license assignments are described in hertz .

standard abbreviations for measuring frequencies include khz — kilohertz or thousands of hertz ; mhz — megahertz , or millions of hertz ; and ghz — gigahertz , or billions of hertz .

the emerging debate over spectrum policy centers on how best to apply technology to maximize the societal and economic value of the airwaves to support popular and essential wireless services .

immediate policy concerns tend to focus on providing new spectrum capacity to fuel the building of networks using ip - enabled technologies to meet immediate consumer demand .

still to be fully addressed – by congress and by most policy - makers – is how to bring the wireless network technology to the next level of accomplishment , assuring american leadership in a wireless , mobile economy for decades to come .

the "spectrum act," title vi of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) — signed into law on february 22 , 2012 — addresses present and future needs to provide adequate spectrum .

the act authorizes the federal communications commission ( fcc ) to establish an "incentive auction" process .

the incentive auction is intended to release airwaves , now used for television broadcasting , to be licensed and auctioned to commercial wireless companies for broadband networks .

the act also seeks to expand the amount of spectrum available for unlicensed use and stipulates conditions under which federal agencies may share their spectrum holdings with commercial users .

the technologies for next - generation networks built using licensed spectrum are well - established .

technologies that rely on databases to manage spectrum availability are being deployed and tested for next - generation unlicensed use .

more advanced technologies , such as dynamic spectrum access , that many believe will be the base for future spectrum policy , are in early stages of testing and development .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in telecommunications policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report r43256 , spectrum policy: provisions in the 2012 spectrum act , by [author name scrubbed .

