the current gap between u.s. coal supply and domestic demand may widen as low cost natural gas becomes more attractive to electric power plants , and uncertainties with new environmental regulations discourage investment in new coal plants .

coal producers with excess supply will likely seek to expand their market abroad .

consequently , in the long run ( over the next decade and possibly longer ) , u.s. coal exports are expected to rise .

in the near term , however , the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) projects coal exports to decline from a high point of 126 million short tons in 2012 to 107 million short tons in 2014 .

growth potential in asian coal markets seems large , but there are potential bottlenecks ( eg , lack of infrastructure , potential rising costs of regulation , competition from other fuels , and transportation ) , which could slow export growth .

also , limits on natural gas supply ( for any number of reasons ) would likely increase domestic coal prices and cut into exports .

although u.s. consumption of coal appears to be declining , other parts of world are increasing their use of coal .

u.s. consumption of coal declined from 2011 to 2012 .

coal production also declined , but exports rose 17% .

the decrease in supply was driven , in part , by the decline in domestic demand .

the eia includes coal in its 2013 annual energy outlook early release .

in its reference case , net exports of coal may increase through 2040 , increasing almost 50% from 2011 levels .

increased net exports could improve the u.s. trade balance as well as add government revenue from production on federal lands that might otherwise decline because of falling domestic consumption .

exporting coal may run counter to the current administration's domestic environmental policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions ( ghg ) , and affect current u.s. policy goals addressing global climate change and other environmental issues .

depending upon the location of the coal exports , certain parts of the country may benefit economically .

current and projected coal exports , issues associated with infrastructure , and the environment have prompted interest by congress .

bills were introduced in the 112 th congress that supported increased coal exports ( h.r .

3409 , s. 3450 ) and sought to limit exports ( h.r .

6202 ) .

coal export - related issues that have raised congressional concern include carbon emissions abroad , coal dust from rail transport , infrastructure development ( particularly port expansion ) , and federal coal valuation for royalty purposes , among others .

global production , consumption , and trading of coal have increased over the last decade , and are projected to continue growing .

in fact , worldwide coal was the fastest - growing source of primary energy in 2011 , according to the international energy agency's ( iea's ) coal medium - term market report 2012 .

coal consumption is projected to also grow more than oil or natural gas over the next five years , according to the iea report , and reach parity with oil as the most used fuel source in the world .

the united states has been exporting coal since the late 1800s .

from 2003 to 2012 , u.s. coal exports rose over 200% , mainly driven by competitive production costs , global demand , and lower prices , among other factors ( see figure 5 ) .

coal exports comprised 12% of u.s. coal production in 2012 .

the obama administration continues to support clean coal , natural gas , renewables , and uranium as energy sources for electric power in the united states , as u.s. coal exports continue to rise .

the administration has not been clear where it falls along the spectrum of coal exports but announced on june 25 , 2013 , a proposal to limit u.s. government financing of coal plants overseas as part of an overall u.s. strategy to reduce carbon emissions .

as u.s. hydrocarbon resources have expanded over the last few years , there is greater interest by some groups , mainly producers , to export a portion of these resources .

in addition to coal , the united states became a net exporter of petroleum products in 2011 , and there are 23 pending liquefied natural gas export projects at various stages of the regulatory approval process .

there has even been interest in possibly exporting crude oil from the united states in the future .

planned expansion of u.s. hydrocarbon exports has generated some controversy .

environmental groups and various consumer groups have been most vocal against exports .

coal exports have attracted greater attention from both sides of the question as fast as new projects have been proposed .

in addition to areas where new port capacity is being proposed , some communities along potential and existing rail routes , and mining sites , have voiced their opposition .

crs report r42950 , prospects for coal in electric power and industry , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43011 , u.s. and world coal production , federal taxes , and incentives , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

u.s. coal exports: national and state economic contributions , prepared for the national mining association , by ernst and young , may 2013 .

our pain , thei r gain: mountains destroyed for coal shipped overseas , by u.s. house committee on natural resources — democrats , july 19 , 2012 .

appendix a. map of coal deposits and infrastructure appendix b. characteristics of different coals coal — a dense carbonaceous fossil fuel — is formed from decayed organic matter that has been subjected to various temperatures and pressures without the presence of oxygen .

this burnable rock also contains quantities of hydrogen , sulfur , and nitrogen , and other elements and various amounts of mineral matter .

coal seams are formed along with other sedimentary rocks , primarily sandstone and shale .

there are four basic types of coal with varying characteristics throughout the united states .

the characteristics of a particular coal will determine how it is used , mainly for heat or electric power generation , or in steel production .

coal quality is measured by its energy value ( eg , british thermal units or btus per pound ) , moisture and sulfur levels , and ash content .

lignite: a brownish - black coal with high moisture and ash content and relatively low heating value , between 4,000 british thermal units ( btu ) to 8,300 btu per pound .

it contains the lowest carbon content of the four types of coal , and is usually consumed in electricity generation .

lignite is mainly mined in texas , north dakota , louisiana , and montana .

sub - bituminous: this type of coal was the most produced coal in 2011 , accounting for 47% of u.s. production .

it is a dull black coal with higher heating value than lignite and used for generating electricity and space heat .

its btu content ranges from 8,300 btu to 13,000 btu per pound .

resources are primarily found in montana , wyoming , colorado , new mexico , washington , and alaska .

bituminous ( soft coal ) : this type of coal is the most abundant in the united states and has a higher heating value than sub - bituminous and lignite , between 10,500 btu and 15,500 btu per pound .

it is typically used for electric power generation in the united states .

coke is also produced from bituminous coal .

metallurgical coke produced from bituminous coal is used to make steel .

it is found primarily in appalachia and the midwest .

anthracite ( hard coal ) : anthracite has the highest carbon content and energy content ( 15,000 btu per pound ) of all coals but occurs in limited geographic areas , mainly in appalachia and pennsylvania .

the highest grades are used in metallurgy .

thermal coal: coal that is used primarily to generate steam or heat for industrial purposes .

used in electric power generation .

metallurgical coal: also known as coking coal , this type of coal is used to make steel .

appalachia: primarily the east coast of the united states , and includes the north , central , and southern appalachia basins .

interior: mainly in the midwest part of the united states and includes the illinois basin .

western: mostly the rocky mountain region of the united states and includes the powder river and uinta basins .

