congress has demonstrated an ongoing interest in many different aspects of the three - year civil war in syria .

the humanitarian situation , in particular , has garnered significant bipartisan attention .

members have proposed and enacted legislation addressing the issue and have held hearings on the u.s. and international humanitarian response to the conflict .

although not discussed in this report , the use of chemical weapons in syria on august 21 , 2013 , triggered an intense debate over possible u.s. military intervention .

this debate created temporary momentum focused on the dire humanitarian situation within syrian where humanitarian organizations remain severely constrained by the conflict , fighting , and restrictions imposed by the syrian government .

humanitarian assistance has traditionally been one of the least controversial types of foreign aid , and in the syria context , it has so far been one avenue in which the united states has provided support to syrian civilians absent a political solution .

the united states remains the largest humanitarian donor .

as of mid - june 2014 , it is providing roughly 27% of the funding for the humanitarian response in calendar year ( cy ) 2014 .

in cy2012-cy2013 , the united states provided an average of 22% of the funding for the crisis .

u.s. humanitarian policy is guided by concerns about access and protection within syria ; the large refugee flows out of the country that strain the resources of neighboring countries ( and could negatively impact the overall stability of the region ) ; and an already escalating and protracted humanitarian emergency .

along with the international community , the united states provides humanitarian assistance to civilians affected by the conflict both inside and outside syria .

such assistance includes medical care and medical supplies ( including immunization programs ) , food , water , shelter , and other non - food items such as blankets and clothing .

it also supports programs focused on psycho - social rehabilitation of refugees and the prevention of gender - based violence .

since the conflict began in march 2011 in syria , reportedly an unknown number of civilians have been wounded and tens of thousands of lives lost .

some observers estimate the death toll figures to be as many as 100,000 to 150,000 , and others say it is likely much higher .

in january 2014 , according to press reports , the united nations stopped updating the death toll figures from the syria conflict , stating that it could no longer verify the sources of information that led to the last count of 100,000 ( july 2013 ) .

it is estimated that more than 2% of the pre - conflict syrian population of 21.4 million has been killed , maimed , or wounded over the course of the conflict .

in addition to the use of chemical weapons , there are repeated allegations of serious human rights and international humanitarian law violations on all sides of the conflict .

observers claim that hundreds of detainees and political prisoners have died under torture .

the u.n .

independent international commission of inquiry on the syrian arab republic pointed to the "reckless manner in which parties to the conflict conduct hostilities" as a main cause of the civilian casualties and displacement .

the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) has repeatedly urged all sides to fully comply with international humanitarian law .

the icrc currently has no access to detainees .

the united states and many other countries have increasingly recognized the human rights crisis , which not only exacerbates the humanitarian situation , but raises the prospect that atrocities reaching the level of crimes against humanity and war crimes by armed groups may have been committed , including the use of chemical weapons that killed ( by some reports ) as many as 1,400 civilians on august 21 , 2013 .

on january 17 , 2014 , u.n. high commissioner for human rights navi pillay condemned the obstruction of food and medical deliveries to those living in the yarmouk palestinian refugee camp , emphasizing that starving civilians as a method of combat was prohibited under international law .

other reports of mass executions of detainees on the one hand and killing of civilians on the other have also generated condemnation .

outside syria , humanitarian workers have observed a sharp rise in gender - based crimes , including rape and sexual violence , as well as exploitation and discrimination in refugee camps and informal settlements .

the independent international commission of inquiry on the syrian arab republic was established on august 22 , 2011 , by the human rights council .

its mandate is to investigate all alleged violations of international human rights law since march 2011 in the syrian arab republic .

the commission was also tasked with ( 1 ) establishing the facts and circumstances of such violations and ( 2 ) of the crimes perpetrated and , where possible , to identify those responsible with a view of ensuring that perpetrators of violations , including those that may constitute crimes against humanity , are held accountable .

recently , pillay called for syria to be referred to the international criminal court ( icc ) .

on may 22 , 2014 , china and russia blocked the french draft resolution referring syria to the icc .

all other council members voted in favor of the referral .

the short - to medium - term outlook for the resolution of the conflict in syria and impact on its neighbors is not positive .

the united states and other third parties face a number of difficult policy choices with limited potential to decisively shape the overall outcome .

these issues are addressed in other crs reports .

as the international community deliberates over what action it can or should take on the crisis , a massive humanitarian operation continues in parts of syria and in neighboring countries .

the humanitarian situation in syria and in neighboring countries is dire .

as conditions inside syria continue to deteriorate , unocha estimates that of an overall population of just fewer than 21.4 million , nearly 50% ( 9.3 million people ) are in need of humanitarian assistance , including between 6.5 million displaced inside syria .

the number of syrians that have been displaced as refugees , primarily to countries in the immediate surrounding region , is estimated to be 2.8 million .

the obama administration has consistently supported providing humanitarian assistance to all civilians affected by the conflict in syria .

it is working closely with neighboring countries , other governments , the united nations , and humanitarian partners in its response to the crisis .

congress has also demonstrated sustained interest and bipartisan support for a robust u.s. humanitarian response , although members may be divided over other dimensions of u.s. policy .

u.s. humanitarian priorities in syria include providing as much humanitarian assistance as possible through partners and multilateral mechanisms ; supporting protection activities for vulnerable populations ; helping to develop a strong multilateral response to support countries hosting refugees ; encouraging donor pledges and contributions ; and building capacity within syria and among its neighbors for immediate assistance and contingency planning for what has become a protracted crisis .

the key u.s. agencies and offices providing humanitarian assistance include the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , bureau for democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance ( dcha ) through the office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) and food for peace ( ffp ) , and the state department's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) .

there is functional or programmatic overlap between usaid's offices and prm in the humanitarian response , and they coordinate with each other in supporting implementing partners .

in general , prm provides funds for multilateral actors , such as the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , while usaid focuses more on bilateral arrangements with ngos .

with regard to displaced populations , in many contexts including syria , usaid takes the lead on idps , while prm focuses on the needs of refugees and other persons of concern .

overall , 75% of u.s. government funding for syria supports multilateral initiatives through the two u.n. appeals , and 25% supports ngos directly .

prm is not providing funding to ngo partners working inside syria .

usaid funding for the humanitarian response , however , is split between multilateral and ngo programs .

the breadth and scale of the crisis inside syria , with 9.3 million people in need of humanitarian assistance , requires using multiple resources and aid delivery options .

through its ofda and ffp offices , usaid currently has 28 partners , including ngos and u.n. entities , although the names of the former have not been disclosed for security reasons .

usaid's criteria for determining priority partners and sectors for humanitarian assistance inside syria include analysis of on - the - ground assessments ; assistance gaps ( includes an analysis of what other donors are already contributing ) ; and a determination of which humanitarian responders are best placed to respond to humanitarian needs in terms of capacity , technical expertise , and access to populations .

the safety and security of staff working for humanitarian organizations funded by the u.s. government is a primary concern .

the names of ngo implementing partners are considered sensitive information , and obtaining many details is not possible .

ofda and its implementers have taken steps to manage the significant risks associated with working in syria by putting into place a variety of internal controls based on best practices for operating in highly insecure environments .

international efforts to address the humanitarian situation in syria range from global u.n. appeals to on - the - ground food aid to communities and assistance in camps and settlements .

the following sections describe these and other activities in more detail .

as congress considers funding and legislation addressing the humanitarian situation in syria , members may want to take a number of challenges and policy issues into account: impeded international humanitarian response .

despite the provision of substantial humanitarian assistance , insecurity within syria and lack of cooperation by the syrian government has severely hampered efforts by governments , u.n. entities , and humanitarian partners to access affected areas to provide humanitarian assistance to populations in need .

funding shortfalls .

although the united nations and governments , including the united states , have worked with both traditional and non - traditional donors to generate and increase contributions , the two u.n. appeals remain underfunded .

willingness and cooperation of neighboring countries .

so far , jordan , lebanon , and turkey have received the vast majority of refugees from syria .

the united states and the international community have recognized the contribution of neighboring countries and supported their efforts while simultaneously encouraging them to keep their borders open to those fleeing the conflict .

nevertheless , in the short term , the increasing numbers of refugees strain the infrastructure and capacity of these countries , and in the long term , they create concerns that the situation could become protracted with limited ongoing international support and attention .

ongoing capacity by the international community to keep pace with humanitarian developments .

the urgent humanitarian needs coupled with the speed at which the situation is changing have many experts concerned that the international response capacity could be overwhelmed if the current pace and scope of conflict and displacement continues .

amid these factors , congress may also need to weigh the following: balancing priorities .

finding the resources to sustain u.s. aid pledges may be difficult in light of domestic budget constraints .

when humanitarian emergencies like the syria situation require immediate emergency relief , the administration may fund pledges by depleting most global humanitarian accounts .

in order to respond to future humanitarian crises , however , these resources would need to be replenished .

if not replenished , u.s. capacity to respond to other emergencies could be diminished .

burdensharing .

both congress and the administration have encouraged other countries to provide humanitarian assistance for the syria situation and to turn pledges into actual commitments .

it is not always evident whether figures listing donor amounts represent pledges of support or more specific obligations .

pledges made by governments do not always result in actual contributions , as demonstrated by the donor conferences in kuwait .

it also cannot be assumed that the funds committed to relief actually represent new contributions , since the money may have been previously allocated elsewhere .

moreover , it is not readily apparent how the actual costs of a humanitarian emergency might be shared among international donors .

comparing u.s. assistance and international aid can also be difficult because of the often dramatically different forms the assistance takes ( relief items versus cash , for instance ) .

more broadly , political considerations play a role in the way humanitarian assistance is given and to whom .

while the images of human suffering only reinforce the need to "do something," humanitarian assistance carries some weight as an instrument of "neutral" intervention and is the most flexible policy tool that can be quickly brought to bear in a crisis .

sometimes humanitarian assistance is expanded beyond its immediate function to avert a crisis , to provide support to allies , and to maintain a presence in the region .

how it is used and whether it becomes more of a strategic , policy tool depends upon the situation , what other governments are doing , and the degree to which the united states has further interest in the region .

providing humanitarian assistance also raises questions about implications for future action .

on the one hand , if the united states decides to reduce its humanitarian support to syria , would this diminish u.s. standing among its allies or affect its interests in other ways ? .

on the other hand , since the president has a great deal of flexibility over u.s. involvement , once commitment to a humanitarian effort is made , does this make the long - term u.s. participation in reconstruction and political solutions more likely ? .

regardless , the level and sources of u.s. humanitarian assistance will inevitably have an important impact not only on the syrian relief operation itself , but on broader u.s. foreign policy goals .

appendix a .

distribution of u.s. funds , cy2012-2014 appendix b .

selected humanitarian projects funded by all donors in syria and the region appendix c. selected humanitarian partners serving the syria arab republic civil unrest , cy2014 appendix d. u.s. and international humanitarian country donors to the syria crisis , cy2012-2014 appendix e. 2013 pledges not converted to commitments or contributions as of june 18 , 2014 appendix f. sources for further information united states agency for international development ( usaid ) syria country page: http: / / www.usaid.gov / crisis / syria no lost generation: http: / / www.usaid.gov / crisis / syria / children u.s. department of state syria country page: http: / / www.state.gov / p / nea / ci / sy / bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) : http: / / www.state.gov / j / prm / central intelligence agency ( cia ) the world factbook on syria: https: / / www.cia.gov / library / publications / the - world - factbook / geos / sy.html united nations — selected sources un news center: http: / / www.un.org / apps / news / infocusrel.asp ? infocusid=146&body=syria&body1= united nations inter - agency information sharing portal: http: / / data.unhcr.org / syrianrefugees / regional.php relief web link: http: / / reliefweb.int / country / sy .

