this report provides a comprehensive summary of the federal financial assistance provided to the gulf coast states of alabama , florida , louisiana , mississippi , and texas in response to the widespread destruction that resulted from hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma in 2005 and hurricanes gustav and ike in 2008 .

the damages caused by the hurricanes are some of the worst in the history of the united states in terms of lives lost and property damaged and destroyed .

the federal government played a significant role in the response to the hurricanes and congress appropriated funds for a wide range of activities and efforts to help the gulf coast states recover and rebuild from the storms .

in addition , congress appropriated a significant amount of funds for mitigation activities and projects to reduce or eliminate the impacts of future storms .

though the storms happened over a decade ago , congress remains interested in the types and amounts of federal assistance that were provided to the gulf coast for several reasons .

for one , congress continues to be interested in how the money has been spent , what resources have been provided to the region , and whether the money has reached the people and entities intended to receive the funds .

the financial information is also useful for congressional oversight and evaluation of the federal entities that were responsible for response and recovery operations .

similarly , it gives congress a general idea of the federal assets that are needed and can be brought to bear when catastrophic disasters take place in the united states .

as such , the financial information from the storms can help frame the congressional debate concerning federal assistance for current and future disasters .

the financial information provided in this report includes a summary of appropriations provided to the gulf coast states by congress in response to the 2005 and 2008 hurricanes .

in addition , when available , hurricane - specific and state - specific funding information is provided by federal entity .

the 2005 hurricane season was a record - breaking season for hurricanes and storms .

there were 13 hurricanes in 2005 , breaking the old record of 12 hurricanes set in 1969 .

the 2005 season also set a record for the number of category 5 storms ( three ) in a season .

most of the damaging effects caused by the hurricanes were experienced in the gulf coast states of louisiana , arkansas , florida , mississippi , and texas .

the 2008 hurricane season was also an active hurricane season that caused additional damage in the gulf coast .

the following two sections provide funding data and narratives describing the assistance that was provided to the gulf coast in response to the 2005 and 2008 hurricane seasons .

section i presents funding provided to the five gulf coast states ( alabama , florida , louisiana , mississippi , and texas ) after hurricanes katrina , rita , wilma , gustav , and ike .

funding amounts were compiled by crs analysts who reviewed legislative texts of supplemental appropriations .

the amounts are disaggregated by federal entity and subentity , insofar as possible and applicable .

the data are based on the analysts' interpretations of disaster assistance .

some data were excluded from section i because crs analysts found that the data either were too ambiguous or covered disasters not limited to the gulf coast .

certain amounts pertaining to a range of disasters were included , however , because crs analysts determined that most of the funds went to the gulf coast states .

section ii presents funding by federal agency .

the amounts reported may reflect expenditures , obligations , allocations , or appropriations .

the data in this section are not based solely on those in section i .

rather , the data in section ii were derived from a variety of authoritative sources , including agency websites , crs experts who received information directly from agencies , and governmental reports .

section ii presents funding information by federal entity and includes a narrative summarizing each agency's disaster assistance efforts .

the sections also provide the authorities that authorized the activities that were provided .

when possible , funding data are provided in tabular form .

it should be noted that the data on appropriations in section i , table 1 , are not directly comparable to funding data in section ii .

the former were drawn solely from the public laws cited in the source note to table 1 .

the data in section ii were obtained , as cited in each subsection , from a range of published and unpublished sources , and include various fiscal years .

funding data on federal ( and nonfederal ) assistance are not systematically collected .

given the absence of comprehensive federal information on disaster assistance , the data provided in this report should only be considered as an approximation , and should not be viewed as definitive .

in addition to the above , the following caveats apply to this report: it is difficult to identify all of the federal entities that provide disaster relief because many federal entities provide aid through a wide range of programs , not necessarily through those designated specifically as "disaster assistance" programs .

because data on federal ( and nonfederal ) assistance are not systematically collected , funding data were drawn from a wide range of sources including published and unpublished data that have been collected at different times and under inconsistent reporting methods .

following the exodus of thousands of residents from the gulf coast states after hurricane katrina in 2005 , many other states received federal assistance to cope with the influx of those seeking aid .

the aid provided to the states outside the gulf coast is not discussed in this report .

the appropriations language reviewed for section i usually designates funds to a federal entity for a range of disasters without identifying how much funding is to be disbursed to each incident .

for example , p.l .

110-329 , signed into law on september 30 , 2008 , provided funds for several disasters that occurred in 2008 , including hurricanes gustav and ike , wildfires in california , and the midwest floods .

determining the funding amounts directed toward each individual disaster is difficult , if not impossible , unless the legislative text specifies these amounts .

an additional difficulty occurs in tracking funding at the agency level because appropriations might be made , not to specific entities , but to budget accounts , and then allocated for specified purposes .

the degree of transparency in reporting funding levels for disaster relief varies tremendously among federal entities .

as an example , congress requires the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) to submit monthly status reports on the disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

the drf is fema's disaster assistance account .

the drf is used to fund existing recovery projects ( including reimbursements to other federal agencies for their work ) and provide funding for future emergencies and disasters as needed .

the drf reports must detail obligations , allocations , and expenditures for hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma .

this requirement has not been extended to other agencies , and scant data exist , particularly on a state - by - state basis , on other federal funding for emergencies and major disasters .

appropriations may be subject to transfers or rescissions after enactment of appropriations statutes .

it is possible that such emendations to the initial appropriations have not been identified in this research .

in addition to the above caveats , it should also be noted that there may have been funding changes since this report was originally published in 2013 that are not represented in this updated version .

in some cases , additional obligations may have been provided and in other cases some funding may have been recouped or otherwise transferred .

the funding information in this report should therefore be interpreted as illustrative as opposed to definitive , and used with appropriate caution .

 table 1 presents data on the appropriations enacted after hurricanes katrina , rita , wilma , gustav , and ike from fy2005 to fy2009 , by federal entity and subentity , when possible and applicable .

as mentioned earlier , in many cases funding for disaster relief is appropriated for multiple incidents .

therefore , table 1 may include data on appropriations that also provided funding for non - gulf coast incidents .

some appropriations designated for a range of disasters were excluded , however , in an attempt to avoid artificially inflating the amount of funding directed to the gulf coast for hurricane relief .

since fy2005 , at least 10 appropriations bills have been enacted to address widespread destruction caused by the 2005 and 2008 gulf coast hurricanes .

these appropriations consisted of eight emergency supplemental appropriations acts , one reconciliation act , and one continuing appropriations resolution .

in addition to these statutes that specifically identify the hurricanes or the gulf coast states , it is likely that regular appropriations legislation also provided assistance to the gulf coast .

because these statutes did not specify that they were providing such assistance , regular appropriations are not included in table 1 .

in the course of this research , crs identified 11 federal departments , 4 federal agencies ( or other entities ) , and numerous subentities , programs , and activities that supplied roughly $121.7 billion in federal assistance to the gulf coast states after the major hurricanes of 2005 ( katrina , rita , and wilma ) and 2008 ( gustav and ike ) .

section ii provides information on the most significant programs , or categories of programs , through which the aid was provided .

each narrative contains a summary of activities of each federal entity providing disaster relief .

when possible , the information is presented in tabular form and is disaster and state specific .

unless otherwise specified , all figures are stated in nominal dollars .

as mentioned earlier , the data in section ii may not correspond to the emergency funds appropriated by congress for hurricane relief purposes specified in section i .

reasons for the difference include the following: the tables in section ii present information from a variety of funding measures , including obligations , allocations , and expenditures ; some funds made available may have been reallocated or deobligated from other purposes ; and money from accounts that did not terminate at the end of a fiscal year ( known as no - year accounts ) may have been allocated to the gulf coast states .

this report demonstrates not only the significant amount of assistance the federal government provides for major disasters , but also the wide range of federal programs that are brought to bear to help individuals and communities respond and recover from major disasters , as well as prepare and mitigate against future disasters .

yet , this is only a partial picture of the amounts and types of disaster assistance that have been provided by the federal government on a yearly basis .

the research focus for this report was on supplemental appropriations for the 2005 and 2008 gulf coast hurricanes .

the federal government , however , also annually provides disaster assistance through regular appropriations and continuing resolutions , as well as supplemental appropriations .

for example , with respect to the drf , congress provided roughly $42 billion in annual appropriations for fy2007 to fy2016 ( see table 30 ) .

this amount does not include what was provided in annual appropriations for other agencies , nor does it include what was provided through supplemental appropriations .

there are indications that expenditures on disaster assistance may increase .

in recent years there has been an uptick in the number of declarations issued each year .

for example , the average number of major disasters declared per year from 1953 to 2016 was 35.8 .

however , beginning in the 1990s there has been an uptick in the frequency with which major disasters are declared .

during the 1990s the average number of major disaster declarations per year was 45.8 , the average number from 2000 to 2009 was 57.1 , and the average number from 2010 to 2016 was 58.7 ( see figure 1 ) .

thus , while this report provides the most detailed information on federal assistance for the 2005 and 2008 gulf coast hurricanes , there is a need for further research on the subject of federal disaster assistance — including the assistance provided in response to disasters in other regions of the united states — to address existing gaps in funding information .

this information would be useful because , arguably , congressional oversight and debates concerning disaster relief can be better informed with more accurate data and information on the amounts and types of assistance provided by the federal government to states , localities , and tribal nations .

potential policy methods for addressing gaps in funding information may include requiring the issuance of disaster assistance reports on an annual or quarterly basis from all federal entities that provide significant amounts of disaster assistance ; the office of management and budget ( omb ) to compile a report on an annual or quarterly basis with funding information that details all federal spending for emergencies and major disasters ; a standardization of how expenditure data are reported across federal agencies to facilitate cost comparisons ; reports to include state - specific as well as disaster - specific information .

state - specific information could be used to target mitigation projects ; disaster assistance reports to include supplemental as well as regular appropriations data ; federal agencies to flag monies used for disaster relief that has been taken from their regular budgets ; and disaster assistance reports to contain cost share information as well as detailed information on state expenditures .

if the increase in the number of declarations and their associated costs are of concern , in addition to requiring improved data reporting congress may choose to address the issue through a variety of policy measures .

the following sections could be used to frame a potential debate on limiting the number of declarations being issued , limiting the assistance provided after a declaration has been declared , or both .

to many , providing relief to disaster victims is an essential role of the government .

in their view , the concern over costs is understandable given concerns over the national budget .

however , they may argue that the increase in the amount of assistance provided over the past decade is justified because the occurrences of disasters are on the rise ( see figure 6 ) .

the rise may be due to a number of factors including increases in inclement weather , population growth , and building development .

moreover , proponents of keeping the current system in place may say that providing assistance to disaster - stricken areas is both acceptable and needed to help a state and region's economy recover from a storm that it otherwise may not be able to recover from on its own .

others may contend that too many major disasters are being declared and should be limited .

the following sections review some policy mechanisms that could be employed to decrease the number of declarations that are being issued .

the primary option consists of preventing what may be perceived by some to be marginal incidents from triggering federal assistance .

potential methods to achieve this include changing the definitions of a major disaster in stafford act , changing the per capita formula for determining whether a disaster is sufficiently large to warrant federal assistance , or the use of other indicators instead of , or in conjunction with , the per capita formula .

some argue that the stafford act has enhanced presidential declaration authority because the definition of a major disaster in section 102 ( 2 ) of stafford act is ill - defined .

because of the expansive nature of this definition under the stafford act , they assert , there are not many restrictions on the types of major disasters for which the president may issue a declaration .

for example , some would argue that snowstorms do not warrant major disaster declarations .

one potential method of reducing the number of major disasters being declared is to increase the per capita amount used by fema to make major disaster recommendations to the president .

a per capita formula based on damages caused by an incident is used by fema to make recommendations to the president concerning whether to issue a major disaster declaration .

the current per capita amount used by fema to make recommendations is $1.43 .

this amount could be increased ( for example , by 10% ) to reduce the number of incidents eligible for federal assistance .

if increased , congress might require that the per capita be adjusted annually for inflation .

the dhs inspector general issued a report in may 2012 , which noted that fema had been using a $1 per capita damage amount since 1986 for determining during its preliminary damage assessment process if it would recommend to the president that the event was beyond the capacity of state and local governments to deal with without federal assistance .

the dhs inspector general also explained that fema did not begin adjusting that number for inflation until 1999 .

the dhs inspector general pointed out that if the inflation adjustment had been occurring over that 13-year period , from 1986 to 1999 , fully 36% fewer disasters would have qualified for a presidential declaration based on that factor .

however , it is also useful to understand that the actual public announcement of factors considered for a declaration did not become public until 1999 .

at the behest of congress , it was in that year that fema began to print the factors that were considered in regulation .

until then , all of that information had been within the "pre - decisional" part of the process in the executive branch .

however , in 1999 fema began to identify factors considered for both public and individual assistance .

that is not to say fema was not using the per capita amount in its considerations , only that the process was not widely known or understood as it presently is .

as the dhs ig notes , fema could have been raising that amount gradually , a process that did not begin until more than a dozen years later .

on the other hand , it should also be considered that when fema discussed such proposals ( eg , per capita figures gradually increasing ) with congress , the result was a new section 320 of the stafford act that stated the following: no geographic area shall be precluded from receiving assistance under this act solely by virtue of an arithmetic formula or sliding scale based on income of population .

in 2001 , the government accountability office ( gao ) issued a report on disaster declaration criteria .

the gao report was a comprehensive review of fema's declaration criteria factors .

gao recommended that fema "develop more objective and specific criteria to assess the capabilities of state and local governments to respond to a disaster" and "consider replacing the per capita measure of state capacity with a more sensitive measure , such as a state's total taxable resources. .

the state's total taxable resources ( ttr ) was developed by the department of the treasury .

gao reported that ttr: is a better measure of state funding capacity in that it provides a more comprehensive measure of the resources that are potentially subject to state taxation .

for example , ttr includes much of the business income that does not become part of the income flow to state residents , undistributed corporate profits , and rents and interest payments made by businesses to out - of - state stock owners .

this more comprehensive indicator of state funding capacity is currently used to target federal aid to low - capacity states under the substance abuse and mental health service administration's block grant programs .

in the case of fema's public assistance program , adjustments for ttr in setting the threshold for a disaster declaration would result in a more realistic estimate of a state's ability to respond to a disaster .

it could be argued that the use of ttr would conflict with the prohibition against the use of arithmetic formulas established by congress .

however , just as fema's per capita measurement is one of several factors considered and not the "sole" determinant of a declaration , gao stated that ttr would not violate section 320 because ttr could also be used with other criteria such as those identified in regulations .

thus , some could contend that ttr could fill a similar role with perhaps more accuracy .

it may also help reduce federal costs for disaster assistance by denying assistance to marginal incidents that could be otherwise handled by the state .

some have proposed the use of an independent expert panel to review gubernatorial requests for major disaster declarations .

such panels would be comprised of individuals with specialized knowledge in certain subject areas , such as disasters , economics , and public health .

the panel would take into account the severity of the incident as well as other factors that might indicate how well the state could respond to and recover from the incident .

the panel would then make recommendations to the president whether the circumstances of the incident were worthy of federal assistance based on their assessment .

some might argue that the use of an expert panel would make decisions about whether to provide assistance more objective .

others might argue that the use of a panel may slow down the declaration process and impede the provision of important assets and resources .

it may be argued that the panel's recommendation would infringe on the president's authority to issue a declaration .

on the other hand , it could also be argued that the president would retain the authority to issue a declaration despite the panel's recommendation .

another potential method to reduce the number of declarations and the costs of federal disaster assistance would be to create incentives to dissuade states from requesting assistance .

one method would be converting some , or all , federal assistance provided through emergency declarations into a loan program .

for example , emergency declarations could be altered to provide up to a specified amount ( for example , $5 billion dollars ) in low interest recovery loans .

under this arrangement a state could elect to handle the incident without federal assistance rather than having to reimburse the federal government for recovery loans .

the following section discusses some potential changes to the stafford act that might limit the number of declarations being issued each year .

as mentioned previously , section 320 of the stafford act restricts the use of an arithmetic or sliding scale to provide federal assistance .

repealing section 320 would allow formulas that establish certain thresholds that states would have to meet to qualify for assistance .

section 404 of the stafford act authorizes the president to contribute up to 75% of the cost of an incident toward mitigation measures that reduce the risk of future damage , loss of life , and suffering .

section 404 could be amended to make mitigation assistance contingent on state codes being in place prior to an event .

for example , states that have met certain mitigation standards could remain eligible for the 75% federal cost share .

states that do not meet the standards would be eligible for a smaller share , such as 50% federal cost share .

the amendment may incentivize mitigation work on the behalf of the state and possibly help reduce damages to the extent that a request for assistance is not needed , or the cost of the federal share may be lessened .

the amendment could be set to take effect in three years , giving states time to act , or not .

other amendments to the stafford act could either limit the number of declarations being issued , or the amount of assistance provided to the state by the federal government .

the stafford act could be amended so that there could be no administrative adjustment of the cost - share .

the cost - share could only be adjusted through congressional action .

the amendment could be designed to apply immediately .

the stafford act could be amended so that federal assistance would only be available for states with corollary programs ( such as public assistance , individual assistance , and housing assistance ) .

establishing these programs at the state level may increase state capacity to handle some incidents without federal assistance .

the amendment could be designed to take effect in three years , giving states time to act , or not .

the stafford act could be amended to discontinue all assistance for snow removal unless directed by congress .

the amendment could be designed to take effect in three years to give states and localities an opportunity to increase snow removal budgets , or not .

most discussions regarding state cost - shares in disaster programs and projects involve ways in which the state amount may be reduced and the federal share increased .

some may contend , however , that the opposite approach should be adopted and efforts should be undertaken to reduce disaster costs by shifting the costs to the state and local level .

currently , state and local governments provide 25% of disaster costs on projects and grants to families and individuals with the federal government assuming , at a minimum , 75% of all costs .

there is no statutory limit on the number of people that can be helped following a disaster .

similarly , when assessing damage to state and local infrastructure there is no cap on the amount of federal funds that can be expended to make the repairs or accomplish a replacement .

the only limitation is that the damage must be to eligible facilities and that it is disaster - related damage .

given that open - ended commitment by the federal government , some may argue that increasing the state share of 25% to a higher percentage would be warranted given the federal government's fiscal condition .

another option would be to make the cost - share arrangement not subject to administrative adjustment .

as mentioned previously , the assistance provided for emergency declarations could be provided through the form of loans .

similarly , some or all of the assistance provided to the state after a major disaster could be converted to low - interest or no - interest loans .

for example , a state may receive the traditional 75% cost share for an incident but be required to reimburse 25% of that funding to the federal government .

loans for disaster recovery could also be incentivized .

for instance , states that undertook certain pre - established preparedness mitigation measures could qualify for a larger federal share or a lower interest rate .

congress has always debated the federal role in disaster relief .

in recent years the debate has intensified in light of the federal budgetary environment .

policymakers have , or may ask , a number of questions relating to federal expenditures on disaster relief to assist and improve oversight , and to better inform deliberations on legislation designed to assist individuals and communities respond and recover from incidents .

such questions may include the following: to what degree should the federal government be involved in providing disaster assistance ? .

is the federal government providing enough assistance , or being overly generous in providing financial assistance to states ? .

was the funding provided for the gulf coast storms delivered efficiently and to its intended targets ? .

if not , how can the process be improved without slowing the provision of necessary services and resources ? .

how were funding allocations to each federal entity determined ? .

was the process accurate , or could it be improved in upcoming disasters ? .

are there increased instances of fraud , abuse , and waste when large sums of funding are provided for disaster relief ? .

if so , what oversight mechanisms are in place to prevent such occurrences ? .

is there unnecessary duplication of services and / or efforts given the large number of federal entities involved in disaster relief ? .

the assistance provided by the federal government to the gulf coast was provided , in part , by a number of supplemental appropriations .

is it better to provide funding overtime through multiple supplemental appropriations , or to provide the funding once through a single supplemental appropriation ? .

the following authors contributed sections in this report .

