this report provides an overview of appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the first portion of this report provides an overview and historical context for reviewing dhs appropriations , highlighting various aspects including the comparative size of dhs components , the amount of non - appropriated funding the department receives , and trends in the timing and size of the department's appropriations legislation .

the second portion of this report outlines the legislative chronology of major events in funding the department for fy2014 .

the third portion of this report provides detailed information on dhs appropriations .

the dhs appropriations bill includes funding for all components and functions of the department .

for fy2013 , pre - sequester dhs discretionary appropriations were $46.2 billion , with $12.1 billion in supplemental appropriations ( see table 1 ) .

for fy2014 , the total request was $44.7 billion .

house - passed and senate - reported dhs appropriations legislation had similar total funding levels , $44.6 billion and $44.7 billion , respectively .

totals represent net discretionary budget authority , taking into account impacts of rescissions , and include emergency spending and disaster relief .

analyses that include the impact of fees and mandatory spending are found later in this report .

title i of the dhs appropriations bill provides funding for the department's management activities , analysis and operations ( a&o ) account , and the office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

the administration requested $1,239 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $883 million in title i , a decrease of 28.0% from the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $1,054 million in title i , 14.9% below the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $1,037 million in title i , 16.3% below the requested level .

table 5 lists the pre - sequester enacted amounts for the individual components of title i for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , and the house - passed appropriations for the same .

the heavy lines in this table and in similar ones later in the report serve as a reminder that direct comparisons between the pre - sequester fy2013 funding and fy2014 proposals are not comparisons of current levels of actual spending and proposals for the coming fiscal year , as one would normally see in this type of report .

title ii of the dhs appropriations bill , which includes over three - quarters of the budget authority provided in the legislation , contains the appropriations for u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

the administration requested $30,283 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $30,768 million under title ii , an increase of 1.60% from the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have included $30,289 million in title ii , an increase of less than 0.1% from the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $30,877 million in title ii , 2.1% above the requested level .

both the senate - reported bill and the enacted annual appropriations act also included an additional $227 million in funding for overseas contingency operations of coast guard , compensated for by an adjustment in the discretionary spending limits outlined through the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act , as amended .

table 6 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title ii for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

title iii of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the administration requested $5,383 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $5,928 million , an increase of 10.1% above the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $5,955 million , an increase of 10.6% above the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $5,952 million in title iii , 10.6% above the requested level .

in addition , all three versions of this title also include a requested $5,626 million for disaster relief that is offset by an adjustment under the budget control act .

table 7 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iii for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

title iv of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office .

the administration requested $2,214 million for these accounts in fy2014 .

the house - passed bill would have provided $1,890 million , a decrease of 14.7% below the requested level .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $1,885 million , a decrease of 15.0% below the requested level .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $1,878 million in title iv , 15.2% below the requested level .

table 8 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iv for fy2013 , the administration's request for these components for fy2014 , the house - passed and senate - reported appropriations for the same , and the annual appropriation enacted through division f of p.l .

113-76 .

title v of the dhs appropriations bill contains the general provisions for the bill .

these typically include a variety of provisions that apply generally to the bill , as opposed to a single appropriation .

however , general provisions may carry additional appropriations , rescissions of prior - year appropriations , limitations on the use of funds , or permanent legislative language as well .

the administration's request was made in relation to the general provisions for dhs included in the fy2012 appropriations act ( division d of p.l .

112-74 ) , as the fy2013 appropriations process had not been concluded while the fy2014 request was being developed .

the administration proposed dropping 36 general provisions , most of which they had proposed eliminating in fy2013 .

eleven of those were already eliminated in the final fy2013 appropriations bill .

the administration also proposed adding 10 provisions and modifying 10 others .

while many of those modifications were simple date changes , one represented a significant change from previous practices .

the administration proposed modifying section 503 , which governs reprogramming of funds , to provide transfer authority that would allow funds to be moved between appropriations accounts within dhs to expedite response to a catastrophic event .

the house concurred with the administration's request to drop three general provisions beyond the 11 that were dropped from the fy2013 dhs appropriations act .

the house appropriations committee did not add any of the general provisions requested by the administration — with the exception of a rescission provision that it modified — and rejected the expansion of reprogramming authority .

h.r .

2217 as reported to the house had 65 general provisions .

the house added 19 general provisions to the bill during floor action , bringing the total number of general provisions in its version of h.r .

2217 to 84 .

eighteen of these newly added general provisions prohibit the use of funds provided in the bill for specific activities .

the senate appropriations committee chose to drop a provision that the house retained , kept four proposed for removal that the house did not , and added several other provisions .

it added two provisions requested by the administration — one authorizing the use of reimbursable fee agreements to fund cbp services , and a modified provision allowing dhs to receive donations to construct , alter , operate , or maintain land ports of entry .

the senate - reported bill includes 72 general provisions in all .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included 77 general provisions in all .

seven provisions of the 74 general provisions carried in the fy2013 homeland security appropriations act were dropped , and ten were added .

section 559 of the act included a modified version of the administration's requested authority to enter into reimburseable fee agreements and to receive donations .

the act did not include the requested expansion of reprogramming authority .

house - passed h.r .

2217 included $460 million in rescissions in title v , while the senate - reported version included $241 million in rescissions .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $693 million in title v. these provisions reduce the net score of the act .

the house - passed bill would have provided $34 million for dhs's data center consolidation effort through a general provision , while the senate - reported bill would have provided $54 million in the same fashion , as well as $43 million for dhs headquarters consolidation at st. elizabeths .

these are cross - cutting initiatives which have been funded in the past in the general provisions of the legislation .

the senate - reported bill also included legislative language to allow dhs to use fee revenues collected as a result of lifting a fee exemption , which adds $110 million to the overall cost of the legislation .

division f of p.l .

113-76 included $3 million for a uscis immigrant integration grant program , as well as $42 million for data center migration , $35 million for dhs headquarters consolidation , and $30 million for financial systems modernization .

the division also includes the legislative language concerning fees as proposed by the senate .

these are the only provisions in this title that impact the score of the act .

