on april 27 , 2014 , south africa celebrated freedom day — marking the 20 th anniversary of the first non - racial democratic elections in 1994 and "the end of over three hundred years of colonialism , segregation and white minority rule" — ahead of the fifth democratic post - apartheid national election on may 7 .

the governing african national congress ( anc ) political party is widely expected to maintain an electoral majority after the polls , though its share of the vote may shrink .

as discussed in this report , the anc faces substantial , increasing criticism focusing on its governance record by many in the general public , a range of civic leaders , and by rival political parties , the number of which has recently grown by two .

an early 2014 opinion poll pegged the anc's level of support at 53% , while it garnered about 66% in two recent polls .

the latter figure is in line with its share of the parliamentary vote in the last election in 2009 .

these issues and the elections are discussed below .

in late june 2013 , president obama traveled to south africa after visiting senegal , prior to a visit to tanzania .

his trip to the african continent highlighted u.s. - african cooperation and policies in the areas of trade and investment , development , democracy , and peace and security , which the president addressed in a "framing speech" at south africa's university of cape town .

the president also announced plans to host a u.s. - africa heads of state summit in the united states in 2014 , now slated to be held in early august , and the roll - out of power africa , "a new initiative that will double access to [electrical] power in sub - saharan africa. .

while in south africa , the president held a meeting and a joint press conference with president jacob zuma of south africa , which he described as a "critical partner" of the united states .

their meeting focused on u.s. - south african bilateral relations , which president obama said are "extraordinarily strong," and a wide range of regional and global political , security , economic , and development issues .

among other activities in south africa , the president also held a town hall meeting as part of his young african leaders initiative , initiated in 2010 ; met with the african union commission chair on continental issues and regional organization capacities ; and visited the desmond tutu hiv foundation youth center .

the center visit was intended to highlight community - based solutions to healthcare challenges and the administration's global health agenda , in particular efforts to help improve public health systems in south africa and elsewhere in africa .

the state department characterizes south africa as a u.s. "strategic partner," and president obama's trip to the country underlined that bilateral ties remain close , as they have been since 1994 , despite periodic differences on some foreign policy issues .

socioeconomic development is a key focus of bilateral cooperation ; since 1992 , south africa has been a leading african recipient of u.s. aid , the bulk of which supports hiv / aids and related health programs .

u.s. - south african trade ties are also important .

total trade ( exports and imports ) more than doubled over the past decade , reaching a record of $16.7 billion in 2011 before declining slightly to $16.2 billion in 2012 and $15.8 billion in 2013 .

south africa has enjoyed a significant but declining trade surplus with the united states and is a major export and investment destination for u.s. businesses in africa .

security cooperation is another key area of engagement .

in 2010 , the two countries established a strategic dialogue centering on cooperation related to health , education , food security , law enforcement , trade , investment , energy , and nonproliferation .

south africa hosted two visits by former secretary of state hillary clinton , as well as by other top u.s. officials .

john kerry had not made a visit to south africa as secretary of state as of early may 2014 .

first lady michelle obama traveled to south africa in 2011 , as did vice president joseph biden and his wife in 2010 , when they attended the world cup .

congress has played an active role in u.s. relations with south africa .

this was particularly true during the struggle against apartheid , beginning in the late 1960s , through the first decade that followed the 1994 transition to majority rule .

in recent years , congressional engagement with south africa has mainly focused on foreign aid program oversight , particularly relating to hiv / aids and other healthcare - related programs .

in addition to these traditional areas of interest , efforts to bolster trade and investment ties with south africa , and with africa generally , are drawing increasing congressional attention .

trade was a key focus of an early 2013 bicameral congressional delegation to south africa .

south africa , a multi - racial but predominantly black country about twice the size of texas , has the largest , most diversified , and most industrialized economy in africa .

south africa is also influential regionally , due to its investment and political engagement in many african countries and active role and leadership within the inter - governmental african union ( au ) .

it has enjoyed economic growth for more than a decade , apart from 2009 when the economy contracted , and average per capita incomes and access to education have grown across racial groups , notably for blacks .

nonetheless , south africa remains a racially unequal society with respect to wealth and income distribution and access to jobs , social services , and utilities .

there are also significant regional , rural - urban , and intraracial disparities .

most black south africans live in poverty , and average per capita black incomes are one - sixth as large as those of the historically privileged white minority , although this disparity has gradually declined .

blacks are also disproportionately unemployed , at a rate of 36% in 2011 , compared to 5.9% for whites , and have relatively less access to education , although black education rates are steadily increasing .

south africa faces multiple challenges , many related to poverty and public service provision .

most south african cities are surrounded by vast , high - density informal housing settlements , known as townships , which are populated mostly by blacks and coloureds .

shortages of formal housing ( i.e. , legally registered , generally durable cement houses , as opposed to improvised shanty structures often constructed by squatters ) , water , electricity , and social services in townships have contributed to growing social and political tensions .

township protests demanding improvements in these areas have increased in recent years .

labor unrest is also common and rose sharply in 2012 , and has remained so , notably in the mining sector .

public corruption is another key challenge , and there are high rates of violent crime , particularly rape .

there are periodic reports of vigilante and mob violence , and police reportedly often use heavy - handed tactics to respond to crime and public unrest , occasionally resulting in serious human rights violations .

south africa is afflicted by high and gradually increasing rates of adult hiv prevalence .

the rate in 2012 was 17.9% .

the anc has held a large majority in the national assembly ( parliament ) since the first universal suffrage elections in 1994 , and currently holds a majority just shy of the two - thirds required to amend the constitution .

the parliament elects the country's president and , as a result , the anc has controlled the executive branch since 1994 .

the anc customarily nominates its party president to serve as national president , with some exceptions ( see textbox below ) .

the assembly elected the incumbent anc president , jacob zuma , to his first term as national president in 2009 .

despite rising criticism of zuma and internal party challenges to his candidacy , zuma mounted a carefully crafted , successful campaign to ensure his reelection as head of the anc at a late 2012 anc party congress .

he easily thwarted a belated and reportedly ill - coordinated rival bid by his deputy , kgalema motlanthe .

zuma's election as head of the anc means that he is almost certain to win a second term as south africa's president .

south africa's economy is diverse and , until nigeria revalued its gross domestic product ( gdp ) measurement methodology in april 2014 , was the largest in africa .

the country is a famed wine producer and exports a range of agricultural products , such as wool , maize , sugar , and fruit and juice , although only about 10% of its land is arable and agriculture contributes less than 3% of the gdp .

industrial contributions to gdp , at 28.4% in 2012 , are far more significant .

south africa is the world's leading producer of platinum and chromium and a major gold , diamond , and coal producer .

other key industrial sectors include automobile assembly , chemicals , textiles , foodstuffs , and iron and steel production .

services contribute the largest share of gdp , 69% .

south africa has large and well - developed tourism , banking , energy , legal , communications , and transport sectors .

south african cell phone companies and other firms are active throughout africa , and sabmiller , formerly south african breweries , operates globally .

the johannesburg stock exchange is among the 20 largest exchanges globally , and south africa is one of the few african upper middle income countries ( defined by the world bank as those with a per capita gross national income of $4,086-$12,615 in 2012 ) .

domestically , south africa faces a number of economic challenges .

low local savings rates mean that south african firms seeking credit must often turn to foreign sources of finance .

government deficits have increased in recent years , from an average of 0.5% of gdp from 2005 to 2008 to an average of nearly 5% of gdp from 2009 to 2012 , and government net debt as a percent of gdp has grown from a low of about 23% in 2008 to over 34% in 2012 .

total external debt stocks have risen steadily , from $68 billion in 2008 to nearly $114 billion in 2011 .

due to population increases , real per capita gdp growth has also lagged behind national gdp growth rates .

an inadequately educated workforce is widely seen as a key hindrance to growth .

education quality in south africa ranks poorly in international comparisons , despite large investments in the sector .

high unemployment , limited access to social services , and diverse public infrastructure investment needs are also viewed as key barriers to economic growth .

according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , distortions of demand , supply , and pricing in the labor market , together with other market imbalances , have undermined south africa's economic production potential and helped "to preserv[e] inequality and high unemployment. .

despite efforts to increase electricity generation capacity , lack of power is another serious problem .

south africa was the largest non - oil - focused u.s. trade partner in africa in 2012 , and the second - largest overall , after nigeria .

it is the third largest , on average , over the past decade .

bilateral trade in goods grew by over 210% over the past decade , rising from $7.7 billion in 2003 , to $16.2 billion in 2012 , when south africa was the 40 th - largest source of u.s. imports and the 35 th - largest u.s. export destination .

top u.s. goods exports in recent years include machinery ; vehicles , mostly tractors and trucks ; electrical machinery ; precious metals and stones , mostly gold ; and aircraft , engines , and parts .

top u.s. goods imports include precious metals and stones , mostly platinum and rough diamonds ; vehicles , mostly cars ; iron and steel ; ores , slag , and ash ; and machinery .

u.s. fdi in south africa has gradually grown in recent years .

u.s. fdi in south africa in 2011 centered on manufacturing ( 37% ) , notably of chemicals ( 11% ) and transportation equipment ( 6% ) ; wholesale trade ( 13% ) ; professional , scientific , and technical services ( 13% ) ; and non - bank holding firms ( 8% ) .

tables 3 and 4 summarize trends in u.s. - south african trade and u.s. fdi in south africa .

u.s. - south african trade and investment is attracting relatively high - level attention from u.s. policy makers , including members of congress and business leaders .

this increased interest may partly reflect the administration's growing focus on trade and investment as both a goal and a tool of foreign policy in africa and elsewhere .

u.s. private sector interest in african markets , spurred by positive economic growth and governance trends in much of the region in recent years , is also rising .

concern over competitive threats to u.s. government and business interests posed by burgeoning chinese engagement in africa has also fostered increased u.s. attention toward africa .

in february 2013 , a bicameral congressional delegation joined the launch in south africa of the u.s. - south africa business council , formed in late 2012 by the u.s. chamber of commerce ( uscc ) .

the congressional visit followed acting commerce secretary rebecca blank's november 2012 start of the obama administration's doing business in africa campaign and an august 2012 state department / chamber trade mission to south africa .

doing business , a whole - of - government effort , seeks to promote trade , investment , and trade financing in africa to meet the goals of the obama administration's africa strategy and its national export initiative , an effort to double u.s. exports by 2015 .

blank was the first commerce secretary to visit sub - saharan africa in a decade .

these visits followed the june 2012 signing of an amended u.s. - south african trade and investment framework agreement ( see below ) .

the august 2012 trade mission , part of the broader u.s. - south africa strategic dialogue , included a summit and other meetings between top south african and u.s. business leaders and government trade agency officials , including then - secretary of state clinton .

in her remarks , clinton contended that public - private partnerships can play important roles in efforts to expand trade and investment .

she stated that south africa's multi - billion dollar public infrastructure investment initiatives will "create massive new opportunities for american businesses in energy , transportation , and communications technology , which means more jobs here and more jobs back in the united states. .

she described several u.s. public interagency initiatives to support u.s. private sector involvement in achieving these goals .

one is an export - import bank project aimed at financing up to $2 billion in u.s. clean energy exports to south africa ( see " economic policy under zuma " section , above ) .

another is a new u.s. - south africa aviation partnership .

clinton also noted that small and medium enterprises ( smes ) contribute 50% of south africa's gdp and nearly 60% of its jobs .

in recognition of such contributions , clinton noted , the united states has established a $150 million usaid sme loan program and a separate $65 million opic new private equity investment fund for south african smes .

a proposed overhaul of south africa's investment framework , the promotion and protection of investment bill of 2013 , has also raised concerns for some foreign investors .

with respect to fdi , it would replace the use of bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) with a new investment legal framework applicable to all investors .

in most cases , it would require investment disputes to be resolved by the south african legal system .

for some investors , this may raise questions over matters of alleged expropriation , compensation , national treatment , and rights of establishment , in addition to questions over dispute settlement .

to a large extent , the bit aspects of the bill would not affect u.s. investors , as no u.s. - south african bit is in force .

in recent years , south africa has sought an increased role in world economic fora and hosted a number of major global sporting events , such as the 2010 soccer world cup , and multilateral policy events ( eg , the 2011 u.n .

climate change conference and the 2002 u.n. world summit on sustainable development ) .

it is a member of the g20 , and in late 2010 , at the invitation of china , joined the bric ( brazil , russia , india , and china ) , a political and economic formation of major emerging market economies .

south africa is a key trading and investment partner of china in africa , and a key target of increased chinese economic and diplomatic cooperation over the past decade .

china became south africa's largest trading partner in 2009 .

u.s. - south africa bilateral relations are generally close , based on shared socioeconomic growth and development goals and mutual support for democratic values , among other factors , although there are occasional differences over foreign policy issues .

south africa often backs developing country positions that may be at odds with u.s. interests ; has advocated caution with respect to proposed u.s. - backed external interventions in international crises ( eg , in iraq and libya ) ; and takes stances toward cuba and the palestinian cause that are at odds with those of the united states .

however , south africa tends to concur with the obama administration regarding most african political or military crises , and on major aspects of issues such as climate change and nonproliferation .

the two countries cooperate in the areas of development and defense , in addition to having close trade and investment ties .

since 2010 , they have pursued an ongoing strategic dialogue with regard to health , education , food security , law enforcement , trade , investment , energy , and nuclear nonproliferation .

congressional engagement with south africa in recent years has centered mainly on foreign aid program oversight , notably hiv / aids and other healthcare - related efforts , and often takes the form of leadership exchange visits and congressional travel to the country .

trade and investment ties with south africa and africa generally may also attract congressional attention in the 113 th congress , as they did in the 112 th congress .

south africa was not the main focus of any hearings or substantive resolutions or bills in the 112 th or 111 th congresses , but several bills in the 112 th did contain key south africa - related measures .

south africa appears likely to remain politically stable for the foreseeable future .

still , dissatisfaction among miners , unemployed youth , township residents , and others concerned with government performance , crime , and corruption could lead to localized volatility and unrest .

such discontent could also translate into weakened political support for the anc and political opportunities for opposition parties .

the 2014 elections will serve as a test of the anc's political dominance and the relative depth of the challenges it faces , and gauge public support for the anc's wide - ranging policy agenda and state - led economic and political vision for the country .

despite significant challenges , south africa's economy is large and diversified , and appears to have the capacity to expand moderately in the coming years .

the imf projects a slight uptick in real growth in 2013 , to 2.8% , and then to 4.1% in 2014 .

given south africa's economic linkages to and investment in sub - saharan africa , south africa may also benefit as other african economies continue to expand .

trade with the united states is likely to grow .

south africa is making a range of large - scale public infrastructure investments , which could help boost economic growth .

such spending could , however , gradually become a burden on the state , which is facing revenue limitations and must balance infrastructure spending goals with a need to finance education , healthcare , and other social services .

south africa may gradually increase as a u.s. investment and export destination , due to south african demand and regional economic growth ; increasing u.s. government and private sector efforts to expand trade and investment ties ; and opportunities created by south africa's infrastructure investment initiatives .

u.s. - south african ties are growing closer in other areas as well ; under the two countries' strategic partnership , there have been an increasing number of high - level exchanges and visits .

over the medium term , one question for policy makers will be how , if at all , the nature and level of relatively large levels of u.s. aid in the healthcare sector — specifically to counter hiv / aids — should change , in light of shared u.s. and south african government plans to transition to a situation in which south africa funds most of its own hiv / aids programs .

