the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant provides states , territories , and indian tribes with federal grants for benefits and services intended to ameliorate the effects , and address the root causes , of child poverty .

tanf funds can be used in any manner a state can reasonably calculate helps it achieve the goals of ( 1 ) providing assistance to needy families so that children may be cared for in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; ( 2 ) ending the dependence of needy parents on government benefits through work , job preparation , and marriage ; ( 3 ) preventing and reducing the incidence of out - of - wedlock births ; and ( 4 ) encouraging the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

thus , tanf truly is a broad - based block grant with broad discretion for the states to spend funds to meet federal goals .

tanf was created in the 1996 welfare reform law and is typically thought of as the federal program that helps states fund their cash assistance programs for needy families with children .

moreover , tanf is also most associated with the 1996 welfare reform policies imposing work requirements and time limits on families receiving assistance .

most of tanf's federal rules and requirements relate to families receiving assistance .

tanf's performance is measured on state welfare - to - work efforts , with states assessed based on numerical work participation standards .

however , basic assistance — what many call "cash welfare" — accounted for only 27.6% of all tanf funding in fy2013 .

additionally , many of the families that received tanf cash assistance in fy2013 represented family types that were not the focus of debate in 1996 , and are not subject to tanf work requirements and time limits .

these are families with children cared for by adults who are not themselves recipients of tanf: disabled parents receiving supplemental security income ( ssi ) ; immigrant parents who are ineligible for tanf assistance but have citizen children who are eligible ; and nonparent relative caregivers , such as grandparents , aunts , and uncles .

in fy2013 , 38.1% of families receiving tanf were composed of children in families cared for by adults who themselves were not recipients of tanf or did not come under tanf work rules .

this report examines the tanf cash assistance caseload , focusing on how the composition and characteristics of families receiving assistance have changed over time .

it first provides a brief history of cash assistance for needy families with children , discussing how policy became focused on moving the predominately single parents who headed these families from welfare to work .

it then traces the changes in the caseload composition since the 1996 welfare reform law , from a caseload dominated by unemployed single parents to a diverse caseload that had different routes to the benefit rolls as well as different circumstances on the rolls .

it provides detail on caseload characteristics in fy2013 , using data that states are required to report to the federal government .

the report is intended to complement tabulations of these data already released by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

this report does not describe tanf rules or provide current statistics on the tanf caseload or expenditures .

for an overview of tanf , see crs in focus if10036 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , by [author name scrubbed] .

it also does not describe individuals and families who receive tanf benefits and services other than cash assistance .

federal law does not require states to report on their numbers or characteristics .

the increases in the cash assistance caseload from 1989 to 1994 , and its decline thereafter , were also associated with changes in the character of the caseload .

table 1 provides an overview of the characteristics of the family cash assistance caseload for selected years: fy1988 , fy1994 , fy2001 , fy2006 , and fy2013 .

the most dramatic change in caseload characteristics is the growth in the share of families with no adult recipients .

in fy2013 , 38.1% of tanf assistance families had no adult recipient ; in contrast , in fy1988 only 9.8% of all cash assistance families had no adult recipient .

these are families with ineligible adults ( sometimes parents , sometimes other relatives ) but whose children are eligible and receive benefits .

some other notable characteristics of the caseload include the following: most families receiving assistance are small .

the average number of recipients in a family stood at 2.5 recipients per family in fy2013 .

in that year , just over half ( 51.0% ) of all families had only one child .

the vast majority of adult recipients are women .

in fy2013 , 85.7% of adult recipients were women .

as discussed , family cash assistance has historically been provided to families with children headed by a single mother .

the fy2013 percentage is lower than in previous years examined in the table .

men slowly increased as a share of the caseload over time , but still remain a relatively small share of the total adult caseload .

the families tend to have young children .

in fy2013 , 56.6% of all families had a child under the age of six , with 12.0% of all families having an infant .

the majority of the caseload is racial or ethnic minorities .

this was the case for all years shown in the table .

examining the racial / ethnic makeup of children , hispanic children became the largest group of recipient children by fy2013 .

in fy2013 , the share of child recipients who were hispanic was 36.3% , compared with 29.9% who were african american , and 25.8% who were non - hispanic white .

the share of the child caseload that is hispanic has grown over time .

this reflects their growth as a share of all children in the general population and of all poor children .

the incidence of tanf cash assistance receipt among hispanic children and poor hispanic children — like that of children in other racial and ethnic groups — has actually declined over time ( see table a - 3 ) .

tanf was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , the culmination of decades of debate over the roles of low - income , single mothers in the home and in the workforce .

the policies created within tanf reflect a primary outcome of that debate: that is , the expectation that single mothers should work to support their families , with tanf being at most temporary assistance rather than a long - term support they would depend on for themselves and their children .

in 2016 , the tanf law turns 20 years old , with most policies the same as when the block grant was created .

however , much has changed since 1996 .

states have used tanf as a broad - based block grant to fund a wide range of benefits and services addressing conditions and causes of economic and social disadvantage of children , in addition to providing cash assistance or traditional "welfare. .

additionally , both the size and the composition of the tanf cash assistance caseload have changed markedly since welfare reform legislation was debated in the mid - 1990s .

the caseload is much smaller — 1.7 million families in fy2013 versus 5.0 million families in fy1994 .

the type of family receiving assistance that was the focus of the welfare reform debates — families with an unemployed adult recipient , which accounted for three out of four families pre - reform — now accounts for less than half of all families on the rolls .

therefore , the majority of the caseload today represents families with characteristics that are different from those who are the focus of current tanf welfare - to - work policies .

tanf cash assistance families with an adult reported as working represented 17.3% of the cash assistance caseload in fy2013 — more than double the 7.5% share in fy1994 .

these often are families either in transition from welfare to work or are families with very low earnings .

they also sometimes represent families in "earnings supplement" programs , which provide a tanf benefit ( sometimes a small tanf benefit ) to working parents who left traditional tanf cash assistance when they worked and / or received food assistance from the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

there was some attention to transitional benefits during the welfare reform debates .

a series of welfare reform experiments showed that , without earnings supplements through continued assistance for working families , welfare - to - work initiatives tended to increase work and decrease receipt of welfare , but not increase family income .

the experiments that showed increased family income were those that provided continued welfare assistance to families with earnings .

tanf's work participation standards give states credit for providing cash assistance to families with earnings , so that states have the incentive to provide at least some earnings supplements to families who find work while on the rolls .

the welfare reform experiments discussed above were conducted in the late 1980s and early 1990s .

since then , there have been expansions of earnings supplements and aid to working families through refundable tax credits ( the earned income tax credit and the additional child tax credit ) , subsidized child care , and expanded health insurance coverage .

however , little attention has been paid to how cash assistance to working families fits together with other earnings supplements , such as the eitc , to achieve tanf goals .

many of the "child - only" tanf assistance families are affected not only by tanf policy , but other social policies as well .

the child welfare system ( child protective services , foster care , guardianship ) could be involved with some of the children who are in the care of nonparent relatives because of , or risk of , abuse or neglect .

families with ineligible noncitizen parents are affected by immigration policies .

families with disabled parents who receive supplemental security income ( ssi ) are affected by disability determination and redetermination policies .

congress has focused on relative caregiving through child welfare legislation , specifically creating a program to help states reimburse kin who take legal guardianship of children who would otherwise be eligible for federal foster care assistance under title iv - e of the social security act .

congress has shown interest in promoting coordination between tanf and other federal and state programs serving tanf families , including the "non - traditional" families .

this has especially been true in terms of coordinating information between tanf and child welfare programs .

p.l .

112-96 requires the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to develop standards of data reporting to facilitate the sharing of information between tanf and other programs .

earlier legislation ( p.l .

112-34 ) added similar language to facilitate data sharing between child welfare and other programs .

in addition , a may 2013 government accountability office ( gao ) report said congress could opt to require states to include in tanf state plans how they will coordinate services between tanf and child welfare programs .

questions remain about whether and what policies within tanf should apply to "child - only" families .

a 2012 report on "child - only" families from chapin hall at the university of chicago , funded by hhs , raised concerns about each major group: whether tanf assistance to relative caregivers might be an inadequate replacement for foster care , and whether low rates of tanf receipt among potentially eligible families headed by ssi parents or ineligible immigrant parents might not be assuring a minimal standard of living for children in these families .

the report did recommend that "explicit attention" be given to each component of the tanf caseload , including separate attention to each of the three major groups of "child - only" families .

the may 2013 gao report said a potential option to better understand tanf's role in helping its "child - only" families would be to require states to provide additional information to the federal government about the status and needs of "child - only" families .

this information could be provided , for example , in tanf state plans .

congress could also establish — or require states to establish — goals and performance measures related to the well - being of children in "child - only" families .

congress could also require that annual reporting by states to hhs include a statement about how the goals related to "child - only" families are being met , and report on such performance measures that relate to these goals .

