dozens of temporary tax provisions expired at the end of 2013 , and several other temporary tax provisions are scheduled to expire at the end of 2014 .

the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) , signed into law on january 2 , 2013 , reduced tax policy uncertainty by permanently extending most of the tax cuts first enacted in 2001 and 2003 and permanently indexing the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) for inflation .

atra , however , did not eliminate uncertainty in the tax code .

under atra , a number of provisions that had been allowed to expire at the end of 2011 or 2012 were temporarily extended through 2013 .

thus , under current law , these provisions expired at the end of 2013 .

collectively , temporary tax provisions that are regularly extended by congress rather than being allowed to expire as scheduled are often referred to as "tax extenders. .

many of these "tax extender" provisions have been temporarily extended multiple times .

the research tax credit , for example , has been extended 15 times since being enacted in 1981 .

most of the temporary tax provisions that expired at the end of 2013 were previously extended more than once .

the 113 th congress has considered legislation that would extend selected expired or expiring tax provisions .

the expiring provisions improvement reform and efficiency ( expire ) act ( s. 2260 ) , which would extend most expired and soon - to - expire tax provisions through 2015 , was reported by the senate finance committee on april 28 , 2014 .

the act subsequently became an amendment to h.r .

3474 which did not advance in the senate , as a motion to end debate on h.r .

3474 was voted down on may 15 , 2014 .

in contrast to the senate , the house has voted to permanently extend certain expired tax provisions as part of the jobs for america act ( h.r .

4 ) , which passed the house on september 18 , 2014 .

several expired charitable - related provisions would be made permanent as part of the america gives more act of 2014 ( h.r .

4719 ) , which passed the house on july 17 , 2014 .

chairman camp supports addressing extenders as part of broader tax reform .

his proposed tax reform act of 2014 would make certain provisions permanent , such as the research and experimentation ( r&d ) tax credit and increased expensing under section 179 .

the president's fy2015 budget proposal would permanently extend or modify certain expired provisions , while temporarily extending others .

proposals that would be permanently extended ( and in some cases modified ) include ( 1 ) the enhanced deduction for conservation easements ; ( 2 ) increased expensing under section 179 ; ( 3 ) the exclusion for qualified small business stock ; ( 4 ) the new markets tax credit ( nmtc ) ; ( 5 ) the renewable electricity production tax credit ( ptc ) ; ( 6 ) the deduction for energy - efficient commercial property ; ( 7 ) the research and experimentation ( r&d ) tax credit ; and ( 8 ) the work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) .

proposals that would be temporarily extended include ( 1 ) the exclusion for cancellation of home mortgage debt ( through 2016 ) ; ( 2 ) the tax credit for cellulosic biofuel ( through 2024 ) ; and ( 3 ) the tax credit for energy - efficient new homes ( through 2024 ) .

the president's fy2015 budget also assumes that the american opportunity tax credit ( aotc ) , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) expansions , and the child tax credit ( ctc ) expansions , that were extended through 2017 as part of arta , are made permanent .

allowing temporary tax provisions to expire at the end of 2013 does not necessarily mean that these tax provisions will not be available to taxpayers in 2014 .

in recent years , congress has chosen to retroactively extend expired tax provisions .

under atra , for example , a number of tax provisions that had been allowed to expire at the end of 2011 were retroactively extended through 2013 .

this report provides a broad overview of the tax extenders .

additional information on specific extender provisions may be found in other crs reports , including the following: crs report r43510 , selected recently expired business tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] crs report r43688 , selected recently expired individual tax provisions ( "extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43517 , recently expired charitable tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r43541 , recently expired community assistance related tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43449 , recently expired housing related tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed .

the tax code presently contains dozens of temporary tax provisions .

in the past , legislation to extend some set of these expiring provisions has been referred to by some as the "tax extender" package .

while there is no formal definition of a "tax extender," the term has regularly been used to refer to the package of expiring tax provisions temporarily extended by congress .

oftentimes , these expiring provisions are temporarily extended for a short period of time ( eg , one or two years ) .

over time , as new temporary provisions have been routinely extended and hence added to this package , the number of provisions that might be considered "tax extenders" has grown .

dozens of temporary tax provisions expired at the end of 2013 ( see table 2 ) .

many of these provisions have been extended as part of previous "tax extender" legislation .

for the purposes of this report , expiring provisions have been classified as belonging to one of six categories: individual , business , charitable , energy , community development , or disaster relief .

the following sections provide additional details on expiring provisions within each category .

table 2 also notes which provisions would be extended by the expire act .

table 2 also includes the 10-year ( or budget window ) cost of the extension through 2015 , as proposed in the expire act .

in addition to the provisions that expired at the end of 2013 , six tax provisions are scheduled to expire at the end of 2014 .

three of these provisions are energy - related: ( 1 ) incentives for alternative fuels and alternative fuel mixtures involving liquefied hydrogen ; ( 2 ) the credit for fuel cell motor vehicles ; and ( 3 ) the credit for hydrogen alternative fuel refueling property .

the other tax provisions expiring in 2014 are the automatic amortization extension for multiemployer defined benefits plans ; the additional funding rules for multiemployer defined pension plans in endangered or critical status ; and the deemed approval of adoption , use , or cessation of shortfall funding method for multiemployer defined benefits plans .

the expire act would extend the energy - related provisions expiring at the end of 2014 as well as the expiring provisions relating to multiemployer defined benefit pension plans through the end of 2015 .

as discussed above , the senate's extenders bill , the expiring provisions improvement reform and efficiency ( expire ) act ( s. 2260 ) , would extend most expiring provisions through 2015 .

the expire act would cost an estimated $84.9 billion over the 2014 through 2024 budget window .

of this cost , $87.4 billion is for the two - year extension of tax provisions that expired in 2013 .

extending tax provisions that expire in 2014 would cost $0.1 billion .

other revenue provisions would raise $3.4 billion , while the hire more heroes act of 2014 ( h.r .

3474 ) would cost $0.7 billion .

the house has taken a different approach to tax extenders , instead considering legislation that would make permanent certain expired provisions ( see table 3 ) .

the house has passed legislation that would make nine of the expired provisions listed in table 2 permanent .

taken together , permanently extending these nine provisions would reduce revenues by an estimated $511.4 billion over the 10-year budget window .

six of these nine provisions were included in the jobs for america act ( h.r .

4 ) .

three other charitable - related provisions were passed as part of the america gives more act of 2014 ( h.r .

4719 ) .

the committee on ways and means has reported legislation that would make two additional international - related extender provisions permanent , although this legislation has yet to be considered by the full house .

some of the legislation proposed in the house would not only extend expired provisions , but would also make policy changes .

for example , the house - passed modification and permanent extension of the research credit ( h.r .

4429 and h.r .

4 ) would provide a permanent credit equal to 20% of a taxpayer's qualified research expenditures ( qres ) in the current tax year above 50% of average annual qres in the previous three tax years , 20% of its basic research payments in the current tax year above 50% of average annual basic research payments in the three previous tax years , and 20% of the amounts paid or incurred by the taxpayer in the current tax year for qualified energy research conducted by an energy research consortium .

the house - passed proposals to make the increased expensing allowances permanent under section 179 would index the limits for inflation , starting in 2015 .

the house - passed proposals to permanently extend 50% bonus depreciation would expand the list of eligible property to include qualified leasehold and retail improvement property , in addition to other changes .

the american taxpayer relief act ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) extended dozens of temporary tax provisions that had expired or were scheduled to expire at the end of 2012 ( see table 4 ) .

many of these provisions were extended retroactively , as they had been allowed to expire at the end of 2011 .

the 10-year budgetary cost of extending temporary expiring provisions under atra was an estimated $73.6 billion .

the largest of these provisions , in terms of revenue cost , were the credit for research and experimentation expenses ( $14.3 billion ) , the extension and modification of the wind production tax credit ( ptc ) ( $12.2 billion ) , and the exception under subpart f for active financing income ( $11.2 billion ) .

information on the cost of extending specific provisions can be found in table 4 .

several provisions that might have been considered "traditional extenders" — that is , they had been extended multiple times in the past — were not extended under atra .

two charitable provisions , the enhanced deduction for donations of computer equipment , and the enhanced deduction for book inventory to schools , which were first enacted in 1997 and 2005 respectively , were allowed to expire .

other energy - related provisions , including the suspension of the 100% - of - net - income limitation on percentage depletion for oil and gas from marginal wells , first enacted in 1997 , and the production tax credit ( ptc ) for refined coal , first enacted in 2004 , were also allowed to expire .

tax incentives for ethanol , which were first enacted in 1978 , were also not extended in atra , nor were provisions first enacted in 1997 that allowed for expensing of "brownfield" environmental remediation costs .

the estate tax look - through rule for regulated investment company ( ric ) stock , first enacted in 2004 , was also not extended .

a number of other provisions were allowed to expire at the end of 2012 .

some of these provisions , such as the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits program and 100% bonus depreciation , might have been classified as having been temporary stimulus measures .

among the other provisions that were allowed to expire were a number of disaster relief measures , including gulf opportunity ( go ) zone provisions and tax provisions related to the 2008 midwestern storms and hurricane ike .

