the united states' supply of natural gas is growing due to technological improvements , such as horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing , which have increased producers' ability to extract natural gas from shale formations .

shale gas is projected to become the dominant source of the u.s. natural gas supply by 2040 .

the growth in u.s. shale gas production requires the expansion of natural gas pipeline infrastructure at the local level ( to extract and gather the gas ) and at the national level to transport natural gas from producing regions to consuming markets , typically in other states .

over 300,000 miles of interstate transmission pipeline already transport natural gas across the united states .

however , if the growth in u.s. shale gas continues as projected , the requirement for new pipelines could be substantial .

for example , an analysis by the ingaa foundation , a pipeline industry research organization , estimates that the total cost of new gas gathering and transmission pipelines , including storage , could average over $8 billion per year and total over $200 billion through 2035 .

this ongoing expansion has increased congressional interest in the role of the federal government in the certification ( permitting ) of interstate natural gas pipelines .

the natural gas pipeline permitting reform act ( h.r .

161 ) seeks to expedite the federal review of certificate applications by imposing deadlines on the agencies involved .

this report provides an overview of the federal certification process for interstate natural gas pipelines .

it discusses the length of the review for recent interstate gas pipeline applications — a topic of specific interest to congress and industry .

in this context , the report discusses the key provisions in h.r .

161 and their implications for gas pipeline certificate approval .

issues associated with presidential permits for natural gas pipelines crossing the international border are discussed in crs report r43261 , presidential permits for border crossing energy facilities , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

under section 7 ( c ) of the natural gas act of 1938 ( nga ) , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) is authorized to issue certificates of "public convenience and necessity" for "the construction or extension of any facilities ... for the transportation in interstate commerce of natural gas" ( 15 u.s.c .

§717f ( c ) ) .

thus , companies seeking to build interstate natural gas pipelines must first obtain certificates of public convenience and necessity from ferc .

ferc's regulatory process for interstate gas pipeline certification consists of several principal steps , which may vary somewhat depending upon whether or not a pipeline developer opts to enter into a voluntary pre - filing process before formally applying for a pipeline certificate .

there are no statutory time limits within which ferc must complete its own certificate review process , issue an order , or complete a rehearing .

however , epact authorizes ferc to establish a schedule for all federal authorizations and provides for judicial petition "if a federal or state administrative agency" fails to comply with that schedule ( §313 ( c ) ) .

congress included these provisions in epact to address concerns that some interstate gas pipeline and other energy infrastructure approvals were being unduly delayed by a lack of coordination or insufficient action among agencies involved in the certification process .

ferc has promulgated regulations under the epact authority requiring certificate - related final decisions from federal agencies or state agencies ( acting pursuant to delegated federal authority ) no later than 90 days after the commission issues its final environmental document , unless another schedule is established by federal law ( 18 c.f.r §157.22 ) .

as stated above , h.r .

161 would make three major changes to ferc's pipeline certification process , all schedule - related .

thus , the bill would not change the way pipeline certificate applications are currently reviewed in terms of subject matter , funding , or inter - agency relationships .

the bill would solely seek to impose explicit time limits on the existing process .

the potential effects of the three proposed changes are discussed below .

h.r .

161 would mandate a ferc certification process deadline of 12 months .

the imposition by congress of explicit agency deadlines for the review of energy project permit applications is not new .

crs has identified other statutes and legislative proposals with similar deadline provisions for the review of permit applications: for oil and gas drilling , liquefied natural gas terminals , electric transmission lines , and other facilities .

these provisions are provided as examples in the appendix .

the optimal time for any deadline that congress might impose on ferc is unclear .

compared to an 11.6-month benchmark implied by the gao study , the 12-month deadline in h.r .

161 would be approximately the same as the average ferc certificate review time today .

however , 12 months could represent a reduction in the review time that might be expected for atypically lengthy or complex pipeline projects , perhaps routed through heavily populated or environmentally sensitive areas .

the safety or environmental reviews for such projects might place them in the "tail" of the review time distribution reported by gao .

for example , according to the gao report , one pre - filed certificate review lasted 886 days .

assuming a 210-day pre - filing period for this project implies a certificate review time of 676 days , or 22.5 months .

for such pipeline projects , it is unclear what ferc could do differently to shorten its review process if the bulk of the review involves a complex nepa environmental evaluation .

more information might be required to understand how ferc could adapt its process to meet a 12-month deadline for such projects and to gage the possible impact of this provision .

if the 12-month deadline under h.r .

161 were imposed upon ferc , it raises the possibility that the commission might deny certificate applications for some projects solely on the grounds that it lacks sufficient time for an adequate ( and legally defensible ) review , especially in the case of nepa compliance .

this kind of denial is what occurred in 2012 when the state department denied an application by transcanada for a presidential permit to construct the keystone xl oil pipeline , citing insufficient time under a 60-day deadline imposed by congress under the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-78 ) to obtain all the necessary information to assess the project .

when the 112 th congress considered delegating permit authority for the keystone xl pipeline to ferc and mandating permit approval within 30 days under h.r .

3548 ( see appendix ) , a senior ferc official testified that such a proposal would not provide enough time for an "adequate" public record , among other concerns .

another such permit review statute , the mineral leasing act , includes a provision conditioning the deadline upon satisfying review requirements under nepa and "other applicable law" within the given timeframe ( 30 u.s.c .

226 ( p ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ) .

in july 2013 testimony before the house committee on energy and commerce , commissioner moeller stated that ferc could likely achieve the 12-month deadline proposed in h.r .

161 as long as gas pipeline certificate applications are complete when the process begins .

nonetheless , a 12-month deadline imposed upon all ferc certificate reviews may lead to the rejection or delay ( due to re - application ) of otherwise worthy proposals on administrative grounds if unanticipated issues arise .

it might also force developers to reconfigure , or break up , larger projects into smaller proposals more "reviewable" within 12 months .

the southern leg of the original keystone xl pipeline project ( now called the gulf coast project ) was separated this way and proceeded to construction under its own permit process .

reconfiguration of complex pipeline projects might lead to inefficiencies both in ferc certification and in the design or use of the infrastructure itself .

congress may consider whether a 12-month deadline could be made more flexible to accommodate projects which may require more review time due to their size and complexity at the discretion of ferc .

h.r .

161 codifies ferc's deadline — established through regulation — for other federal or state agencies to make final certificate - related decisions within 90 days after ferc issues its final environmental document .

because ferc has the statutory authority to establish such deadlines under epact , the only change to the status quo of this provision would be to mandate the 90-day time period rather than leaving the length of the time period up to ferc to determine .

like the 12-month deadline imposed by ferc , it is difficult to determine whether 90 days is optimal for a statutory deadline — although ferc , in this case , has an administrative record examining the question through its rulemaking process .

note that this deadline occurs only after ferc's environmental review is completed , so other agencies would presumably have months during ferc's nepa review to conduct reviews of approvals under their jurisdiction .

although it affirms ferc's current regulatory judgment as to how long the cooperating agency deadline should be , h.r .

161 may tie the hands of the commission if , at some future date , ferc concludes that 90 days is no longer appropriate .

in that case , ferc would have to seek new legislation rather than changing the deadline under its existing epact authority through the regulatory process .

some might view this provision as being insurance against the commission becoming more lax in the future with respect to review deadlines .

others might view this provision as being too prescriptive .

congress may consider whether imposing a prescriptive 90-day deadline strikes the best balance between ferc's deadline enforcement authority and the commission's ability to manage its own review process .

h.r .

161 would effectively issue by default any license , permit , or approval requested from a cooperating agency if the agency does not make its decision on the request within ferc's 90-day deadline .

statutory approval by default of agency decisions failing to meet a deadline appears to have few precedents in the specific context of energy project approvals .

the clearest example crs has been able to identify is p.l .

112-78 , which would have put "in effect by operation of law" the permit for the keystone xl pipeline if the president failed to act on the permit prior to the mandated 60-day deadline ( §501 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) .

in that case , the result was denial of the permit .

however , additional statutes with default approval provisions not involving energy projects have been cited as precedents for the provisions like those in h.r .

161 .

to date , ferc has had little enforcement authority under epact over its 90-day deadline .

h.r .

161 might lead some cooperating agencies to increase efforts to meet the deadline .

if those agencies view the deadline as inadequate , however , some of them may deny approvals on the basis of having insufficient time for review and the development of necessary permit conditions as discussed above in the context of the 12-month deadline for ferc .

opponents of this provision have cited , for example , statements from the army corps of engineers , the environmental protection agency , the bureau of land management , and the fish and wildlife service expressing this concern if a 90-day deadline for their respective permit reviews were imposed .

in the 113 th congress , the obama administration opposed deadline and default approval provisions like those in h.r .

161 because they could create conflicts with existing statutory and regulatory requirements and practices related to agencies' programs , thereby causing confusion and increasing litigation risk .

the ... requirements could force agencies to make decisions based on incomplete information or information that may not be available within the stringent deadlines , and to deny applications that otherwise would have been approved , but for lack of sufficient review time .

for these reasons , the bill may actually delay projects or lead to more project denials , undermining the intent of the legislation .

congress may consider maintaining ferc's existing authorities to set the agency review schedule , while providing alternative ways to strengthen ferc's ability to enforce those authorities at the commission's discretion .

the principal effect of h.r .

161 would appear to be imposing explicit ( strict ) time limits on the existing process for ferc certification of new natural gas pipelines .

the ability of ferc and any other federal or state agencies it works with to expedite their parts of certificate review may be limited by available resources .

the agencies may well have the administrative capability to meet these deadlines .

that is , the review periods , public notice periods , and other regulatory requirements associated with the certificate review schedule may all be feasible .

however , a shorter deadline under h.r .

161 might require more resources for agency staff , contractors , and external consultants to achieve the same level of review as a longer deadline .

in considering the ability of ferc and other agencies to meet these deadlines , the availability and allocation of resources within the agencies may be important .

this may be a concern not only for ferc , but also for various other federal , state , and local agencies whose ability to increase funding for regulatory review may vary considerably and may be limited due to budget constraints .

requirements similar to those proposed in h.r .

161 have been imposed by congress on other agencies to approve or deny energy projects .

a number of statutes or bills over the last 10 years have included explicit deadlines ( i.e. , a specific number of days ) for various types of federal energy permits — including drilling permits , liquefied natural gas ( lng ) terminals , a nuclear waste repository , and electric transmission lines .

they are summarized below .

note that , due to the limitations of such a legislative search , there may be additional statutes crs has not identified .

the mineral leasing act as amended ( 30 u.s.c .

226 ( p ) ) requires the secretary of the interior to approve or disapprove of drilling permit applications submitted by federal leaseholders within 30 days of submission unless they fail to meet certain required criteria .

the maritime administration ( marad ) has a 330-day time limit for granting or denying a deepwater port license ( 33 u.s.c .

§1504 ) , including a 45-day deadline after the last public hearing for specific agency reviews ( 33 u.s.c .

§1504 ( e ) ( 2 ) ) .

notably , this provision applies to offshore lng terminal applications .

the outer continental shelf lands act as amended ( 43 u.s.c .

1340 ( c ) ) requires the secretary of the interior to approve or disapprove of oil and gas exploration plans ( drilling permits ) submitted by federal leaseholders within 30 days of submission unless the plans fail to meet certain required criteria .

the nuclear waste policy act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-425 ) requires the nuclear regulatory commission to issue a final decision approving or disapproving a nuclear waste repository project proposal "not later than the expiration of 3 years after the date of the submission of such application" ( §405 ( b ) ( 2 ) ) .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) gives ferc authority to permit an electric transmission siting application if "a state commission or other entity that has authority to approve the siting of the facilities has — ( i ) withheld approval for more than 1 year…. .

 ( §1221 ) .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) requires the secretary of energy to approve or disapprove a tribal energy resource agreement from an indian tribe not later than 270 days after receiving an initial agreement or not later than 60 days after the secretary receiving a revised agreement ( §2604 ( e ) ) .

the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-78 ) required the secretary of state to issue a permit for the keystone xl pipeline within 60 days , unless the president determined the project not to be in the national interest ( §501 ( a ) ) .

in addition to these statutes , crs identified a few recent unenacted legislative proposals that would have imposed statutory deadlines on energy project permit decisions .

examples are listed below .

the energy policy act of 2003 ( h.r .

1644 , 108 th congress ) would have required the federal energy regulatory commission to approve or deny any permit application for an alaska natural gas pipeline project "not more than 60 days after the issuance of the final environmental impact statement" ( §2004 ( c ) ) .

the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 , 111 th congress ) would have required the federal energy regulatory commission or the department of the interior to complete review of "all permit decisions and related environmental reviews under all applicable federal laws" for electric transmission project applications in the western interconnection within one year or , if provisions in another federal law required more time , as soon as practicable thereafter ( §216b ) .

the energy exploration and production to achieve national demand act ( h.r .

4301 , 112 th congress ) would have required the administrator of the environmental protection agency and the state or governing body of an indian tribe to approve or disapprove a consolidated permit application for the construction of a new oil refinery within 365 days , or , if all parties agreed , within an additional 90 days ( §501 ( b ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ) .

for the expansion of an existing refinery , the respective deadlines were 120 and 30 days ( §501 ( b ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ) .

the north american energy access act ( h.r .

3548 , 112 th congress ) would have transferred the permitting authority over the keystone xl pipeline project from the state department to the federal energy regulatory commission , requiring the commission to issue a permit for the project within 30 days of enactment .

the bill would have deemed a permit to have been issued if the commission did not act upon a permit application within 30 days after receipt ( §3 ( a ) ) .

