the public disclosure of the details of one's personal finances , ownerships , investments , and income is required from high - level elected and appointed officials in all three branches of the federal government under the provisions of law originally enacted as the ethics in government act of 1978 .

such public disclosure requirements in federal law were enacted in the wake of the "watergate" scandal to facilitate supervision , regulation , and deterrence of conflicts of interest between the private financial interests and the official public duties of federal officers , and to increase the confidence of the public in the integrity of their elected and appointed officials in the federal government .

the public reports mandated by the ethics in government act of 1978 have always been available to the public and the press at the ethics office of the employee's agency .

provisions of law more recently adopted by congress in the so - called "stock act" now require that the personal financial disclosure reports by the highest - level officials in the government — the president , vice president , members of and candidates to congress , and executive officials compensated on the executive schedule at level i ( cabinet officials ) and level ii ( under secretaries of departments and heads of many executive branch and independent regulatory agencies ) — are also to be posted on the internet for public access and searching .

the disclosure reports for other government employees who are required to file public reports will remain publicly available at the employee's agency .

reporting under the disclosure law is to be made annually by may 15 of each year by all federal officials covered by the law , and must also be made periodically during the course of the year by such covered officials and employees with respect to certain securities transactions over $1,000 .

in addition to the public disclosure reports from high - level officials and employees , there may also be required from other federal employees ( who are not required to file public reports ) confidential financial disclosure reports that are made to the employee's agency .

in addition to the legislative and regulatory scheme for public financial disclosure for certain federal officials , there is in place a requirement for confidential disclosure reports to be filed with an employee's agency by some lower - level federal officers and employees .

the confidential reporting requirements are intended to complement the public disclosure system , and apply to those employees who do not have to file under the public reporting provisions of the ethics in government act .

generally , the confidential reporting requirements apply to certain "rank and file" employees who are compensated below the threshold rate of pay for public disclosures ( gs - 15 or below , or less than 120% of the basic rate of pay for a gs - 15 ) , and who are determined by the employee's agency to perform duties or exercise responsibilities in regard to government contracting or procurement , government grants , government subsidies or licensing , government auditing , or other governmental duties which may particularly require the employee to avoid financial conflicts of interest .

such a person may be required to file a confidential report if he or she performs the duties of such a position "for a period in excess of 60 days during the calendar year. .

additionally , unless required to file public reports , confidential reports are required from all "special government employees" in the executive branch ( those employees who are employed by the government for not more than 130 days in a year ) , including those who serve on advisory committees .

with respect to advisory committees , it should be emphasized , however , that the disclosure provisions of federal law and regulation apply only to persons who are "officers or employees" of the federal government , and thus do not apply to private individuals who are serving on advisory committees as "representatives" of outside , private , or other non - federal entities .

