this report presents background information and discusses potential issues for congress relating to u.s. ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) efforts in the asia - pacific region .

these efforts pose several potential policy , funding , and oversight issues for congress .

decisions that congress makes on these issues could affect u.s. defense funding requirements and military capabilities , and u.s. relations with countries in the asia pacific region , including china , japan , south korea , north korea , and australia .

this report focuses on u.s. bmd efforts specific to the asia - pacific area .

other crs reports cover u.s. bmd efforts elsewhere and issues other than bmd affecting u.s. relations with countries in the asia - pacific region .

the growing number and modernization of ballistic missiles in the asia - pacific region poses a security challenge for the united states and its allies .

observers believe north korea has a large arsenal of short - range ballistic missiles ( srbms ) .

these north korean srbms are believed to have sufficient range to hit targets in south korea and japan , including some u.s. military bases there .

in recent years , north korea has also conducted several tests of a long - range ballistic missile system that culminated in a successful space launch in december 2012 .

yet , north korea has not to date demonstrated a reliable capability to hit targets such as guam or other u.s. territory with a ballistic missile .

congress has expressed strong concern about the ballistic missile threat from both north korea and iran and strong interest in ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) systems to counter those threats .

section 229 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) states that it is the sense of the congress that "the threat from regional ballistic missiles , particularly from iran and north korea , is serious and growing , and puts at risk forward - deployed forces , assets , and facilities. .

the department of defense ( dod ) is seeking to counter this threat with various measures , including the deployment of increasingly capable bmd systems .

although china is not the focus of u.s. bmd policy , chinese missiles nevertheless present a complicating factor and increasing challenge for u.s. policy .

as a matter of policy and as a result of treaty commitments , the united states extends deterrence to protect its allies in the asia - pacific region .

in essence , this means the united states will help deter threats to these allies and , if deterrence fails , use u.s. assets to defeat these threats .

in 2010 , the united states publicly confirmed to south korea — and thus implicitly to australia , japan , and other allies covered by the u.s. "nuclear umbrella" — that extended deterrence includes bmd capabilities .

congress reinforced this commitment in the fy2013 ndaa when it stated in section 229 that , "the united states has an obligation to meet its security commitments to its allies , including ballistic missile defense commitments. .

similarly , the fy2014 ndaa ( p.l .

113-66 ) and fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) encourage the united states to cooperate with regional allies on bmd issues to enhance the security of all partners .

as the threat from ballistic missiles has increased , the united states has gradually expanded its deployment of bmd assets and associated sensors in east asia .

the configuration of sensors , command - and - control ( c2 ) centers , and bmd interceptors in east asia — in other words , the regional "architecture" of u.s. bmd — has slowly evolved in concert with contributions from treaty allies .

cooperation on regional bmd offers the potential for greater effectiveness and cost efficiency , but it is proceeding at different rates with different countries .

the u.s. - australia partnership on early warning satellites dates back to the early cold war and the defense support program ( dsp ) that began in 1970 .

the united states and japan have been cooperating on bmd programs since the 1990s and have a mature partnership .

south korea and australia are beginning to acquire the necessary hardware and software for a more robust bmd capability to include missile interceptors .

southeast asian allies thailand and the philippines have so far not spent their relatively scarce defense funds to procure and deploy bmd systems .

the most authoritative dod directive on bmd policy , the 2010 ballistic missile defense review report ( bmdr ) , declared a policy of implementing the "phased adaptive approach" ( paa ) in east asia .

that approach seeks to address the most acute near - term threats with deployments of existing technology and to pursue the deployment of bmd programs designed to deal with future , longer range ballistic missile threats as those threats develop .

new capabilities are phased in to the system as they become available .

the implementation of the phased adaptive approach in east asia would require more formal arrangements .

fulfilling the requirement in section 229 of the fy2013 ndaa , in august 2013 dod published a report to congress on regional ballistic missile defense that elaborates on the "phased , tailored , and adaptive approaches" to regional bmd architectures .

although the bmdr and the 2010 nuclear posture review ( npr ) both explicitly commit the united states to the goal of maintaining "strategic stability" with russia and china , the two countries have raised strong objections to u.s. bmd programs .

moscow and beijing both argue that the programs pose a threat to their nuclear deterrents , with russian concerns focused on bmd in europe , and chinese concerns focused on bmd in the asia - pacific .

issues for congress related to the evolution of u.s. bmd posture and policy in the asia - pacific region include appropriations for bmd programs ; the potential for foreign military sales ( fms ) financing of bmd technology to allies ; the role of bmd cooperation in shaping alliance relationships and overall u.s. strategy in the asia - pacific region ; the effect of u.s. bmd cooperation on u.s. relations with china , north korea , and russia ; and the possible role of u.s. bmd cooperation in influencing chinese , north korean , and russian military developments .

several countries in the asia - pacific region possess ballistic missiles and have space launch programs .

north korea's ballistic missiles and their continued development and deployment are a significant security concern and a central focus of u.s. bmd policy .

the u.s. position for some time has been that russian ballistic missiles do not threaten u.s. regional interests or the u.s. homeland , because of strategic deterrence , and therefore , in former defense secretary robert gates' words , u.s. bmd systems "are not focused on trying to render useless russia's nuclear capability. .

china's ballistic missile forces and their modernization are of some concern to the united states , but china's missile forces are also not a stated focus of u.s. bmd programs .

u.s. policy seeks to maintain strategic stability with china .

the responses of the united states and its allies in the asia - pacific region to the threat of ballistic missiles have included political statements , policy coordination , changes to military doctrine , research and development programs , deployment of sensors , and procurement of ballistic missile interceptors and assets .

president obama has declared that , in response to threats from north korea , "the united states is fully prepared and capable of defending ourselves and our allies with the full range of capabilities available , including the deterrence provided by our conventional and nuclear forces. .

the actions of asia - pacific countries reflect variation in how defense policymakers in these countries view their vulnerability to ballistic missile threats .

the sense of insecurity is most acute among japanese elites , whereas australian leaders feel relatively secure from missile attack .

south korean policymakers are aware of the threat , but until recently have prioritized defense against north korea's long - range artillery and a cross - border invasion .

southeast asian leaders appear to be less concerned about ballistic missiles , and their relatively modest defense budgets cannot support the acquisition of technologically advanced bmd systems without forcing reductions in other desired capabilities .

u.s. bmd assets currently in operation use kinetic kill vehicles to intercept ballistic missiles at various points in the missile's trajectory ( upper tier / mid - course and lower - tier / descent phase ) , conceptually akin to "a bullet hitting a bullet. .

ground - based interceptors ( gbi ) are designed to counter icbms aimed at the continental united states , but other systems such as the pac - 3 , terminal high - altitude area defense ( thaad ) , and aegis sm - 3 are designed to intercept srbms and mrbms in an allied defense and force protection role .

only the gbi is designed to intercept an icbm launched from the asian continent toward the united states .

united states .

the united states has an array of bmd assets already deployed in the asia - pacific region: sm - 3 interceptors on aegis - equipped destroyers ; pac - 3 batteries at military bases in the theater ; and early warning sensors in japan , on land ( an / tpy - 2 ) , at sea ( floating x - band radar ) , and in space .

in response to north korea's threatening actions and statements in early 2013 , dod decided to deploy a thaad system to guam two years ahead of schedule .

the navy , in particular , is seeking an evolution in its bmd capabilities over the next decade to increase its ability to intercept more sophisticated mrbms , irbms , and eventually to develop limited capabilities against icbms .

existing dod plans call for 48 bmd - capable aegis vessels and over 400 sm - 3s acquired by fy2020 .

the united states is exploring ways to leverage its bmd investments by collaborating with other countries to establish the appaa ; u.s. defense officials have expressed a desire for trilateral bmd cooperation .

in december 2014 , the u.s. military deployed a second an / tpy - 2 radar in japan ( at the kyogamisaki communications site near kyoto ) and , as of early 2015 , is considering deploying thaad to south korea in response to north korean provocations ( see section below for further discussion ) .

japan .

more than any other country , japan has invested heavily in bmd .

the japan maritime self - defense force ( jmsdf ) has four destroyers equipped with aegis tracking software and sm - 3 block ia interceptors , and the ministry of defense plans to add four more bmd - capable aegis destroyers .

japan fields 17 pac - 3 units , protecting key locations in tokyo and throughout the archipelago , and will procure more .

all these bmd assets are linked with japan's advanced fps - 3 and fps - 5 radar .

japanese defense officials say that a space - based early warning system is under consideration to be deployed before the end of this decade .

japan reportedly is planning to build two new aegis destroyers beginning in 2015 , in part to expand its sea - based missile - defense capabilities , and to build two more bmd - capable destroyers by 2020 .

in early july 2014 , japan's government announced plans to ease the country's long - standing ban on participating in collective self - defense activities , a move that will allow japanese aegis - equipped ships to be more fully integrated into missile defense systems with the united states .

reports in september 2014 indicated that japan may also be interested in acquiring aegis ashore capabilities .

south korea .

south korea has only recently begun to acquire advanced bmd capabilities .

in the decade prior to the election of president lee myung - bak in 2008 , south korean leaders prioritized harmonious relations with north korea over acquisition of missile defense technologies that could provoke pyongyang .

the south korean navy now has three kdx - iii sejon - daewon class cruisers equipped with aegis tracking software — but no interceptors .

however , seoul has announced plans to implement an indigenous korean air and missile defense ( kamd ) system to counter aircraft , cruise missiles and ballistic missiles launched by north korea .

as part of its ongoing effort to upgrade its missile defense system , south korea's arms procurement agency in april 2014 approved a $1.3 billion plan to upgrade the rok's pac - 2 air defense system and buy pac - 3 missiles by 2020 .

the commander of u.s .

forces korea in june 2014 recommended that the united states deploy a thaad system in south korea ; this potential deployment and south korea's plans for its own kamd system became a subject of controversy in 2014 ( see section below for further discussion ) .

australia .

australia has long maintained several early warning radar sites in cooperation with the united states , but currently has no bmd intercept capability .

the australian navy plans to procure two aegis - equipped vessels , which could be fitted with bmd capabilities against srbms and mrbms in the future .

such capabilities would be useful primarily to australia for defending others in a force projection capacity .

due to the great distance from northeast asia , canberra is faced with a unique threat profile: australia is only at risk from icbms but has no plans to counter such missiles with bmd .

australia relies on the u.s. nuclear umbrella for deterrence , with a treaty - based security guarantee .

the persistent threat of a missile attack from north korea has led u.s. policymakers to seek deeper bmd cooperation with asia - pacific allies .

this trilateral and multilateral approach remains the major emphasis of u.s. officials and can be viewed as aligning with the goals of the strategic rebalancing to the asia - pacific region .

the "joint integrated air and missile defense: vision 2020" policy guidance document , which dod released in december 2013 , urges the u.s. military to integrate air and missile defense capabilities with partner countries and to leverage partners' contributions .

u.s. - rok .

although u.s. - south korea alliance relations have been closely coordinated in recent years , seoul resisted cross - national integration of bmd systems .

the two countries share intelligence and sensor data and in 2013-2014 deepened their bilateral missile defense discussions .

reportedly , the united states has urged south korea to develop advanced bmd capabilities that are more integrated with u.s. and allied bmd systems in the region .

seoul has announced its intention to develop its indigenous kamd system instead , but — in a compromise that could enhance alliance capabilities and regional security — south korean bmd systems will be interoperable with u.s. systems .

it appears that this basic agreement will enable efficient bilateral bmd cooperation without infringing on south korean sensitivities .

for years , seoul has been resistant to the concept of an integrated bmd system for several reasons: the desire , especially strong among progressive koreans , for more strategic autonomy ; a reluctance to irritate china , which has consistently voiced opposition to u.s. bmd deployments ; and a disinclination to cooperate with japan .

u.s. - rok - japan .

japan - south korea defense cooperation remains extremely limited due to long - standing historical disputes .

in july 2012 , south korea and japan came to the brink of signing a military information - sharing agreement , but domestic political considerations led the south korean government to walk away from the agreement at the last minute .

the two countries eventually arranged a more limited memorandum of understanding ( mou ) on trilateral intelligence - sharing with the united states in december 2014 .

this agreement enables japan and south korea to share information on north korea nuclear and missile programs through the united states and could be valuable for detecting and tracking north korean missile launches .

u.s. - australia .

as a staunch u.s. ally , australia signed a bmd framework mou with the united states in july 2004 , facilitating policy collaboration and information sharing .

australia relays missile launch and tracking sensor data from its early warning radar and satellites .

such information would likely be highly useful to bmd platforms .

u.s. - australia - japan .

the united states , australia , and japan have established a working group on bmd as part of their regular trilateral security consultations .

u.s. - japan .

the united states and japan have researched bmd technology since 1987 and currently are making progress in the joint development of the sm - 3 block iia interceptor .

initiated in 1998 , this bilateral research and development program paved the way for deeper cooperation on bmd .

the u.s. navy and the japan maritime self - defense force ( jmsdf ) manage the program , and the two governments share the costs .

in 2011 and 2013 , japan relaxed its prohibitions on the export of defense technology , opening the door for future sales of sm - 3 block iia interceptors , pac - 2 interceptors , and other bmd systems to third parties under certain conditions .

the mature u.s. - japan bmd partnership has already served as a key driver of improvements to alliance interoperability .

both nations feed information from a variety of sensors to create a common operating picture at the bilateral joint operating command center at yokota air base , located outside tokyo , and at u.s. pacific command ( pacom ) headquarters in hawaii .

a center for strategic and international studies report stated in june 2012 that the united states and japan "have essentially created a joint command relationship ... from the perspective of any possible adversary. .

this information sharing arrangement improves the effectiveness of each nation's target identification , tracking , and interceptor cueing .

japan and the united states hold an annual command exercise called "keen edge," which examines potential conflicts centered on japan and simulates bmd responses .

the jsdf is the only partner with which the u.s. military has conducted kinetic bmd exercises , primarily as testing for the aegis system and sm - 3 block ia interceptors .

bmd exercises and training .

pacom and u.s. air forces pacific established the pacific integrated air and missile defense ( iamd ) center in october 2014 to increase multinational integrated iamd capabilities in the asia - pacific region and to serve as a hub for related training and education .

a u.s. officer affiliated with the pacific iamd center wrote , "the center would be the medium to build and improve operational plans , defended assets lists and integrated command and control , and discuss new challenges and methodologies. .

at the global level , the united states conducts biennial , multilateral computer - simulation exercises , called "nimble titan," with partner countries to study the possible role and effects of bmd in a conflict .

these exercises include representatives from japan , australia , and numerous european countries .

in april and december 2012 , north korea launched three - stage taepodong - ii ballistic missiles ( called unha - 3 by north korea ) , providing opportunities for the united states , japan , and south korea to test their sensors' tracking capabilities operationally .

the missile tests reportedly revealed gaps in sensor coverage and flawed communications protocols , which japanese defense officials subsequently rectified .

also , the u.s. navy deployed its sea - based x - band radar to the theater before both launches .

japanese , south korean , and taiwanese officials all declared that they would intercept a missile if it endangered their territory .

in the weeks leading up to the april launch , the japanese government formed several task forces and held multiple meetings with high - level u.s. defense officials .

japan mobilized three aegis destroyers and deployed pac - 3 units on the island of okinawa and on three smaller islands close to the announced trajectory of the rocket .

these statements and deployments echoed japanese actions prior to north korea's 2009 taepodong - ii missile launch .

the efforts of the united states and others to defend themselves from the threat of ballistic missiles have elicited opposition in east asia as well as in europe since president reagan first announced the strategic defense initiative ( often referred to as "star wars" ) in 1983 .

the united states formally withdrew from the 1972 anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty in june 2002 , a step that allowed it to pursue bmd programs without restriction .

russia has strongly criticized u.s. bmd deployments in europe as targeted , at least partially , at russia , and thus a danger to the strategic stability of nuclear deterrence .

in the asia - pacific region , north korea and china have been the most vocal opponents .

china , like russia , argues that u.s. bmd programs are a threat to strategic stability .

both north korea and china also argue that u.s. bmd policies are evidence of hostile intentions .

at present , u.s. - allied cooperation on bmd in the asia - pacific region follows the hub - and - spokes model of bilateral alliance relationships centered on the u.s. military .

the united states and its allies share information and have commitments to mutual defense on a bilateral basis , but the multilateralism that underpins the european bmd architecture is largely absent .

statements by senior u.s. defense officials indicate that the u.s. military is encouraging greater integration of command , control , computers , and communications ( c4 ) functions among u.s. allies .

as bmd systems and related sensors become more sophisticated , observers argue that the opportunities and the potential benefits of inter - service and international linkages are growing .

the u.s. military has the technical capacity to operate a multinational , integrated bmd architecture in the asia - pacific region — based on its experience in europe — but there are political challenges and risks as well .

congress has consistently authorized and appropriated funding for bmd as a core component of u.s. defense policy in countering ballistic missile threats from rogue states .

there have been exceptions for programs deemed unlikely to deliver capabilities in the near - or medium - term , but the overall level of funding support for bmd programs in congress to date has remained steady .

it is possible that an appaa will require additional funding , beyond that for which dod has planned .

costs could include funds for more bmd systems , sensors , c4 infrastructure , bases , and / or military construction .

as part of any agreement to deploy bmd capabilities in the region , u.s. allies might want additional , non - bmd related weapons systems .

in a congressionally - mandated independent assessment of u.s. force posture strategy in the asia - pacific region , the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) recommended that the united states deploy thaad and additional pac - 3 units to protect forward deployed forces .

considering the current threats from ballistic missiles , potential issues for congress are whether dod is expanding bmd programs at an appropriate level , and whether current and planned bmd capabilities are the best and most cost - effective approach for addressing ballistic missile threats .

other observers believe the stated threats are exaggerated and that the u.s. bmd program , especially the u.s. gmd system , does not work .

the united states has sold to allies several types of bmd capabilities: aegis tracking software , pac - 2 and pac - 3 batteries , and sm - 3 block ia interceptors ( the last to japan only ) .

there is a potential for significant further sales if south korea and australia decide to emphasize bmd in future budgets , or if southeast asian countries such as vietnam , the philippines or singapore begin to view ballistic missiles as a threat to their security .

even if these countries do not participate in a regional bmd system , some analysts have suggested that "reliance of non - u.s. assets on american hardware and software in systems like aegis goes a long way toward syncing allied capabilities and interoperability [at the technical level]. .

a potential issue for congress is what role , other than those already defined in statute , congress would play in overseeing foreign military sales ( fms ) of these bmd systems .

as the executive branch further develops u.s. bmd policy in the asia - pacific region , congress has the opportunity to shape this development .

the budget allocated to these bmd efforts will affect u.s. defense posture and capabilities in the region , and potential fms financing of u.s. arms exports could help determine allied approaches to bmd .

through the power of the purse , oversight , legislation , or other tools , congress may choose to encourage the evolution of an executive branch - led appaa or other formal , collective bmd architectures , or it may choose to slow or thwart this current development .

the degree of multilateral integration of bmd assets , accommodation of russian and chinese concerns , strategic focus , and technical foundation of bmd capabilities are just several of the critical issues that may merit congressional attention going forward .

