the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was last amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) .

appropriations for most programs authorized by the esea were authorized through fy2007 .

as congress has not reauthorized the esea , appropriations for esea programs are currently not explicitly authorized .

however , because the programs continue to receive annual appropriations , appropriations are considered implicitly authorized .

during the 113 th congress , both the house and senate have considered legislation to reauthorize the esea .

on june 12 , 2013 , the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee considered and ordered reported the strengthening america's schools act ( s. 1094 ) by a strictly partisan vote of 12-10 .

the house education and workforce committee also considered and ordered reported a bill that would reauthorize the esea .

on june 19 , 2013 , on a strictly partisan vote of 23-16 , the success for all students act ( h.r .

5 ) was ordered reported .

h.r .

5 was subsequently considered and amended on the house floor .

the amended version of h.r .

5 was passed on july 19 , 2013 , by a vote of 221-207 .

it is unclear whether s. 1094 will be considered on the senate floor .

subsequent references to s. 1094 and h.r .

5 in this report refer to s. 1094 as ordered reported by the help committee and h.r .

5 as passed by the house .

s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would take different approaches to reauthorizing the esea , most notably in three key areas: ( 1 ) accountability for student achievement , ( 2 ) teacher quality versus teacher effectiveness , and ( 3 ) targeted support for elementary and secondary education versus the use of a block grant .

in addition , both s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would eliminate existing programs , while creating new programs .

this report examines major features of s. 1094 and h.r .

5 with respect to current law .

the report begins by discussing the approach that each bill takes toward reshaping the esea in key areas .

next , the report provides a structured orientation by esea title and part of how the esea would be reconfigured under each bill .

then it more thoroughly summarizes the major proposals in the bills , focusing on those aspects of the bills that would fundamentally change a portion of current law .

the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of these bills or of technical changes that would be made by each measure .

the report concludes with an appendix that examines the proposed program authorizations included in each bill .

for the purposes of this report , a program is considered to be a new program if the program is a newly proposed program or is a substantively changed or reconfigured existing program ( eg , multiple aspects of a program are changed , such as the purpose of the program , distribution of funds , uses of funds , or eligible recipients of funds ) .

programs included in the esea reauthorization bills are considered to be similar to programs in current law if they are substantively similar in purpose , recipients , and activities .

the tables in this report refer to these programs as being "retained" by a particular bill .

for example , the advanced placement program is considered to be retained under s. 1094 , as the new program ( accelerated learning ) would be substantively similar to the program included in current law , despite change in the use of funds to support tests administered under the international baccalaureate program .

on the other hand , the block grant program created under h.r .

5 is considered a new program , as it differs from the current innovative programs block grant program in numerous ways including program purposes , funding to subgrantees , and allowable activities .

concurrently , the block grant program under current law is considered to be "not retained" under h.r .

5 .

it should be noted that an indication that a particular program would not be included in a particular bill does not mean that all of the activities authorized under current law for the program would be eliminated .

the activities may be continued under a different program .

for example , while h.r .

5 would no longer retain many of the current esea programs , h.r .

5 would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained .

the uses of funds under the proposed block grant program are discussed in this report .

similarly , if an existing program or activity is not specifically mentioned as allowable under a new program , it should not be assumed that funds could not be used to support such programs or activities .

it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss proposed programs or activities in great detail .

at the same time , an indication that a program would be "similar to current law" does not mean that it would be retained without changes .

as previously discussed , this report focuses on major changes that would be made to current law , so there may be additional changes made to a program or activity that are not highlighted in this report .

while congress has not enacted legislation to reauthorize the esea , on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states and described the principles that states must meet to obtain the included waivers .

the waivers exempt states from various academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through nclb .

state educational agencies ( seas ) may also apply for optional waivers related to the 21 st century community learning centers program and the use of funds , determinations of adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) , and the allocation of title i - a funds to schools .

however , in order to receive the waivers , seas must agree to meet four principles established by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are: ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

the waivers apply to school years 2011-2012 , 2012-2013 , and 2013-2014 .

states have the option to apply for a one - year waiver extension for the 2014-2015 school year .

taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law .

as of june 2013 , ed had approved esea flexibility package applications for 39 states and the district of columbia and was reviewing applications from several other states .

if congress continues to work on esea reauthorization during the 113 th congress , it is possible that provisions included in any final bill may be similar to or override the waivers and principles established by the administration .

the remainder of this report focuses only on current law and does not compare the provisions in h.r .

5 or s. 1094 with the provisions included in the esea flexibility package .

this section of the report examines the reauthorization approaches taken by s. 1094 and h.r .

5 in three key areas: ( 1 ) accountability for student achievement , ( 2 ) teacher quality versus teacher effectiveness , and ( 3 ) targeted support for elementary and secondary education versus the use of a block grant .

for each of the three areas , a brief discussion of the treatment of the issue under current law is included , followed by a summary of how s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would address the issues .

table 1 provides a structural orientation by esea title and part of how s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would modify current law based primarily on line - item amounts for esea programs included in appropriations tables , as well as the individual programs included under the fund for the improvement of education .

this list of "programs" does not take into account the number of programs , projects , or activities that may be funded under a single line - item appropriation , so the actual number of esea programs , projects , or activities being supported through appropriations is not shown .

current esea programs under which the federal government provides grants to the initial grantee ( as opposed to a subgrantee ) by formula are noted in the table .

the table provides appropriations information for fy2013 .

it also indicates where s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would place a given program in a reauthorized esea if the program is retained .

it should be noted that an indication that a program would not be retained does not mean that all of the activities authorized under current law for the program would be eliminated .

the activities may be continued under a different program .

for example , while h.r .

5 would no longer retain many of the current esea programs , it would include a block grant program under which funds could potentially be used for similar activities as were permitted or required under some programs that would not be retained .

in addition , the table notes when an existing esea program would not be retained but a new , targeted program would address similar broad purposes ( eg , literacy , dropout prevention ) .

at the same time , an indication that a program would be retained does not mean that it would be retained without changes .

for example , while both s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would retain a state grant program focused on teachers like title ii - a of the esea , both bills would modify the formula used to award grants and would change the uses of funds .

in addition , an indication that a program would be retained does not mean that it would be retained under the same name .

for example , the advanced placement program in current law would be retained as the accelerated learning program under s. 1094 .

the program would be expanded to include international baccalaureate programs and exams .

table 2 compares s. 1094 and h.r .

5 to current law .

it provides a more detailed description of specific features of each bill .

it is arranged thematically , focusing on key issues that have arisen during the reauthorization process .

the themes are as follows: overall structural and funding issues ; accountability ; title i - a ; other issues related to special populations / areas ; teachers , principals , and school leadership ; science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education ; flexibility and choice ; other program areas addressed by current law ; programs currently authorized outside of the esea and proposed for inclusion in the esea ; general provisions ; and key changes included in esea reauthorization bills to non - esea programs / acts .

no attempts were made to provide a comprehensive analysis of each of the bills or to compare s. 1094 with h.r .

5 .

table a - 1 examines specific esea program authorizations included in current law compared with those included in s. 1094 and h.r .

5 .

overall , current law includes 46 specific authorizations compared with 39 in s. 1094 and 16 in h.r .

5 .

it should be noted that a single authorization may apply to more than one program .

table a - 1 was designed to show the actual number of explicit esea program authorizations included in current law and each of the bills .

in order to make this table more useful , however , the table notes whether proposed statutory language indicated that certain programs would receive a specific share of a given authorization .

for example , h.r .

5 includes only one authorization for title i - a , but proposed statutory language would provide a specified share of that authorization to multiple , individual programs .

a new program authorization under s. 1094 or h.r .

5 should not be interpreted to mean that the program is not authorized under current law .

for example , s. 1094 would include separate authorizations for teacher incentive fund ( tif ) grants and for promise neighborhoods .

both of these programs are currently funded and were enacted through appropriations language using general authority available to the secretary under the fund for the improvement of education ( fie ; title v - d - 1 ) .

under current law , there is only one authorization for fie that encompasses 21 subparts , including title v - d - 1 , without specifying a share of the authorization for a given subpart .

therefore , under current law , separate authorizations are not listed for the tif or promise neighborhoods program .

in general , all of the authorizations included in s. 1094 are for "such sums" for fy2014 and each of the four succeeding fiscal years ( i.e. , through fy2018 ) .

for each authorization included in h.r .

5 , the same amount is authorized for each fiscal year from fy2014 through fy2019 .

that is , the authorization level is the same for fy2014 as it is for fy2019 .

it should be noted that the bills do not authorize programs for the same period of time .

given that most of the authorizations in current law and all of the authorizations in s. 1094 are for "such sums as may be necessary," it is not possible to calculate the total amount authorized across current law and s. 1094 .

with that said , the total authorized level in h.r .

5 for the esea is $22.8 billion .

fy2013 appropriations for esea under current law are $22.1 billion .

the total esea authorization for the last year for which current law had authorizations specified was $28.9 billion .

it should be noted that an authorization of an appropriation is only an authorization ( i.e. , authority to appropriate ) .

congress can and does enact appropriations at funding levels that differ from authorization levels .

