as 2013 draws to a close , the future of u.s. engagement in afghanistan hangs in the balance .

president obama has stated repeatedly that , in principle , the u.s. is ready to maintain its commitment to afghanistan , including a u.s. troop presence , after december 31 , 2014 , when nato's international security assistance force ( isaf ) mission concludes .

but the u.s. and afghan governments have also stated that any such force presence would require the conclusion of a new , bilateral status of forces agreement ( sofa ) , and that negotiation process has hit a major snag .

talks aimed at crafting a bilateral security agreement ( bsa ) did reportedly yield results , and the loya jirga , or council of elders , to which president karzai referred the matter , did reportedly endorse the deal .

but subsequently , president karzai , in a sustained combative tone , introduced new conditions that the u.s. government has rejected .

those conditions reportedly included limitations on the participation of u.s. forces in raids on homes , and the release of afghan prisoners from the guantanamo bay detention facility , as well as the postponement of signing the bsa until after the conclusion of afghan presidential elections scheduled to be held in spring 2014 .

u.s. officials have warned that they will not renegotiate the deal , and many observers believe that failure to confirm the agreement could result in a u.s. decision to pursue the "zero option" — the complete withdrawal of u.s. forces by the end of 2014 .

for its part , nato writ large has approved a follow - on , post - 2014 effort known as resolute support ; the separate sofa required for that effort is widely regarded as achievable if , but only if the u.s. - afghan bsa is concluded .

even if the u.s. and afghan governments do sign the bsa , still pending is a u.s. decision regarding the u.s. force presence in afghanistan after 2014 — its size , its authorities and missions , and its timeline .

in his 2013 state of the union address , president obama stated that by february 2014 , another 34,000 u.s. troops would come home from afghanistan , and that by the end of 2014 , "our war in afghanistan will be over. .

yet he has also indicated readiness , in principle , to maintain a small u.s. force presence after 2014 , to focus on conducting counter - terrorism and supporting the afghan national security forces ( ansf ) .

president obama is widely expected to unveil decisions regarding the contours of any post - 2014 u.s. presence in his 2014 state of the union address .

while troop levels and drawdown curves tend to steal the headlines , more fundamental is the question of how coherently all the facets of u.s. engagement in afghanistan fit together as part of a single political strategy aimed at bringing the war to an acceptable conclusion that protects u.s. interests over the longer term .

in recent months , there has been no shortage of activity: afghanistan's security transition received a jumpstart on june 18 , 2013 , when the afghan government and nato announced milestone 2013 , a marker that recognized afghan exercise of lead responsibility for security across all of afghanistan .

afghanistan's political transition , a continuation of the political process launched in bonn twelve years ago , was further catalyzed in july 2013 when afghan president hamid karzai signed two election laws recently passed by the afghan parliament , refining the legal and oversight frameworks that will govern the presidential and provincial council elections scheduled for 2014 , and the parliamentary elections scheduled for 2015 .

afghanistan's economic transition toward greater self - sufficiency received reinvigorated attention from the international donor community in july 2013 , at the one - year anniversary of the tokyo conference on afghanistan .

regionally , renewed efforts in 2013 related to afghan - pakistani border security suggested some interest , at least , in fruitful bilateral and regional collaboration .

and reinvigorated reconciliation efforts , aimed at achieving a political settlement of the conflict , took center stage in june 2013 with the opening of a taliban political office in doha , qatar , which coincided directly with the milestone 2013 announcement .

less immediately obvious , amidst all this vigorous activity , is what if anything these various threads add up to ; and how if at all they might best reinforce each other to lay a foundation for future stability in afghanistan .

from a u.s. perspective , a central question concerns how the security gains of the campaign on the ground might best be leveraged to shape the political landscape and catalyze broader political progress , in order to protect u.s. interests over the long term , at an acceptable cost .

for congress , next steps in the war in afghanistan , including near - term policy decisions by the u.s. and afghan governments , raise several basic oversight issues: the costs associated with a continued u.s. force presence in afghanistan .

the challenges of "re - setting" the force and restoring its readiness as it comes home from afghanistan .

accountability for sound strategy that protects u.s. interests .

integration of effort across u.s. government agencies in support of broad u.s. political strategy for afghanistan .

appropriate prioritization of this effort compared to competing national security exigencies .

this report briefly summarizes the strategic context for u.s. efforts in afghanistan ; analyzes recent campaign progress , remaining campaign requirements , and steps that might be required to make those gains sustainable ; and provides questions that may be of use to congress in exercising oversight of the war in afghanistan .

for the u.s. government , fundamental components of strategy for the war in afghanistan include: u.s. national security interests in afghanistan and the region ; the minimum essential conditions — political , economic , security — that would need to pertain in afghanistan and the region in order to protect u.s. interests over the long run ; current and projected u.s. approaches , until and after 2014 , for helping afghans establish and sustain those conditions ; the timeline by which , and extent to which , afghans are likely to be able to sustain those conditions with relatively limited support from the international community ; risks to u.s. national security interests if afghans are unable to do so ; and the importance of this overall effort — given its likely timeline , risks , and costs — compared to other u.s. priorities .

that discussion most sensibly begins with the interests that the united states has at stake in afghanistan and the region .

in theory , u.s. national security concerns in afghanistan and the region might include the spread of violent extremism , nuclear proliferation from pakistan , and nuclear confrontation between pakistan and india .

in theory , in turn , a stable afghanistan might help quell these concerns by making sanctuary less available to violent extremists , encouraging state stability in pakistan by lowering the temperature between pakistan and afghanistan , and by making afghanistan less available as a space for proxy contestation between pakistan and india .

but in practice , observers and practitioners disagree about both the interests at stake and their relative weight compared with u.s. interests in the rest of the world .

the obama administration has reasonably consistently articulated two core goals for the war — to defeat al - qaeda and to prevent future safe havens in afghanistan and pakistan .

yet the administration has made some refinements and changes in emphasis over time .

in his 2013 state of the union address , president obama described the goal as "defeating the core of al qaeda" , a new and narrower formulation .

and between 2010 and 2011 , in its "1230" reports to congress , the department of defense ( dod ) revised its description of the strategic architecture of goals , objectives and activities , subtly narrowing the scope of ambition .

the basic framework for most recent u.s. government civilian and military efforts on the ground in afghanistan dates back to 2009 , when general stanley mcchrystal took command of nato's international security assistance force ( isaf ) and was tasked to conduct an initial strategic assessment .

that assessment , and the subsequent isaf campaign design it informed , were based on the administration's two core goals as well as on the novel prospect of more troops , more civilian expertise , more resources , more high - level leadership attention , and relatively unlimited time .

since then , at least six major constraints have been introduced: in december 2009 , in a speech at west point , president obama announced that a troop surge would take place , but that those surge troops would begin to draw down in july 2011 .

in november 2010 , at the nato lisbon summit , the afghan government and the nato allies , including the united states , agreed to pursue a formal process , called transition , in which responsibility for security would shift over time to the afghan government .

this process was to begin shortly thereafter — in early 2011 — and to be completed by the end of 2014 .

in a june 2011 speech , president obama announced parameters for drawing down u.s. surge forces .

from the surge peak of about 100,000 u.s. troops , the u.s. troop commitment in afghanistan would decrease by 10,000 troops by the end of 2011 , and by a further 23,000 by the end of september 2012 , declining to a total of 68,000 by that date .

afterwards , the pace of further drawdowns would be "steady" and at some point the mission would change "from combat to support. .

in may 2012 , at the nato chicago summit , the afghan government and nato added a new step to the formal transition process , milestone 2013: afghans would assume lead responsibility for security throughout afghanistan by mid - 2013 , and at that point , international forces would shift to playing a primarily supporting role .

and in february 2013 , president obama announced that the u.s. troop commitment in afghanistan would draw down by 34,000 more troops by february 2014 — leaving approximately 33,000 troops in afghanistan — and that by the end of 2014 , "our war in afghanistan will be over. .

at the same time , the timeline for the declared commitment of the international community to afghanistan has been extended , in principle , well past 2014 .

in november 2011 , at the international conference on afghanistan held in bonn , the international community pledged broad support until 2024 , through the so - called decade of transformation following transition .

in may 2012 , at the nato chicago summit , participants affirmed that nato's security partnership with afghanistan would not end with the current campaign .

the u.s. - afghan strategic partnership agreement ( spa ) , signed in may 2012 — a statement of mutual commitment in multiple arenas — is scheduled to remain in force until 2024 .

and president obama , during his early 2013 press conference with president karzai , iterated that u.s. forces would remain engaged in afghanistan after 2014 , in "two long - term tasks" — albeit "very specific and very narrow" ones — including "first , training and assisting afghan forces and second , targeted counterterrorism missions against al qaeda and its affiliates. .

questions that might help inform the debates about u.s. strategy for afghanistan include: what interests does the u.s. government have at stake in afghanistan and the region , and in what priority order ? .

where if at all on that list should the following concerns figure: countering al qaeda and other violent extremist organizations ; preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; preventing nuclear confrontation between nuclear - armed states ; standing up for core u.s. values including human rights and the protection of women ; preserving and strengthening u.s. ability to exercise leadership on the world stage ? .

how appropriate are declared u.s. goals and objectives regarding afghanistan for protecting u.s. interests ? .

how consonant are the ways and means currently being employed with those declared goals and objectives ? .

to what extent if any might longer - term u.s. and international commitments balance the risks associated with near - term disengagement ? .

given the full panoply of u.s. national security interests and broader concerns , what should be the relative priority of afghanistan and its region , between now and 2014 , and after 2014 , for the u.s. government ? .

what would be an acceptable cost ? .

the basic premise of the campaign is to build up competent afghan forces ( ansf ) , while reducing the scale of the insurgent threat to proportions that those afghan forces can manage in the future with very limited support from the international community .

by most afghan and coalition accounts , the basic logic of the campaign has proven to be sound — based on the overall improvement of afghan forces , degradation of the insurgency , and adaptation by coalition forces .

indeed , many observers contend that if the campaign were not working , it should be discontinued immediately — not gradually — given its high cost in terms of lives and resources .

in 2013 , most isaf and afghan commanders envisaged a further trajectory for the campaign in which coalition forces would continue to play supporting roles beyond the end of the nato isaf mission , but those roles would be ever more tailored in scope and smaller in scale .

at the same time , debates continued among the afghan government , the u.s. government , and nato , about possible parameters for a u.s. "enduring presence" after 2014 , and a follow - on , post - 2014 nato resolute support effort that would succeed nato's isaf mission .

while both the internal debates and the broader public discussions about them tended to fixate on a single number of troops , more fundamentally at stake is the purpose of any post - 2014 presence , including missions , authorities , and duration .

in a word , what more would need to be done ? .

two broad roles — enabling and advising — are frequently mentioned as components of any post - 2014 coalition engagement .

most observers agree that while campaign progress may deliver security gains , the longer - term sustainability of those gains will depend on key facets of the broader strategic landscape , including governance , economics , pakistan and the region , and whether and how the war is brought to a close .

at issue is what it would take in each of these areas , at a minimum , to protect security gains and make them sustainable .

looking ahead , some suggest that it is much easier , and in many ways more reassuring , to picture afghanistan two years out than to try to visualize it five years out .

two years out , it is not hard to imagine an afghanistan — though still beset with great challenges — that enjoys an ever more competent ansf , ever more reliant on its own enablers ; better security in population centers and along commerce routes ; and a new political leadership enjoying some sort of a honeymoon period .

that vision , many would agree , is at the very least plausible .

five years out , the picture seems much more difficult to predict .

the image easiest to visualize may be that of afghanistan as a palimpsest of overlapping , often competing , and sometimes mutually contradictory dynamics: self - regulating , roughly inclusive traditional forms of organization and dispute resolution at the local level ; a highly centralized governance architecture based on the bonn process that still struggles with insufficient capacity ; a highly articulated system of informal power and influence networks , reaching inside and outside government , making decisions and distributing resources ; some emerging institutions , particularly the army , with truly national equities , impatient with others who do not share the same values ; some limited economic opportunity , tempered by hedging behaviors driven by lingering uncertainty about the future ; and some increasingly organized popular voices including those of the media and civil society writ large ; together with some measure of continued though deeply diminished international support , and a whole array of deepening , sometimes - constructive and sometimes - adversarial , relationships with neighboring states .

further , it is not hard to imagine such a palimpsest either as a foundation for nascent stability , or as a set of precursors for civil war .

it seems reasonable to suggest that choices made in the near term , by the u.s. , by the rest of the international community , and most of all by afghans , will powerfully shape the interplay of all the major afghan stakeholders a little further down the road .

