although human rights concerns place limits on the depth of the u.s. - cambodia relationship , a period of relative political stability in cambodia that began in 2006 , combined with u.s. regional security and strategic concerns , has led to a movement toward deeper bilateral ties .

u.s. interests in the kingdom of cambodia include social , economic , and political development , trade and investment , regional security , civil society , and human rights .

as china's economic and political influence has grown in cambodia and the lower mekong delta region , the obama administration has attempted to bolster u.s. ties with cambodia and other countries in the region .

a key challenge for u.s. policy toward cambodia lies in combining and balancing efforts to engage the kingdom on a range of fronts while promoting human rights and democracy .

some policy makers and experts contend that u.s. relations with cambodia should be restricted until prime minister hun sen reverses a trend of deteriorating conditions for civil liberties and democratic institutions .

cambodia is integrated in the global system through foreign aid ties , the international ngo community , regional organizations , and foreign trade and investment .

the kingdom is heavily dependent upon foreign aid from japan , the united states , australia , and europe .

since 1996 , the world bank , other international financial institutions , and development assistance committee ( dac ) countries have attempted to coordinate aid and set economic and political reform guidelines for the cambodian government through the consultative group for cambodia and later the cambodia development cooperation forum .

cambodia is a member of the association of southeast asian nations and served as the organization's rotating chair for the first time in 2012 .

cambodia has significant trade relations with neighbors thailand and vietnam , while its largest export market is the united states .

during the past decade , cambodia has made fitful progress in some areas of u.s. interest and concern , including the conduct of elections , the development of a vibrant civil society , the protection of labor rights , bringing some khmer rouge leaders to justice , and improving public health .

after a period of relative stability and prosperity , hun sen and the cambodian people's party ( cpp ) appear to enjoy popular support , particularly in rural areas .

a public opinion survey conducted in cambodia by the international republican institute in early 2013 found that 79% of respondents felt that the country was going in the right direction , with many of them pointing to new roads , schools , and clinics as reasons for such optimism .

growing corruption and the trade and use of drugs were viewed as major national problems .

during the past several years , the political system has become less democratic and civil liberties such as free speech and assembly have been encroached upon .

although political opposition groups may gain parliamentary seats in the national elections by forming a united front and tapping into voter discontent among urban voters , youth , and marginalized groups , the cpp's hold on power seems assured for now .

hun sen has bolstered his political strength through a combination of electoral victories , influence over the broadcast media and judiciary , legal and extra - legal political maneuvers , intimidation of opponents , patronage , and economic threats .

some critics argue that while electoral processes have improved , hun sen possesses unfair campaign advantages through his control over the broadcast media and harassment of political opponents , critics , and civil society actors .

although the press is somewhat freer to criticize the government , the print media reaches a relatively small proportion of the population .

the prime minister has silenced political opponents through defamation and other lawsuits .

under a penal code that went into effect in december 2010 , persons can be charged with defamation for the expression of views that "affect the dignity" of individuals , public officials , and government institutions and the crime of incitement for public speech and writings that create "serious turmoil in society. .

governance is marred by corruption and many observers suspect that the cpp has played a role in many unresolved , politically motivated killings .

the national democratic institute described cambodia as a country that has "made some progress in building democratic institutions and practices , particularly with a strong and vocal civil society. .

however , the "long - standing dominance of the ruling cambodian people's party … over all aspects of governance … has limited transparency of government activities , stifled dissent and opposition , and suppressed free speech and access to information. .

in october 2012 , the phnom penh municipal court sentenced independent radio broadcaster , government critic , and land rights activist mam sonando to 20 years in prison for insurrection .

many cambodian observers and human rights groups considered the charges to be lacking in evidence and politically motivated .

in march 2013 , following international pressure , sonando's charge was replaced by a minor one and he was released .

some experts argue that the space for civil society in cambodia is shrinking .

for example , in february 2013 , the cambodian government attempted to pressure lawyers not to give media interviews without the prior approval of the national bar association .

demonstrations in the capital have been outlawed except in an officially designated "freedom park" away from state buildings and the parliament .

there also have been instances of the government detaining or firing upon protestors in various disputes .

the extraordinary chambers in the courts of cambodia ( eccc ) , an international court with international and cambodian judges and prosecutors , began proceedings in 2006 to try khmer rouge leaders and others responsible for grave violations of national and international law , such as crimes against humanity .

the eccc is financed through a u.n. - administered international trust fund and bilateral donations .

the top foreign donors , in order of contributions , are japan , australia , the united states , germany , france , and the united kingdom .

japan has contributed $78.7 million since 2006. international donors pledged $35 million for operating costs in 2013 .

the tribunal reportedly has been hampered by interference from the cambodian government and corruption by cambodian court officials , resignations by some international judges , and unexpected costs and delays .

since the beginning of operations , the court has spent over $179 million , and has faced annual budget shortfalls which have resulted in unpaid salaries to cambodian judges and staff .

the united states government withheld assistance to the eccc from 2006 to 2008 due to doubts about the court's independence .

in 2008 , the state department announced that the court met international standards , and began providing contributions through the u.n. trust fund .

between 2008 and 2012 , the united states contributed nearly $17 million to the tribunal .

the u.s. government also has provided financial support to the documentation center of cambodia ( dc - cam ) , an archive , library , and public service center related to khmer rouge atrocities .

under current congressional restrictions , foreign operations appropriations may be made available to the eccc only if the secretary of state certifies that the united nations and the government of cambodia are taking credible steps to address allegations of corruption and mismanagement within the tribunal .

five khmer rouge leaders have been charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes .

kaing guek eav ( known as comrade duch ) , pol pot's "chief executioner," ran the infamous toul sleng ( s - 21 ) prison in phnom penh , where an estimated 14,000 cambodians were killed .

nuon chea was the khmer rouge's second - in - command .

ieng sary was the former foreign minister .

ieng sary's wife , ieng thirith , was the regime's minister of social affairs .

khieu samphan , the chief of state , was in charge of the communist regime's radical economic policies .

in 2010 , kaing guek eav was sentenced to 35 years in jail ( minus time already served ) , which many cambodians considered to be too lenient .

in february 2012 , the court rejected his appeal and increased his term to life in prison .

of the remaining four defendants , all of whom were in their 80s at the beginning of 2013 , nuon chea and khieu samphan have been in poor health and ieng thirith has been declared mentally unfit for trial and freed .

ieng sary died in march 2013 , before the completion of his trial .

cambodian and international human rights groups have advocated expanding the scope of prosecutions to include more khmer rouge officials .

however , prime minister hun sen has opposed expanding the number of indictments , arguing that it would undermine "national reconciliation. .

although hun sen had defected from the khmer rouge in 1977 and fled to vietnam , some analysts argue that he is reluctant to widen the scope of the trials due to his former connections with khmer rouge military officials .

cambodian court officials have blocked the indictments of five additional suspects recommended by international members of the eccc , maintaining that they were "not either senior leaders or those who were most responsible" during the khmer rouge period .

cambodia relies heavily upon foreign aid , which is equal to more than half of its government budget .

civil society groups are also heavily dependent upon foreign funding .

the largest providers of traditional aid or overseas development assistance ( oda ) , in order of the amount of oda , are japan , the united states , australia , germany , and france .

development assistance committee ( dac ) countries combined provided an average of $640 million per year between 2009 and 2011 .

cambodia is one of the poorest countries in asia .

the kingdom has experienced steady economic growth during the past decade and a half , largely driven by expansions in agriculture , construction , the garment sector , and tourism .

gdp growth was estimated to be 6.4% in 2012 and is forecast to be 6.9% in 2013 .

however , income inequality , which remains high , has been increasing .

continuing obstacles to faster and more balanced development and greater foreign investment include poor education and public health , low government capacity , weak legal and financial institutions , inadequate infrastructure , and official corruption .

the united states is the largest overseas market for cambodian goods , accounting for about half of the kingdom's garment exports .

there are about 600 clothing factories that employ approximately 400,000 workers in the kingdom .

bilateral trade fell by 20% between 2007 and 2009 , but has since rebounded .

in 2011 , u.s. - cambodian trade surpassed the levels of before the global recession .

in 2012 , bilateral trade was worth $2.9 billion , including $2.7 billion in u.s. imports of cambodian goods , mostly apparel , and $226 million in u.s. exports to the kingdom .

the largest u.s. export item was vehicles .

in 1996 , cambodia and the united states signed a bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) , which provided for reciprocal "normal trade relations" tariff treatment .

in july 2006 , cambodia signed a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) with the united states .

cambodia acceded to the wto in october 2004 .

as a member of asean since 1999 , the kingdom is committed to participating in the asean free trade area ( afta ) in 2015 .

cambodia is also a party to the regional comprehensive economic partnership ( rcep ) , a proposed free trade area including the 10 nations of asean and 6 other asia - pacific countries , which is under negotiation .

principal foreign investors in cambodia include china , malaysia , south korea , thailand , the united states , and vietnam .

according to one report , china has become cambodia's largest investor with approximately $9 billion in cumulative investment ( $1.19 billion in 2011 ) .

u.s. cumulative investment reportedly totals $1.3 billion .

the united states invested $144 million in the country in 2011 , triple the amount of 2010 .

tourism accounts for 350,000 cambodian jobs and 12% of gross domestic product , according to the tourism minister .

cambodians hope that offshore oil production will eventually provide a boon to government revenues and the economy .

a number of multinational and national companies , including chevron , are working in the gulf of thailand to develop oil reserves , estimated at 500 million barrels .

however , the estimated start date of oil production has been delayed from 2013 to 2017 .

in addition to low labor costs , many cambodian garment factories have developed a reputation for good labor practices , largely because of a u.s. - cambodia agreement , enacted in 1999 , that rewarded progress in labor conditions with increased access to the u.s. market .

as part of the agreement , in 2001 , the international labor organization ( ilo ) was brought in to monitor and promote good labor practices in the kingdom .

it continues to do so under the program better factories cambodia with funding from the royal government of cambodia , the garment manufacturers' association in cambodia , the u.s. department of labor , the world bank , the australian agency for international development , and international buyers .

labor relations have shown some signs of strain in recent years .

cambodian workers are free to form their own unions and have the right to strike , although a majority of unions are affiliated with the cpp , and independent labor leaders and strike organizers sometimes have been harassed by employers .

in february 2013 , an estimated 20,000 workers across a number of foreign - owned textile factories in an industrial area in southeastern cambodia went on strike for better working conditions and higher wages .

other strikes also occurred in other regions throughout the year .

although some cambodians have expressed appreciation of china's role in their country's development , others have complained of its adverse social , environmental , and other effects .

according to some estimates , china has become cambodia's largest investor , concentrated in such areas as garments , agriculture , and mining .

although the united states is cambodia's largest export market for apparel , china leads in foreign investment in the sector .

chinese companies are also helping to develop cambodia's infrastructure and basic industry , reportedly building a rail line , sea port , and steel plant worth $11 billion .

other projects include road construction , hydropower , and irrigation .

in december 2012 , cambodian and chinese oil companies announced plans to build the kingdom's first oil refinery in kampot province , to be completed in 2013 .

domestic demand for energy and chinese investment have fueled dam construction in cambodia and other countries along the lower mekong and other rivers , alarming environmentalists and people who rely upon the waterways for their livelihood .

three chinese - backed dams have been built in the kingdom , three are under construction , and more reportedly are planned .

these hydropower projects are largely financed and constructed by chinese banks , companies , and workers , often on terms that are unfavorable to cambodia , according to critics .

ownership of most chinese dams is based upon a "build - operate - transfer" arrangement .

during a period of chinese operation , which may last from 30 to 45 years , cambodia pays the chinese company for power generated by the dam .

some experts contend that such dams endanger or disrupt fish supplies , soil conditions , drinking and irrigation water , wildlife and aquatic species , and ecological balances .

they add that there is very little transparency or public input regarding the conception , construction , and environmental assessments associated with these projects .

similar dams built in laos and vietnam reportedly also have had damaging effects on cambodia , which lies downstream .

proponents of the dams argue that china is filling a void made by the withdrawal of the world bank and other developed countries from hydropower projects in the region for reasons related to feasibility and environmental , social , and political costs .

they argue that these facilities supply energy for development , reduce reliance on oil , and help expand electricity in rural areas .

cambodian economic development and foreign ( particularly chinese ) demand for hardwood threaten to deplete cambodia's forests and have spurred illegal logging .

stronger environmental policies in some neighboring countries , such as thailand , have added pressure on the cambodian timber market .

in 2012 , a cambodian environmental activist and an investigative journalist who had exposed illegal logging were killed under suspicious circumstances in separate incidents .

another reporter who had uncovered timber smuggling involving a well - connected local businessman was arrested .

in may 2012 , the cambodian government suspended the granting of land to domestic and foreign companies in a move to curb forced evictions and illegal logging .

