the first amendment of the u.s. constitution prohibits the government from establishing religion ( the establishment clause ) , which the u.s. supreme court has interpreted to include a prohibition on official support or endorsement of religion .

it also prohibits the government from interfering with individuals' exercise of religion ( the free exercise clause ) .

the balancing of these constitutional provisions often leads to questions regarding the extent to which religious activities may occur at public events or within public institutions .

on one hand , it may be argued that permitting prayer as a part of publicly sponsored events or activities suggests official support for religion .

on the other hand , restricting religious expressions at events or activities may appear to interfere with individuals' ability to exercise their religious beliefs .

the court has addressed these questions in a variety of contexts and drawn important distinctions regarding the constitutionality of such prayers .

in particular , the court's major decisions have focused on two categories of public prayers: prayer in schools and legislative prayers .

lower courts have considered the constitutionality of publicly sponsored prayers in other contexts , including the military chaplaincy as well as invocations and other religious commemorations at public events .

this report will analyze the court's approach to each of these categories and examine the relevant distinctions used to determine whether a public official or entity may engage in prayer activity or other religious commemorations .

the court's interpretation of the establishment clause's prohibition on publicly sponsored prayer arises from the historical roots of the founding of the united states .

the court has noted that the "practice of establishing governmentally composed prayers for religious services was one of the reasons which caused many of our early colonists to leave england and seek religious freedom in america. .

accordingly , the court has held that "the constitutional prohibition against laws respecting an establishment of religion must at least mean that in this country it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers for any group of the american people to recite as a part of a religious program carried on by government. .

however , the court has also recognized the significance of the role of religion in the history of the nation and has upheld some religious messages in selected public contexts .

as a general rule , the court has permitted public displays of religious symbols , including in one case a display of the ten commandments , if the display is set in a diversified context .

the court also has allowed privately donated displays of religious messages on public grounds , although these cases were not resolved under the establishment clause .

despite the court's decisions upholding public displays with religious messages , it is important to note that these cases are distinguishable from its public prayer decisions .

as a general rule , publicly sponsored prayer is prohibited by the establishment clause .

legal challenges to public prayers have arisen most frequently in the context of school prayers , and the u.s. supreme court consistently has struck down school policies that implement official acts of prayer in school settings .

although a number of restrictions apply to official prayers , the court has recognized that in certain public contexts , official prayer or religious expression may be permissible , e.g .

 , the legislative prayer exemption .

legislative prayers generally are permissible provided that such prayers do not indicate a government preference for one religion over another .

in 1985 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit decided the only direct constitutional challenge to the military chaplaincy , katcoff v. marsh .

although later cases have challenged how the chaplaincy is administered , katcoff considered whether the mere existence of the military chaplaincy violated the establishment clause .

the second circuit held that the chaplaincy itself did not violate the establishment clause , but concluded that specific practices of the chaplaincy may not be constitutional .

the second circuit noted that the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of legislative chaplains offering prayers at legislative sessions under the rationale that the practice was a part of american history and had been woven into the fabric of our society .

the court had reasoned that the legislative chaplaincy had an "unbroken history of more than 200 years. .

it may be argued that the legislative chaplaincy is distinct from the military chaplaincy , meaning that the supreme court's analysis of the legislative chaplaincy does not control the outcome of cases challenging the military chaplaincy .

thus , the second circuit examined the challenge under other constitutional tests .

the court indicated that the military chaplaincy would fail the constitutional requirements of the establishment clause , but recognized that the establishment clause concerns must be balanced by other constitutional considerations , including the free exercise clause .

the court held that the military chaplaincy was a constitutional means of accommodating servicemembers' religious exercise rights under the free exercise clause .

because members of the military have been removed from their religious communities , the court explained that the government had interfered with their ability to exercise their religious beliefs .

accordingly , the military chaplaincy , although unconstitutional if examined solely under the establishment clause , alleviated the burden imposed by the military on servicemembers' religious exercise .

the court reinforced this balance favoring the accommodation of servicemembers' religious exercise by noting the importance of the war powers clause of the u.s. constitution , which requires the court to give significant deference to congress in military affairs .

the court explained that "when a matter provided for by congress in the exercise of its war power and implemented by the army appears reasonably relevant and necessary to furtherance of our national defense it should be treated as presumptively valid and any doubt as to its constitutionality should be resolved ... in favor of deference to the military's exercise of discretion. .

thus , the court determined that because the chaplaincy serves as an accommodation to alleviate a burden on religion imposed by the government and because the military is entitled to deference in a reasonable policy to ensure that servicemembers are treated adequately to maintain military order , the chaplaincy is a permissive accommodation of religion by the government .

the court has often recognized the role of religion in the nation's history , noting a number of occasions on which government officials invoke religion during official acts .

the court has specifically stated that "[w]e are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a supreme being. .

with that understanding , the court often has justified examples of religious references during public ceremonies: "so help me god" as part of the oath of office ; opening prayers during legislative sessions ; "god save the united states and this honorable court" in the opening statement of the supreme court's sessions ; presidential proclamations , including the thanksgiving holiday ; etc .

such references have been labeled as "ceremonial deisms" — practices that may not violate the establishment clause "because they have lost through rote repetition any significant religious content. .

the court has justified references to religion , particularly with regard to displays of religious symbols , as long as the context of the reference does not promote religious beliefs , but only acknowledges a religious history of the nation .

the court also has explained that "however history may affect the constitutionality of nonsectarian references to religion by the government , history cannot legitimate practices that demonstrate the government's allegiance to a particular sect or creed. .

courts have upheld the inscription of "in god we trust" as the national motto on coins and currency .

one court explained that the motto was not a religious invocation and therefore could not violate the first amendment .

according to the court , "[i]t is quite obvious that the national motto and the slogan on coinage and currency 'in god we trust' has nothing whatsoever to do with the establishment of religion .

its use is of a patriotic or ceremonial character and bears no true resemblance to a governmental sponsorship of a religious exercise. .

congress regularly confronts public concerns regarding the parameters of permissible public religious expression .

among the notable issues of legislative interest in the 113 th congress are the permissibility of voluntary prayer in publicly funded programs ; religious inscriptions on government property ; and the religious freedom of military chaplains .

h.r .

2926 / s. 1279 , the freedom to pray act , would prohibit the revocation or withholding of federal funds to otherwise qualified recipients "on the basis of religious activities that are conducted voluntarily and initiated by participants" in the recipient's program or activity .

the bill explicitly clarifies that it would not authorize sponsorship of religious activity in federally funded programs or activities ; restrictions on recipients' ability to ensure that permissible religious activities do not interfere with the program or activity ; or requirements for participation in prayer or other activities that may conflict with individuals' first amendment freedoms .

h.r .

2175 / s. 1044 , the world war ii memorial prayer act of 2013 , would direct the secretary of the interior to incorporate the words of the prayer from president franklin d. roosevelt's june 1944 d - day address at the world war ii memorial on the national mall .

the bill would prohibit the use of public funds to prepare or install the inscription , but would authorize the use of private contributions .

h.r .

343 would amend statutory provisions relating to military chaplains to include an explicit protection allowing a chaplain to close prayers offered outside of religious services "according to the dictates of the chaplain's conscience. .

the bill would amend provisions governing chaplains serving under the u.s. army , u.s. navy , u.s. marine corps , and u.s. air force , as well as the u.s. military academy and u.s. air force academy .

it does not address chaplains serving under the u.s. coast guard .

although these bills implicate first amendment protections , they do not affect the constitutional rules controlling public prayer .

it should be noted that congress may not alter the constitutional parameters of public prayer and religious expression through statute .

