imports of crude oil derived from canadian oil sands have increased dramatically over the past decade .

oil spills involving oil - sands - derived crude oils have generated interest from policymakers and a variety of stakeholders .

several oil spills , including both the 2010 enbridge pipeline spill in michigan and the 2013 exxonmobil pipeline spill in arkansas , involved this material .

 ( see text box below. ) .

oil spill liability , cleanup , and compensation issues are addressed by the oil pollution act of 1990 .

the oil spill liability trust fund ( osltf ) provides an immediate source of federal funding to respond to oil spills in a timely manner .

the national pollution funds center ( npfc ) , an office within the coast guard , manages the trust fund .

the monies from the osltf can be used to respond to a wide variety of oil types , including oil - sands - derived crude oils .

the osltf is financed primarily by a per - barrel tax on domestic crude oil and imported crude oil and petroleum products .

in 2017 , the tax increased from 8 cents to 9 cents per barrel .

based on language in a 1980 house committee report , the internal revenue service ( irs ) concluded in 2011 that oil - sands - derived crude oils are not subject to this excise tax .

this issue received attention in recent congresses and from the prior administration .

the obama administration's budget proposals in recent years called for statutory changes that would have subjected oil sands to the per - barrel tax .

members in the 113 th congress introduced several proposals to address this issue , but the bills did not receive committee action .

this issue has received considerable interest in the 114 th congress , as policymakers debated the approval of the keystone xl pipeline , which would transport 830,000 barrels of oil - sands - derived crude from canada to u.s. refineries .

on november 6 , 2015 , secretary of state john kerry announced that "the national interest of the united states would be best served by denying transcanada a presidential permit for the keystone xl pipeline. .

members of congress and stakeholder groups have expressed both support for , and opposition to , the state department's decision .

the first section of this report provides a background of oil sands resources .

the second section discusses the osltf , including authorized uses and revenue sources .

the third section compares the scope of oil subject to the per - barrel tax ( which funds the osltf ) versus the scope of oil that triggers activities under the oil pollution act and discusses the potential implications of the different scopes .

the fourth section provides details of recent legislative activity .

the final section offers concluding observations .

the terms "oil sands" and "tar sands" are often used interchangeably to describe a particular type of nonconventional oil deposit that is found throughout the world in varying quantities .

opponents of the resource's development often use the term "tar sands," which arguably carries a negative connotation .

proponents typically refer to the material as oil sands .

some federal government resources refer to the deposits as "tar sands," some use "oil sands," and some have used both terms .

in its documents evaluating the keystone xl pipeline , the department of state refers to the material as oil sands .

epa has followed suit in its letters to the department of state concerning the pipeline's environmental impacts .

in general , this report uses the term "oil sands" to describe the deposits in the ground and "oil - sands - derived crude oil" to describe the material imported into the united states .

the use of this term is not intended to reflect a point of view but to adopt the term most commonly used by the primary executive agencies involved in recent oil sands policy issues .

these terms generally refer to a mixture of sand , clay and other minerals , water , and bitumen .

the bitumen component of this mixture is a form of crude oil that has undergone degradation over millions of years .

after oil producers separate the bitumen from the mixture , it is very dense and highly viscous ( i.e. , resistant to flow ) , having the consistency of molasses at room temperature .

this property lends itself well to making asphalt: bitumen deposits have been mined since antiquity for use as sealants and paving materials .

in recent decades , the natural bitumen in oil sands — particularly deposits in alberta , canada — has been extracted to generate substantial quantities of crude oil and related substances .

the alberta deposits are estimated to be one of the largest accumulations of oil in the world , contributing to canada's third - place ranking for estimated proven oil reserves ( behind venezuela and saudi arabia ) .

canadian production of oil - sands - derived crude oil has increased dramatically in recent years .

if approved and constructed , the keystone xl pipeline would add to existing cross - border pipelines in transporting oil - sands - derived crude oils from alberta into the united states .

companies developing alberta's oil sands resources process or dilute the natural bitumen in order to transport it via pipeline .

this processed / diluted bitumen falls into three general categories: 1 .

upgraded bitumen , or synthetic crude oil ( sco ) is produced from bitumen at a refinery that turns the very heavy hydrocarbons into a lighter material .

2 .

diluted b itumen ( dilb it ) is bitumen that is blended with lighter hydrocarbons — typically natural gas condensates — to create a lighter , less viscous , and more easily transportable material .

dilbit may be blended as 25% to 30% condensate and 70% to 75% bitumen .

3 .

synthetic bitumen ( synbit ) is typically a combination of bitumen and sco .

blending the lighter sco with the heavier bitumen results in a product that more closely resembles conventional crude oil .

typically the ratio is 50% synthetic crude and 50% bitumen , but blends — and their resulting properties — may vary significantly .

crude oil imports from canada accounted for the largest percentage ( 43% ) of imports by nation ( based on 2015 data ) .

in 2005 , the united states imported approximately 217 million barrels of oil - sands - derived crude oils from canada .

in 2015 , that figure increased to 587 million barrels , accounting for approximately 22% of crude oil imports from all nations .

figure 1 illustrates the proportions of crude oil types that canada has exported to the united states in recent years .

the figure indicates that "blended bitumen" exports , which include both dilbit and synbit , have more than tripled since 2005 .

they are also expected to constitute most of the growth in oil sands production in the foreseeable future .

prior to the oil pollution act of 1990 ( opa ) , federal funding for oil spill response was generally considered inadequate , and damages recovery was difficult for parties affected by oil spills .

the 1989 exxon valdez oil spill highlighted many of these concerns .

to help address these issues , congress established the oil spill liability trust fund ( osltf ) .

although congress created the osltf in 1986 , congress did not authorize its use or provide its funding until after the 1989 exxon valdez oil spill .

in 1990 , opa provided the statutory authorization necessary to put the fund in motion .

executive order 12777 ( signed october 18 , 1991 ) authorized the coast guard to create the national pollution funds center ( npfc ) to manage the trust fund .

"oil" has different meanings in different legal or statutory contexts .

for example , "oil" in the context of opa and osltf response authority has a different meaning than "oil" in the context of the internal revenue code ( irc ) that established a per - barrel tax to help finance the osltf .

this difference has generated considerable interest from policymakers in recent months .

as of the date of this report , members in the 115 th congress have not proposed legislation addressing this issue .

members offered several proposals in prior congresses , as discussed below .

the different definitions of "oil" in two distinct but related contexts may create situations in which expenditures from the osltf are used to address discharges of "oil" that were not subject to the tax supporting the cleanup fund .

as noted above , such a scenario may not substantially impact the osltf unless the federal government were unable to recover the trust fund's costs from a responsible party ( or parties ) .

regardless , the different definitions raise a potential equity concern .

the irs interpretation of the definition of "crude oil" is based on a statement from a committee report from 1980 that was repeated in 1986 .

at that time , u.s. deposits of oil sands were known but not extracted on a commercial scale for energy purposes .

this remains the case today , although some parties are expected to begin operations to extract deposits in utah .

canadian oil sands accounted for a relatively minor proportion of canadian crude oil production ( 0.6% ) in 1980 .

however , canadian oil sands production has steadily increased since that time .

moreover , the 1980 committee report specifically exempted "synthetic petroleum , eg , shale oil , liquids from coal , tar sands" from the definition of "crude oil. .

at that time , virtually all canadian oil sands production involved mining operations that subsequently upgraded the bitumen to "synthetic crude oil" before transporting it to the united states .

in more recent years , canadian production of oil sands has included in situ operations that have predominantly employed the process of blending the bitumen with diluents to facilitate transport .

some may assert that blended bitumen would not be considered "synthetic petroleum," but others may argue that blended bitumen would still be considered "liquids from tar sands. .

further , some canadian mining operations have also begun to blend bitumen for transport as opposed to upgrading .

policymakers may choose to reexamine the rationale for excluding particular materials from the definition of "crude oil" in the context of the irc .

the tax code's definition of "domestic crude oil" may also be subject to reassessment if u.s. oil sands resources become commercially viable for energy purposes .

