the u.s. government's national security system includes the organizations , structures , and processes that govern decision - making , budgeting , planning and execution , and congressional oversight of executive branch national security activities .

national security strategic guidance documents , including publicly available reports and classified internal instructions , and the various review processes that help generate them , are a key element of that system .

while some strategy - making activities are carried out in response to statutory requirements , others are conducted on the basis of mandates from within the executive branch .

as a rule , such activities help guide policy and resourcing decisions , and convey intent to internal and external audiences .

core national security strategic guidance documents include the president's national security strategy ( nss ) , the secretary of defense's national defense strategy ( nds ) and its associated quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) report , and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff's national military strategy ( nms ) .

in theory , these documents and review exercises are all "nested" with each other , such that guidance issued at higher levels of the executive branch , for example by the president , informs guidance issued at lower levels , for example by the secretary of defense , whose guidance , in turn , informs that issued by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ( cjcs ) .

in recent years , other agencies have adopted analogues to the department of defense's ( dod ) qdr process: the department of homeland security's quadrennial homeland security review ( qhsr ) , the department of state's quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) , and the intelligence community's quadrennial intelligence community review ( qicr ) .

arguably , all of these reviews fall under the broad rubric of national security .

indeed , in recent years , many have suggested defining the concept of "national security" more broadly , beyond its traditional focus on national defense .

the obama administration , at the start of its first term , declared the concepts of "national security" and "homeland security" to be "indistinguishable," and it institutionalized that concept organizationally by merging the previously separate national and homeland security councils .

others would stretch the concept of national security even further to include economic , energy , and / or environmental security .

some critics charge that executive branch processes for developing strategy are flawed because , for example , they fail to establish clear priorities , consider and apply fiscal constraints , or assign roles and responsibilities to specific agencies .

some note that executive branch conduct of strategic reviews and submission to congress of statutorily required strategic guidance documents do not always fully comply with legislative mandates , while others note that some of the mandates themselves could be improved — for example , by better synchronizing requirements for related documents .

for congress , examining and shaping the administration's national security strategy activities may be one effective avenue for providing congressional oversight of executive branch national security activities .

for example , congress as a whole may enact or amend requirements for the conduct of strategic reviews and / or the creation and submission to congress of strategy reports .

committees , in turn , may hold hearings to probe the processes and thinking behind required strategy reports or internal strategic review processes .

and individual members may shape the crafting or application of strategy through public statements or private correspondence with the executive branch .

this report provides an overview of mandates , statutory and otherwise , for key national security strategic reviews and reports ; assesses recent execution ; and raises issues that congress may wish to consider as it conducts future oversight activities .

in general , strategy articulates "ends" and then links "means" ( resources ) and "ways" ( activities that utilize those resources ) in a plan of action designed to achieve those ends , in a given context .

strategy may also indicate the relative priority of each desired end .

a strategy may be narrowly targeted , designed to achieve one specific goal , such as a strategy for a marketing campaign for a single new product , or it may address a broad field including multiple , prioritized objectives and initiatives , such as a company's overall strategy to succeed in the marketplace .

at its best , strategy is iterative — that is , there are feedback loops in place to facilitate updating the strategy changes in the strategic environment and on lessons learned as the strategy is implemented .

national security strategy for the u.s. government as a whole theoretically can serve several distinct purposes: by offering prioritized objectives and indicating which elements of national power are to be used to meet them , it can provide guidance to departments and agencies to use in their internal processes for budgeting , planning and executing , and organizing , training , and equipping personnel .

by clearly linking goals with approaches designed to meet them , national security strategy can provide the executive branch with a key tool for internal decision - making , and for justifying requested resources and authorities to congress .

by laying out a detailed strategic vision , it can help inform public audiences both at home and abroad about u.s. government intent .

at the level of an individual agency , in turn , strategy can help locate that agency's efforts in the context of the national security efforts of the government as a whole ; confirm agency priorities ; clarify internal roles and missions ; and provide a foundation for external communications including with congress .

congress has enacted , and sometimes amended , an array of requirements for the executive branch to conduct strategic reviews and / or to publish strategy documents .

in many cases , these strategic efforts are required to be synchronized with each other , though in some cases , the specified timelines arguably make synchronization a challenge .

executive branch compliance with these mandates , in form and substance , has varied a great deal over time .

evaluating the effectiveness of congressional oversight of executive branch strategy - making may depend in part on how one defines "effective strategy - making. .

departments , agencies , and the executive branch as a whole may conduct strategic reviews and craft strategic guidance apart from any congressional mandate .

such efforts have the potential to contribute constructively to u.s. national security efforts , but they may , however , raise questions for congress concerning whether and how to provide oversight .

over time , there has been no shortage of debate and commentary about the role of "strategy" in the national security system , which also includes decision - making , budgeting , planning and execution , and congressional oversight .

attention has been focused on both congressional requirements for strategic reviews and reports , and execution of those activities by the executive branch .

this section highlights issues that have been raised in these debates , and provides questions which , among others , congress may wish to consider in evaluating current performance and considering proposals for change .

most observers would suggest that the optimal frequency for any given national security strategic review would balance the need to update strategic thinking based on changing circumstances and priorities , with the need to provide sufficient continuity for effective and efficient execution .

the available time of senior leaders and their staffs might also be a consideration .

in the defense arena of national security , congress requires the submission of a national security strategy ( nss ) at least once per year , of a national defense strategy ( nds ) as part of the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) report every four years , and of a national military strategy ( nms ) or update every two years .

some observers have suggested that in today's fast - paced , globalized age , any written document is by definition too static — that agencies need more frequently updated internal guidance , and that both congress and the public can gain a more accurate understanding of current administration intent from public statements and congressional testimony .

others still see a role for formal strategic reviews and published strategic guidance , but question currently mandated frequency .

in particular , some have questioned the rationale for requiring a new nss every year , arguing that the broad contours of the global security environment do not change rapidly enough to warrant a complete overhaul of the nation's basic outlook that frequently .

responses to specific changes in the global environment might be captured instead , they suggest , in specific policies or approaches .

too - frequent nsss , they add , might introduce the risk of routinization .

a number of observers , following that line of thinking , have proposed that nsss be crafted and issued less frequently — for example , once every four years , rather than annually .

evaluating the advisability of possible revisions to statutory requirements regarding the frequency of strategy - crafting is complicated somewhat by the fact that , in practice , administrations do not always comply with mandated frequency .

for example , the george w. bush administration submitted only two nsss in two terms , while the obama administration , by six months into its second term , had submitted only one .

such non - compliance can make it difficult to gauge the value of strategy mandates as written .

balancing real - world change with the importance of consistency for effectiveness and efficiency , how frequently should each key strategic review be conducted , and each key piece of strategic guidance issued ? .

does it make sense , in principle , that the higher - level the strategy — for example , national - level strategy versus strategy for a single department — the less frequently it is likely to require substantial revision ? .

what , if any , would be the costs of taking too long to revise a strategy , or of revising a strategy too frequently ? .

at what point does the value of iterative strategy - generation run into the problem of diminishing returns ? .

does the failure of many administrations to comply with the statutorily mandated frequency for nss submissions suggest that administrations need to be reminded of this statutory provision ? .

does it suggest , instead , that the requirement is not realistic and / or necessary ? .

and in any case , what is the appropriate locus in congress for nss oversight responsibility ? .

in theory , it might make sense that national - level strategic guidance inform agency - level strategic guidance , which would in turn inform the strategies of agency components ; and that individual agency strategies under the broad national security umbrella constructively inform each other .

for example , the nss might inform the qdr and its nds , and they , in turn , might inform the nms and the chairman's risk assessment ( cra ) .

in turn , the qdr , the quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) , the quadrennial homeland security review ( qhsr ) , and the quadrennial intelligence community review ( qicr ) all might cross - reference each other , to ensure that there are no conceptual disconnects , and no major gaps or unnecessary overlaps , in implementing the nss .

statute explicitly requires some of this synchronization , and some non - statutorily - mandated strategic efforts explicitly note their relationships to other strategic reviews or guidance .

to make such synchronization possible , the timelines , formal or otherwise , for the conduct of reviews and the submission of reports , must line up appropriately .

in principle , a strategic review may inform another by taking place earlier , although not too much earlier ; and it could also do so while taking place concurrently if the two efforts are properly coordinated .

in the defense arena , current submission timelines are fairly well - suited for logical , sequential development of strategies .

the qdr report and its accompanying nds are due to congress at the beginning of an administration's second calendar year in office , by the date the president submits the budget for the next fiscal year .

the nss is due to congress on the same day .

in theory , the qdr report and defense strategy could draw on the previous year's nss , required "150 days" after an administration takes office , and on the concurrent development process for the second - year nss .

the nms , in turn , is required to be submitted to congress by february 15 of even - numbered years — that is , just several days after the submission of the nss , and either several days , or two years and several days , after the submission of the qdr report with its accompanying nds .

by these timelines , development of the nms could draw on the defense strategy from two or four years earlier , as well as on the concurrent nds / qdr process .

in practice , review and reporting timelines have been less coherent .

in the defense arena of national security , for example , the 2001 qdr report ( with its embedded nds ) was issued in september 2001 , before the george w. bush administration issued its first nss ( september 2002 ) from which the nds might naturally take guidance .

the nms followed , but not until 2004 , arguably a significant gap after the preceding nds ; and its publication almost immediately preceded the publication of the next nds ( march 2005 ) , which arguably trumped the 2004 nms .

the 2005 nds , in turn , preceded its "accompanying" qdr report ( february 2006 ) by almost a year , while that qdr report was published just ahead of a new nss ( march 2006 ) , which ought , arguably , to have informed the qdr process .

how important is it that national security - related strategic efforts at all levels reinforce each other ? .

what are the potential pitfalls of developing strategy at lower levels without higher - level strategic top cover ? .

what are the potential benefits , if any , of strategy - formulation unconstrained by parameters set by other strategies ? .

to what extent does current statute support synchronization ? .

to what extent if any might adjustments to statutory timelines help foster greater synchronization ? .

most observers consider that both prioritization and the assignment of roles and responsibilities are critical for the effective , efficient implementation of strategy .

attention to prioritization during a strategic review process can improve the rigor of that process , providing a clear , agreed framework for making follow - on programmatic and policy decisions .

prioritization of objectives and activities by leadership at one level can help leaders at the next subordinate level more appropriately shape their own strategies and focus their planning and budgeting .

and prioritization can also facilitate clearer communications with key audiences , including congress and international partners .

the assignment of roles and responsibilities , in turn , is typically necessary because many missions could be performed , in principle , by any of several different agencies or components .

at the national level , for example , a call to strengthen international partnerships could be met through military exercises led by dod , development assistance programs led by the u.s. agency for international development , or participation in multi - lateral organizations led by the department of state , among other options .

if systemic - level priorities are named , but roles and responsibilities are not assigned , subordinate agencies or components may assume that the systemic - level priorities apply to each of them equally and that they should each apply their own respective tool kits against those priorities .

clear assignment of roles and responsibilities could help agencies , or agency components , far more effectively plan and resource ; could help prevent unnecessary duplication of effort ; and could help ensure that there are no major gaps in responsibility for strategy implementation .

generally speaking , most recent strategic efforts — reviews and reports — have not prioritized the objectives or missions they prescribe , or assigned roles and responsibilities for implementing various facets of the strategy .

for example , the 2012 defense strategic guidance ( dsg ) named ten "priority missions" but did not prioritize among those missions , and did not assign responsibility for those missions to specific actors .

those strategic reviews and reports that have statutory mandates are , as a rule , not required by law either to prioritize or to assign roles and missions .

some observers trace the failure to include sufficiently specific guidance in strategy documents to the fact that explicit prioritization may not always be appropriate for unclassified discussions and publications .

some point to a tension between the need to provide detailed guidance to subordinates who will implement it , and the need to explain — and sell — a strategic vision to broader , potentially skeptical , public audiences .

those two imperatives may not be easily reconcilable in a single product .

frustration with the lack of prioritization and assignment of roles and responsibilities has prompted some to call for institutionalizing the use of national security planning guidance ( nspg ) — classified , internal guidance , at the national level , that includes both priorities and specific assignments .

such guidance could be one product of a strategic review process that could also generate an unclassified strategic guidance document — typical national security strategy — thus satisfying the requirements of two audiences , internal and external , in one broad effort .

such a process might be modeled loosely on dod processes , in which a strategic review , the qdr , informs the production of both unclassified strategic documents for public consumption , including the qdr report and its organic nds ; and internal classified guidance that does prioritize and assign responsibilities , such as the guidance for the employment of the force ( gef ) , which reportedly names specific overall and combatant command - based priorities ; and the defense planning guidance ( dpg ) , which reportedly assigns responsibilities , lead and supporting , to specific military services , agencies and components .

in its "beyond goldwater - nichols" project , the center for strategic and international studies called for institutionalizing the use of a national - level quadrennial national security review ( qnsr ) that would yield both nspg and unclassified national security strategy ; and the 2006 qdr echoed the call for the use of nspg .

congress took one step in this direction , in §1032 of the ndaa for fy2012 , by requiring the president to issue national security planning guidance — specifically including priorities and assigned roles — in the arena of counter - terrorism .

do current strategic efforts in the arena of national security sufficiently prioritize among national interests , objectives , and the approaches designed to achieve those objectives ? .

do such strategic efforts sufficiently assign roles and responsibilities for executing the strategy to subordinate agencies and components ? .

to what extent if any might additional statutory mandates to incorporate prioritization and / or the assignment of roles and responsibilities into strategic reviews and reports be likely to produce constructive changes ? .

what are the potential advantages and drawbacks , if any , of institutionalizing the use of national security planning guidance ? .

both in practice and in theory , the relationship between strategy - making and resourcing can be fraught .

experts and practitioners differ markedly regarding how the two exercises ought to inform each other .

some argue that good strategy should begin with resource - unconstrained consideration of the strategic context , u.s. national interests , u.s. objectives , and approaches designed to achieve those objectives , before considering the fiscal implications .

others argue that — particularly in tougher economic times — strategy is only germane if it takes into account current fiscal realities .

in theory that might be done in a number of ways , for example by predicating strategy on a single set of fiscal assumptions , or by testing draft strategy against several different fiscal scenarios .

as a rule , statutory mandates for strategic reviews and reports do not require the incorporation of fiscal constraints .

indeed , the mandate for the qdr — which is required to make recommendations that are not constrained by the president's budget request — expressly prohibits it .

some mandates — for example , those for the qhsr , the qdr , and the ndp's alternative force structure proposal — do require a cost estimate or budget plan , but those exercises are unconstrained in the sense that no parameters are specified for those plans or estimates .

in turn , most observers and practitioners agree that strategy is powerful only when it shapes decision - making , and in particular , when it is reflected in budget requests .

to that end , some observers have recommended the adoption of more "unified" approaches to national security budgeting that would link budgeting more closely with strategy .

what are the potential advantages and disadvantages of using fiscal constraints to shape the conduct of strategy reviews and the content of strategy reports ? .

what mechanisms might help ensure that conclusions of strategic reviews and the content of strategic guidance directly shape specific policy and resourcing decisions ? .

many observers suggest that strategic review processes can benefit greatly from a competition of ideas .

such competitions can take an internal form .

in one internal approach , a "red team" that enjoys full access to the formal review process regularly grades the homework of that formal process by challenging its assumptions and conclusions .

dod used a red team to support the conduct of its 2006 qdr .

in another internal approach , several groups are tasked simultaneously with the same assignment .

the best - known historical example may be president eisenhower's top secret "project solarium," carried out shortly after stalin's death in 1953 to reassess u.s. "containment" policy toward the soviet union .

the methodology included the formation of three teams of seasoned experts and practitioners , both military and civilian .

each team was assigned a strategy to elaborate and defend .

after working for six weeks at the national war college , the teams presented the strongest cases they could muster at a session with the president eisenhower , attended by the rest of the national security council , senior military leaders , and others .

a competition of ideas can also take an external form .

in this approach , one or more external reviews might be conducted in parallel with a formal process .

their results might be considered together with , and compared to , those of the formal process , by some outside adjudicator such as the president or congress .

part of the mandate for the national defense panel ( ndp ) , conducted in conjunction with the qdr , is "external" — to produce and cost out alternative force structures .

no such mandate exists for a "competition of ideas" mechanism to run in parallel with the crafting of national security strategy .

but the qdr independent panel ( qdrip ) , which paralleled the work of the 2010 qdr , recommended the creation , by the executive and legislative branches , of a standing independent strategic review panel of leading experts to review and assess the national security environment ; review and assess the current nss ; review and assess current national security missions and organization ; and make recommendations to inform the formal national security strategy process .

how important is it to the crafting of good strategy to build a competition of ideas into the process ? .

what are the respective advantages of internal and external versions of a competition of ideas ? .

how important is it effective , "honest broker" adjudication of a competition of ideas , to the effectiveness of that competition ? .

