in the course of executing their missions , all federal departments and agencies create federal records .

federal records are defined in the federal records act ( fra ) to include "all books , papers , maps , photographs , machine readable materials , or other documentary materials , regardless of physical form or characteristics … in connection with the transaction of public business. .

the fra requires federal departments and agencies to collect , retain , and preserve their records — thus providing congress , the executive branch , and the public with a history of public - policy execution and its results .

the fra , as amended , requires agencies to "make and preserve" records that document the "organization , functions , policies , decisions , procedures , operations , or other activities of the government. .

agencies are to use "standards , procedures , and techniques designed to improve the management of records , promote the maintenance and security of records deemed appropriate for preservation , and facilitate the segregation and disposal of records of temporary value. .

pursuant to the fra , agencies are to work with the national archives and records administration ( nara ) to create records schedules that permit agencies to dispose of records of temporary value properly and to preserve those with permanent value to the government and the public .

in august 2012 , nara and the office of management and budget ( omb ) jointly released a directive to federal departments and agencies .

among other requirements , the "managing government records directive" instructed each department and agency to designate a senior agency official ( sao ) "to oversee a review of their records management program. .

the memorandum addressed the management of federal records in all formats , but specifically acknowledged the challenges presented by the use of emerging technologies to create and maintain records .

congress may have an interest in overseeing whether agencies are appropriately capturing and maintaining all federal records .

the proliferation of electronic records produced using numerous digital technologies and platforms may make it costly , time consuming , and technically difficult for agencies to comply with the fra .

with the increase in the creation and use of electronic records , congress may have an interest in examining whether agencies are taking appropriate steps to ensure the authenticity and trustworthiness of the documents they create and preserve .

congress may seek to ensure that agencies are collecting and maintaining records in all formats using methods that will ensure they are accessible to the public in perpetuity .

broadly , the management of federal records in a digital environment may prompt a series of policy questions for congress , including the following: are agencies appropriately collecting and retaining records in compliance with federal law ? .

will digital and electronic records created today be accessible in the future ? .

what policies or actions might be needed to ensure that digital federal records are authentic , authoritative expressions of government deliberation or action ? .

what are the costs to the federal government if agencies are not appropriately preserving records ? .

this report provides background and information on the increasing volume of electronic records and the variety of platforms used to create them .

it then presents data on agencies' increasing use of electronic media to create federal records and examines the potential implications of increasing creation and use of electronic mediums , including the complications of mixed platforms , the difficulties of ensuring a record's trustworthiness , and understanding and preparing for the risks of using electronic platforms .

the report also details and analyzes actions by the administration of president barack obama to streamline and clarify agencies' recordkeeping responsibilities — with a focus on electronic records .

this report does not address all government records issues , such as the collection , preservation of , and access to presidential records .

this report also does not provide details about the collection and retention of federal records , generally .

related topics , such as the laws governing access to federal records and meetings , as well as background on federal information classification policies , are beyond the scope of this report , but are addressed in other congressional research service products .

the contemporary challenges government agencies face in creating and retaining records resemble those discussed and debated prior to the enactment of the fra in 1950 .

the act was prompted in part by the recommendations of the commission on the organization of the executive branch of the government .

the commission researched and provided recommendations on a wide variety of public policies and found that "revolutionary mechanization , specialization , and duplication in recordmaking and recordkeeping" had prompted records to "accumulate in admittedly fantastic quantities" that could be "maintained only at excessive costs. .

the fra addressed many of the concerns expressed by the commission and provided the administrator of the gsa the authority to "make provisions for the economical and efficient management of records of federal agencies. .

new and emerging technologies have continuously allowed federal agencies to create and accumulate more records , complicating and adding costs to record collection , retention , and preservation .

a single record can take many forms , such as a sheet of paper , several linear feet of paper , a map , a digital document , a vast database , or a vhs videocassette .

each type of record requires particular archival responsibilities and presents unique challenges to ensure its perpetual retrieval .

as noted above , agencies are required to collect , retain , and schedule for disposal or permanent retention all series of records regardless of format .

agencies may not destroy "or permanently transfer any record to nara unless it has been scheduled. .

the scheduling requirement provides nara with an estimate of the records series maintained by each federal agency .

with the increase in the creation and use of electronic records , and concern about the durability of those records , the 113 th congress may have an interest in overseeing whether agencies are appropriately capturing and maintaining their federal records .

additionally , congress may choose to revisit the laws that govern federal recordkeeping and disposal to ensure that they include federal records created on different platforms using diverse technologies .

finally , congress might examine whether agencies are taking appropriate steps to ensure the authenticity and trustworthiness of the electronic documents they create and preserve .

the new guidelines and requirements for agencies released by the obama administration may make oversight of the implementation of the fra easier for congress .

for example , congress will have a single point of contact for information on an agency's recordkeeping plans and records management processes .

each agency , however , may provide the designated senior agency official ( sao ) with different resources , different staffing levels , and different levels of authority and autonomy .

in certain cases , the sao may not have the resources to appropriately administer the agency's records management responsibilities .

some officials , for example , may not be aware of certain recordkeeping difficulties that exist within components of the agency .

moreover , the sao may not have access to all agency federal records , particularly those records with sensitive or classified information .

congress may choose to oversee whether saos are provided authority , resources , and access within their agencies to make effective changes to their records management processes — including the authority to require certain agency components to schedule records systems or the authority to impose particular records management training or responsibilities for employees .

congress may choose to enact into law the position of the sao , thereby ensuring that these positions will exist beyond a single administration .

on the other hand , congress may decide that creation of a senior records management official is not the most effective method of ensuring compliance with the fra .

for example , gao has found that agencies have seen mixed results with the creation of other agency officials , such as chief information officers .

congress may choose to continue its oversight of the implementation of the administration's guidance on federal records management .

congress , additionally , could choose to require all saos to meet to discuss best practices and share methods of working through records management difficulties .

congress could also require nara , or another agency , to maintain a website that provides best practices and lessons learned .

congress may also need to address the gap between the statutory definition of records and the practical use of digital content that amalgamates multiple technologies .

it does not appear that the fra addresses all potential complexities that emerge when agencies create digital content that provides information using multiple technologies at once .

for example , a june 2011 gao report found that 23 of 24 major federal agencies used facebook , twitter , and youtube .

social media platforms allow agencies to embed and combine content on agencies' websites .

the department of transportation , for instance , could embed a youtube video of a recent advisory committee meeting on its website .

the website could also include text that provides context to the meeting and identifies those in attendance .

agencies are not required by the fra to retain duplicates of federal records in most cases .

when considering the integration of various platforms , however , it is unclear whether placing a record in a new , unique context would constitute a discrete federal record .

a record that layers various electronic platforms may contain redundant information , but present that information in a different way for a specific purpose that adds value that could constitute consideration as a separate federal record .

current laws and regulations may not make clear to records management employees when combining or repurposing information constitutes a new record .

more importantly , it is unclear whether current recordkeeping software is capable of capturing and retaining all electronic content , including all website updates .

congress may choose to examine whether existing guidance addresses issues that may arise from integrating multiple platforms to create federal records .

if existing guidance is silent or unclear , congress may choose to consider legislative options that would address these concerns , or may choose to task nara with addressing them .

the increasing use of electronic records also requires agencies to ensure the trustworthiness and authenticity of the information they create .

agencies need to ensure that their records are appropriately protected from corruption or destruction .

additionally , agencies need to make certain that records accessed by the public are accurate and usable .

the networks that create and store federal electronic records must be protected from a variety of risks , including "an inability to document or validate transactions that occur via an agency web site. .

nara provides agencies with guidance on identifying and maintaining trustworthy websites .

according to nara , trustworthy records have the following characteristics: reliability: content is trusted as a full and accurate representation of ... transactions , activities , or facts ; authenticity: proven to be what it purports to be ; integrity: complete and unaltered ; and usability: can be located , retrieved , presented , and interpreted .

nara's guidance suggests that agencies "maintain the content , context , and sometimes the structure of" their websites to ensure their records are trustworthy .

congress may have an ongoing interest in ensuring that agencies are appropriately providing for the trustworthiness of their records .

congress may choose to hold hearings or pursue informal oversight mechanisms to determine how agencies are verifying that their e - government initiatives are protected and that publicly available electronic information is reliable , authentic , has integrity , and is usable .

congress may have interest in ensuring that agencies understand and prepare for the potential risks of creating and retaining on electronic records .

nara's guidance provides examples of potential risks associated with the use of electronic platforms .

among these risks are "an inability to document or validate transactions that occur via an agency web site," "an inability to reconstruct views of web content," and "financial losses due to compromising the citizens' or government's rights. .

nara's guidance states that each agency should conduct a risk assessment that addresses "the possible consequences of untrustworthy , lost , or unrecoverable records , including the legal risk and financial costs of losses , the likelihood that a damaging event will occur , and the costs of taking corrective actions. .

congress may choose to ensure that agencies conduct the risk assessments recommended by nara .

congress may also have an interest in receiving agencies' risk assessments to learn of the potential consequences of mismanaged , damaged , or otherwise lost records .

congress could choose to have nara collect these risk assessments and submit a summary to congress .

to the extent that congress believes that a lack of resources leads to poor records management , it could address the problem through appropriations .

according to nara , however , agencies are not required to report their recordkeeping costs .

it is not clear , therefore , what resources agencies currently use to administer various recordkeeping duties .

nor is it possible to determine whether these resources enable agencies to appropriately administer their records .

it is also not clear what it might cost to collect data on recordkeeping costs , nor would it be easy to determine what might constitute a recordkeeping cost ( eg , storage costs , training costs , staffing costs , oversight costs ) .

congress may choose to require nara to define what would constitute a recordkeeping cost .

congress could also choose to require the senior agency officials tasked with records management duties to report these recordkeeping costs to nara , which could then aggregate the data and provide congress and the public a summary document on agencies' recordkeeping costs and how they compare to one another .

such a summary document could inform agencies , nara , congress , and the public as to the resources currently spent on federal recordkeeping — and whether those resources are enough to appropriately comply with existing statutes , regulations , and policies .

on the other hand , congress may decide that such data collection and analysis would be too time consuming and costly and may not yield information on more effective records management .

an agency's recordkeeping costs , for instance , may not capture the efficient or creative ways that agencies may be complying with the fra .

congress could also consider requiring saos to report additional records management data points — such as total records schedules submitted to nara , total number of electronic records submitted to nara , number of records series that the agency has yet to schedule with nara , or creative and cost - saving methods of capturing and retaining electronic records .

a more thorough records management report could provide congress with more information about the status of the federal government's records management .

such data collection , however , would not be without cost .

