since 2009 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has proposed , promulgated , and is developing a number of regulations affecting the operation of the nation's steam electric power plants .

given the central role of electric power in the nation's economy , concerns have been raised about the cost and potential impact of many of these regulations .

industry and environmental advocacy groups have been keenly interested in both the substance of these rules and schedules for their implementation .

a particular issue has been whether the regulations , especially the cumulative impact of implementing multiple rules , will lead to retirement of a significant number of electric generating units , with negative effects on the reliability of the nation's power supply .

all together , these rules have been characterized by critics as a regulatory "train wreck" that would impose excessive costs and lead to plant retirements that could threaten the adequacy of electricity capacity across the country .

epa and many other analysts maintain that this will not be the case .

much of the criticism addressed to epa's actions has concerned clean air act rules , but clean water act ( cwa ) rules also have been part of the discussion , such as a 2014 rule to regulate cooling water intake structures at power plants and some industrial sources .

the most recent major rule affecting power plants that epa has promulgated concerns limits on discharges of wastewater , and it is the subject of this report .

it is the last of a suite of obama administration utility sector rules that also includes greenhouse gas standards for utilities and a rule for disposal of coal combustion residuals from power plants .

the cwa power plant rule is a complex regulation , involving limits on six pollutant wastestreams .

finalized in november 2015 , it updates standards that were issued more than 30 years ago , which did not reflect today's power plant technology .

the 1972 cwa established a comprehensive program to "restore and maintain the chemical , physical and biological integrity of the nation's waters. .

to implement the act , epa was directed to issue effluent limitation guidelines and standards , or technology - based regulations , for industrial dischargers .

the effluent limitation guidelines ( elg ) are to reflect pollutant reductions that can be achieved by categories or subcategories of industrial point sources using technologies that represent appropriate levels of control .

since 1972 , epa has promulgated effluent limitation guidelines for 57 industrial categories , including for the steam electric power industry .

for point sources that introduce pollutants directly into u.s. waters ( termed direct dischargers ) , limits on specific pollutants set in effluent guidelines are implemented through national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permits that are issued by epa or states .

for sources that discharge to publicly owned treatment works , or potws ( termed indirect dischargers ) , epa promulgates pretreatment standards that apply to those sources and are enforced by potws , and state and federal authorities .

the guidelines and standards apply to direct and indirect discharges of conventional pollutants ; toxic pollutants , including toxic metals and toxic organic pollutants ; and non - conventional pollutants , which are all other pollutants that are not categorized as conventional or toxic ( eg , ammonia - n , phosphorus , and total dissolved solids ) .

the cwa established several different kinds of effluent limitations , four for new and existing direct dischargers and two for new and existing indirect dischargers .

effluent limitations are based on performance of specific technologies , but regulations do not require use of a specific control technology .

in establishing effluent limitations , epa considers the cost and / or economic achievability of the controls .

the economic test differs based on the level of control specified in the elg .

best practicable control technology currently available ( bpt ) — bpt limitations generally are based on the average of the best existing performance of plants within the industry or subcategory .

in specifying bpt , epa considers the total cost of applying the control technology in relation to the effluent reduction benefits , as well as the age of the equipment and facilities , processes employed , and other factors .

bpt limitations can cover conventional , toxic , and non - conventional pollutant discharges .

best available technology economically achievable ( bat ) — bat limitations generally represent the best existing performance in the industrial category or subcategory .

bat is the principal national means of controlling toxic and nonconventional pollutant discharges .

factors considered in assessing bat include the cost of achieving bat effluent reductions , processes employed , and other factors .

the epa administrator has considerable discretion in assigning the weight accorded to these factors .

bat limitations may be based on effluent reductions attainable through changes in a facility's processes and operations .

best conventional pollutant control technology ( bct ) — bct is not an additional limitation , but it replaces bat for the control of conventional pollutant discharges from existing industrial sources .

the statute specifies factors to be assessed in determining bct , including a two - part "cost reasonableness" test .

new source performance standards ( nsps ) — nsps are based on the best available demonstrated control technology ( badct ) and represent the most stringent control attainable through the application of technology .

new plants have the opportunity to install the best and most efficient production processes and wastewater treatment technologies .

epa is directed to take into consideration the cost of achieving the effluent reduction and any non - water quality environmental impacts and energy requirements .

pretreatment standards for existing sources ( pses ) — pses are designed to control the discharge of pollutants that pass through , interfere with , or are otherwise incompatible with the operation of a potw .

pses standards are analogous to bat for direct dischargers .

pretreatment standards for new sources ( psns ) — like pses , psns are designed to control the discharge of pollutants that pass through , interfere with , or are otherwise incompatible with the operation of a potw .

epa considers the same factors in promulgating psns that it does in promulgating nsps .

the requirements of the statute embody the concept that , over time , industrial sources will achieve greater pollutant removal by employing progressively more stringent technologies .

thus , the 1972 law required sources to achieve effluent limitations based on bpt by july 1 , 1977 , and effluent limitations based on bat by july 1 , 1983 ( in 1987 congress modified the bat compliance date to march 31 , 1989 ) .

new sources are expected to comply with applicable effluent limitations when they commence operation .

requirements of elgs apply to direct discharges through incorporation into npdes permits issued by epa or authorized states under cwa section 402 and to indirect discharges through local pretreatment programs under cwa section 307 .

epa initially promulgated effluent limitation guidelines for the steam electric industry in 1974 and issued revised standards in 1982 .

the 1982 rules apply to about 1,100 nuclear - and fossil - fueled steam electric power plants nationwide , 495 of which are coal - fired .

under cwa section 301 ( d ) , epa has a duty to review existing effluent limitation guidelines at least every five years and , if appropriate , revise them .

epa had been studying the elg for the steam electric power generating category since the mid - 1990s and on several occasions indicated that a preliminary study of discharges from this category was necessary .

during the 2005 review of the existing effluent guidelines for all categories , epa identified the rules governing the steam electric power point source category for possible revision , based in part on data showing that the industry ranked high in discharges of toxic and nonconventional pollutants .

power plant discharges account for about 30% of all toxic pollutants discharged into u.s. surface waters by all industrial categories that are regulated under the cwa .

broadly speaking , two factors have altered existing wastestreams or created new wastestreams at many power plants since promulgation of the 1982 power plant elg .

the first is the development of new technologies for generating electric power , such as coal gasification .

the second , a result of federal and state requirements , is the widespread implementation of air pollution controls to reduce emissions of hazardous air pollutants and acid gases ( eg , flue gas desulfurization [fgd] , selective catalytic reduction [scr] , and flue gas mercury controls [fgmc] ) .

in particular , the use of wet fgd systems ( the kind that generate liquid discharges ) to control sulfur dioxide air emissions has increased significantly since 1982 .

consequently , each year the pollutant discharges from this industry are increasing in volume , with additional chemical constituents .

they account for 50% - 60% of all toxic pollutants discharged into surface waters by all industrial categories currently regulated under the cwa , according to epa .

the main pollutants of concern for these discharges include metals ( mercury , arsenic , selenium ) , nitrogen , and total dissolved solids ( tds ) .

epa initiated a study , completed in 2009 , which found that the 1982 regulations did not adequately address the pollutants being discharged and have not kept pace with changes that have occurred in the electric power industry over the last three - plus decades , specifically the increase of fgd systems , or scrubbers , at coal - fired power plants to control air pollution .

according to epa , as of 2008 , 30% of coal - fired power plants were using fgd systems to control sulfur dioxide emissions from the flue gas generated in the plants' boilers and prevent buildup of certain corrosive constituents such as chlorides , and by 2025 , nearly 80% of coal - fired generating capacity is expected to employ fgd systems .

while scrubbers dramatically reduce emissions of harmful pollutants into the air , some create a significant liquid waste stream ( especially wet scrubbers ) .

in addition , discharges from coal combustion residual ( ccr ) surface impoundments at steam electric power plants have a potential to degrade water quality .

epa believes that many current cwa permits for power plants do not fully address potential water quality impacts of these discharges through appropriate pollutant limits and monitoring and reporting requirements .

in addition , epa identified several wastestreams that are relatively new to the industry ( eg , carbon capture wastewater ) and others for which there is little characterization data ( eg , gasification wastewater ) .

in 2009 , environmental groups sued epa to compel the agency to commit to a schedule for issuing revised guidelines for this industry .

pursuant to a 2010 consent decree that it entered into with these litigants , epa agreed to propose the revised power plant elg by july 23 , 2012 , and to finalize the rule by january 31 , 2014 .

these dates were subsequently modified and required epa to propose revised effluent limitations by april 2013 , and publish a final rule 13 months later .

pursuant to that agreement , epa proposed revised standards on april 19 , 2013 .

public comments on the proposal were accepted until september 20 , 2013 .

in april 2014 , epa and the environmental litigants agreed to give the agency an additional 16 months — until september 30 , 2015 — to finalize the effluent guidelines for the power plant sector .

epa announced the final rule on september 30 , 2015 ; it was published in the federal register on november 3 , 2015 , and became effective on january 4 , 2016 .

steam electric power plants are highly technical and complex industrial operations .

so , too , the revised elg is very technical and complex .

industry's major concern with the 2013 proposed rule was that epa would set overly stringent standards that will be an economic burden on generators and may not be achievable .

following release of the final rule , an industry spokesman noted that the rule will force technological and operational changes at existing facilities that have the potential to create compliance challenges and increase customer costs .

the technology bases of the rule are available , companies generally agree , but there is concern that the standards may require extensive retrofitting that is costly and could reduce generating plant effectiveness , and some may be infeasible ( eg , may not be physically possible within the plant's footprint ) .

many in industry are concerned that the cwa rule imposes new requirements and compliance timelines at the same time that power plants are implementing other costly and burdensome epa rules .

the agency attempted to address the issue of timing and coordination with other rules both through the timing of the final elg and deadlines in the rcra coal ash rule , discussed above .

one issue concerns impacts of the rule on small entities , including small businesses and small governmental jurisdictions .

the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) requires agencies to prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis of most rules .

the rfa , as amended by the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act ( sbrefa ) , requires epa to convene a small business advocacy review panel for most rules , unless the agency can certify that a rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities .

epa did analyze impacts of the proposed elg on small entities .

epa projects that 22 small entities ( small businesses , small organizations , and small governmental jurisdictions ) will incur compliance costs as a result of the final rule .

it estimates that six small entities owning steam electric power plants ( one cooperative , one nonutility , and four municipalities ) will incur compliance costs exceeding 1% of revenue as a result of the final rule , and one additional municipality will incur costs exceeding 3% of revenue .

further , potential impacts of the rule on small entities and municipalities are reduced by establishing requirements for small power plants ( 50 mw or less ) equal to the previous bpt limits .

the agency believes that these impacts are small and support a finding of no significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities .

nevertheless , a number of stakeholders are concerned that epa underestimated costs of portions of the rule ( for example , by overestimating the bottom ash removal efficiencies of power plants ) .

some were critical that epa did not convene a sbrefa panel , with small business representatives participating , to evaluate the impact prior to the proposed rulemaking .

spokesmen for the national rural electric cooperative association ( nreca ) argue that epa has underestimated compliance costs of the final rule .

nreca believes that the elg , together with other recent epa rules , will disproportionately affect the small - and medium - sized power plants that its members operate .

environmental advocates view the elg differently from industry and reportedly are generally satisfied with the final rule , but expressed concerns that parts of the rule were not stringent enough .

many had urged that epa promulgate standards requiring the most environmentally protective technologies ( i.e. , dry handling of fly ash and bottom ash by all plants , and chemical precipitation plus biological treatment or evaporation of fgd scrubber waste by all plants ) .

they opposed regulatory options in the proposed rule would have set bat equal to current bpt standards for some wastestreams and thus allow continued use of surface impoundments for bottom ash and combustion residual leachate , because impoundments can be a significant source of contamination of surface and ground water .

thus , they endorsed provisions of the final rule that will require dry handling of fly ash and bottom ash from power plants .

environmental advocates indicated concern with some provisions of the final rule , however , such as allowing compliance deadlines as late as december 31 , 2023 , under the rule's incentive program ( rather than in three years ) and the lack of strict limits on legacy wastestreams , discussed previously .

some advocates dispute epa's view that it is not possible to establish bat limits for power plant wastestreams that are generated before standards under the new rule are required and believe that the rule should have addressed waste that leaks from old , inactive coal ash ponds .

as noted in the introduction to this report , epa rules affecting steam electric power plants have been scrutinized and challenged based on their stringency , feasibility , and projected compliance costs .

some argue that these rules may change the economics of power production , the fuel profile of the electricity market , and electricity rates .

congressional interest has been evident in legislation that has been introduced to alter the direction and substance of some of epa's regulatory actions and initiatives .

to this point , discussion of the power plant elg has centered on the administrative proceedings at epa and has not drawn significant attention of lawmakers .

following promulgation of the elg , attention has shifted to the federal courts .

petitions for review of the elg were filed in several federal courts of appeals and have been consolidated in the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit ( southwestern elec .

power co. v. epa , 5 th cir. , 15-60821 , filed november 20 , 2015 ) .

the consolidated cases include challenges filed by individual electric utility companies and a group of such companies , as well as environmental advocacy groups .

the deadline for new challenges to the elg is march 16 , 2016 , under a 120-day time limit that started two weeks after the rule's publication in the federal register .

this appendix provides additional detail on the six wastestreams from steam electric power plants that are regulated in the revised elg .

also see the summary information in table 1 .

fgd wastewater fgd systems remove sulfur dioxide from the flue gas so that it is not emitted into the air .

there are approximately 401 fgd systems either currently operating or planned in the united states .

approximately 17% are dry systems that do not generate wastewater and are not subject to the fgd wastewater requirements of the elg , while the remaining 83% are wet fgd systems that generate a slurry and are subject to fgd requirements of the rule .

dry fgd systems typically remove 80% to 90% of the sulfur dioxide , which is less than a wet fgd system which in some cases can remove up to 99% .

in wet fgd systems , the flue gas stream comes in contact with a liquid stream containing a sorbent , which is used to effect the transfer of pollutants from the flue gas to the liquid stream .

of the 150 plants with wet fgd systems , 100 discharge fgd wastewater after treatment using one or more of several technologies alone or in combination , including surface impoundments , chemical precipitation systems , biological treatment , vapor - compression evaporation systems , and constructed wetlands .

epa estimates that the steam electric industry discharges 16.1 billion gallons of fgd wastewater per year , with an average total industry daily discharge of 0.45 million gallons per day ( mgd ) per plant .

wastewaters generated by wet fgd systems generally contain significant levels of metals and other pollutants of concern .

epa found that treatment technologies are available to treat these pollutants in fgd wastewater ; however , most plants use only surface impoundments that are designed primarily to remove suspended solids from fgd wastewater via settling .

historically , power plants relied on surface impoundments to treat fgd wastewater because npdes permits generally focused on controlling suspended solids for this wastestream .

metals in fgd wastewater are present both in particulate form , which can be substantially removed by settling ( eg , arsenic ) , and in soluble ( i.e. , dissolved ) form ( metals such as selenium , boron , and magnesium ) that is not effectively and reliably removed by surface impoundments .

more advanced technologies are available that are effective at removing both soluble and dissolved forms of metals , as well as nitrogen and total dissolved solids ( tds ) .

the technology basis for the final rule is chemical precipitation / coprecipitation used in combination with anoxic / anaerobic biological treatment to optimize removal of selenium .

epa determined that 45% of all steam electric power plants with wet scrubbers have equipment or processes in place able to meet the final bat / pses effluent limitations and standards in the 2015 rule .

many of these plants use fgd wastewater management approaches that eliminate the discharge of fgd wastewater .

epa rejected technology based on chemical precipitation alone for fgd wastewater because , while chemical treatment systems are capable of achieving removals of various metals , the technology is not effective at removing selenium , nitrogen compounds , and certain metals that contribute to high concentrations of tds in fgd wastewater .

fly ash transport water fly ash is the combustion residual of fine ash particles entrained in flue gases .

depending on the boiler design , as much as 70% to 80% of the ash from a pulverized coal furnace consists of fly ash .

many plants transport fly ash from the boiler using water as the motive force , known as sluicing , and fly ash transport water is one of the largest wastewater sources generated at coal - fired power plants .

the steam electric power industry generates 209 billion gallons of fly ash transport water annually , with the average plant generating 4.27 mgd .

it is typically treated in large surface impoundment systems .

untreated fly ash transport waters contain significant concentrations of metals and total suspended solids ( tss ) .

because current nsps regulations prohibit the discharge of pollutants in fly ash transport water , all plants built since 1982 , as well as many existing generating units that have converted , already have dry fly ash handling systems that use air to transport fly ash to storage silos .

because dry fly ash handling practices do not generate fly ash transport water , converting to a dry system eliminates the discharge of fly ash transport water and the pollutants contained therein .

epa estimates that over 80% of existing coal - and petroleum coke - fired generating units use dry ash fly handling systems that utilize mechanical , pressure , or other technologies .

fly ash transport water is one of the largest volume flows from coal - fired power plants .

studies have found that fly ash transport waters generated from wet systems at coal - fired power plants contain significant concentrations of metals , including arsenic , selenium , and mercury .

epa identified generating units at 145 plants that transport ( i.e. , sluice ) fly ash with water to a surface impoundment to remove particulates from the wastewater by means of gravity .

thus , steam electric units generating wet fly ash transport water tend to be older units ( eg , more than 30 years old ) .

most of these plants are located east of the mississippi river .

the 2015 revised rule establishes zero discharge effluent limitations and standards for discharges of pollutants in fly ash transport water , based on the use of dry fly ash handling technologies .

specifically , the technology basis for bat is a dry vacuum system that employs a mechanical exhauster to pneumatically convey the fly ash from hoppers directly to a silo .

as with fgd wastewater , surface impoundments are not effective at removing soluble forms of metals and nutrients .

bottom ash transport water bottom ash , sometimes referred to as "boiler slag," is the combustion residual of heavier ash particles collected at the bottom of a boiler .

since 70% - 80% of the ash from a pulverized coal furnace consists of fly ash , the remaining 20% - 30% is bottom ash .

like fly ash , bottom ash can be transported from the boiler using water and when it is , it is typically directed to an on - site ash impoundment for treatment .

epa found that bottom ash transport waters generated from wet systems at coal - fired power plants contain significant concentrations of the same metals found in fly ash transport water .

bottom ash transport water is an intermittent stream from steam electric units , with flow rates that typically are not as large as fly ash transport water flow rates , but it is still one of the larger volume flows .

moreover , significantly more plants generate bottom ash transport water than generate fly ash transport water .

epa identified 875 egus ( 348 plants ) — 67% of plants — that wet sluice ( transport ) at least a portion of their bottom ash to a surface impoundment or a dewatering bin for solids removal .

epa estimates that the steam electric industry generates a total of 297 billion gallons of bottom ash transport water annually , with the average plant generating 2.5 mgd .

amounts released to surface waters from impoundment overflow or discharge totaled 157 billion gallons in 2009 .

according to epa , many coal and oil - fired power plants design their bottom ash handling systems either to not use water to transport bottom ash away from the boiler or manage the transport water in a manner that eliminates or reduces the need to discharge bottom ash transport water to surface waters .

the 2015 revised rule requires zero discharge , using dry handling or closed - loop systems as the bat technology basis for control of pollutants .

about 20% of coal - and petroleum coke - fired units that generate bottom ash currently operate systems that eliminate the use of transport water ; more than 80% of coal - fired generating units built in the last 20 years have installed dry bottom ash handling systems .

technologies to achieve zero discharge include mechanical drag systems , remote mechanical drag systems , and impoundment - based systems that are managed to eliminate all discharge of bottom ash transport water and associated pollutants .

epa found that more than half of the entities that would be subject to bat requirements for bottom ash transport water are already employing zero discharge technologies or are planning to do so in the near future .

combustion residual leachate from surface impoundments and landfills combustion residuals include fly ash , bottom ash , and fgd solids , which are generally collected by or generated from air pollution control technologies .

these residuals may be stored at the plant in on - site landfills or surface impoundments ( ponds ) .

few steam electric power plants currently employ technologies other than surface impoundments for this waste .

combustion residual leachate is leachate from landfills or surface impoundments that contains combustion residuals .

water that comes in contact with the combustion residuals stored in a landfill or impoundment will be contaminated by metals and other contaminants present in the combustion residuals .

the two sources of landfill combustion residual leachate are precipitation that percolates through the waste deposited in the landfill or impoundment and the liquids produced from the combustion residual placed in the landfill or impoundment .

when a landfill or impoundment has reached its capacity , it will typically be closed to protect against environmental release of pollutants in the waste .

however , these landfills or impoundments may continue to generate leachate , which is the liquid that drains or leaches from a landfill or surface impoundment .

epa estimated in 2009 that 150 to 200 coal - fired and petroleum coke - fired steam electric plants generated on average 0.57 mgd per plant of combustion residual leachate and that 100 to 110 plants discharged 80,000 to 90,000 gallons per day of combustion leachate residual .

in addition to leachate , stormwater that enters the impoundment or contacts and flows over the landfilled combustion residual would be contaminated with pollutants , such as heavy metals .

power plants manage these wastewaters in various ways .

stormwater collection systems typically consist of one or more small impoundments .

according to epa , approximately 160 to 190 coal - and petroleum - fired steam electric power plants collect combustion residual leachate from either an impoundment and / or landfill .

the majority ( 52% ) of landfills and some impoundments ( 13% ) have leachate collection systems , which may be combined with stormwater or sent to a separate impoundment .

according to epa , 63% of combustion residual landfills and 51% of combustion residual impoundments are lined .

unlined impoundments and landfills do not collect leachate that migrates away from the impoundment or landfill , which can potentially cause groundwater and / or drinking water contamination .

recently installed landfills and impoundments are more likely to be lined and to collect leachate .

once collected , the landfill or impoundment leachate can be recycled back to the landfill or impoundment or within the plant , or it is discharged .

some plants discharge the effluent from leachate impoundments , while others send the leachate impoundment effluent to another impoundment that handles ash transport water or other systems .

surface impoundments are the most common type of system used to treat combustion residual leachate from landfills and impoundments .

constructed wetlands are the next most commonly used treatment system .

physical / chemical and chemical precipitation technologies also have been demonstrated capable of treating pollutants in combustion residual leachate .

in the 2015 revised rule , epa established effluent limitations and standards for existing sources equal to current bpt effluent limitations , based on technology of gravity settling in surface impoundments to remove suspended solids .

for new sources , the technology basis of the 2015 rule is chemical precipitation / coprecipitation .

such systems are capable of achieving low effluent concentrations of various metals and are effective at removing many of the pollutants of concern present in leachate discharges to surface waters , and , like fgd wastewater , combustion residual leachate is similarly amenable to chemical precipitation treatment .

however , as is the case with fgd wastewater , this technology is not effective at removing selenium , boron , and other parameters that contribute to tds ( eg , magnesium , sodium ) .

flue gas mercury control ( fgmc ) system wastewater in response to recent clean air act rules and other state regulations requiring limits on air emissions of mercury and other air toxics , power plants have been installing systems to improve removal of mercury from flue gas emissions .

thus , these systems are relatively new to the steam electric industry .

fgmc systems remove mercury from the flue gas , so that it is not emitted into the air .

in 2009 , there were approximately 120 operating fgmc systems , with an additional 40 planned for installation by 2020 .

approximately 90% of the currently operating fgmc systems are dry systems that add oxidizers to the coal prior to combustion and move the oxidized mercury in the wet fgd system .

using oxidizers does not generate a new wastestream , but the mercury concentration in fgd wastewater may be increased as a result , because oxidized mercury is more easily removed by the fgd system .

about 6% of the currently operating systems involve injection of activated carbon into the flue gas to adsorb the mercury , which can generate a new wastestream at a plant that is likely sent to a surface impoundment .

according to epa , coal - fired power plants can minimize or eliminate the discharge of fgmc particulate handling transport water using the same technologies that are available for fly ash , such as wet or dry vacuum pneumatic systems , pressure systems , or combined vacuum / pressure systems .

epa identified 6 plants that manage their fgmc waste with systems that use water to transport the waste to surface impoundments .

under the final rule , the technology basis for existing and new sources would be zero discharge using dry handling technologies to store and dispose of fly ash without utilizing transport water .

epa found that this technology is available and well - demonstrated in the industry , since nearly all plants with fgmc systems use dry handling systems .

effluent limits based on dry handling would completely eliminate the discharge of pollutants in fgmc wastewater .

epa did not select bat limitations for fgmc wastewater based on surface impoundments , because impoundments , which can remove particulate forms of metals and other pollutants , are not capable of removing dissolved metals and nitrates .

gasification wastewater integrated gasification combined cycle ( igcc ) plants use coal or petroleum coke and subject it to high temperature and pressure to produce a synthetic gas , which is used as the fuel for combined cycle generating plants .

after the synthetic gas is produced and prior to combustion , it undergoes cleaning to remove chlorides and other contaminants .

this step can generate wastewater and condensate that require treatment prior to reuse or discharge .

two technologies in use to treat gasification wastewaters are vapor - compression evaporation systems and cyanide destruction systems .

the technology basis for the effluent limitations in the final rule is vapor - compression evaporation , which is currently used by the three operating igcc plants in the united states .

surface impoundments were not selected as the basis for bat limitations , because impoundments are not effective at removing the pollutants of concern in gasification wastewater , particularly dissolved solids .

