spaceflight fascinates and inspires many americans , but in a time of constrained federal budgets , it must compete with a multitude of other national priorities .

as the 114 th congress conducts oversight and considers authorization and appropriations legislation for the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , an overarching question will be how nasa should move forward within budget constraints .

this report discusses a number of issues that arise within the framework of that question .

among them are the following: can commercial services transport u.s. astronauts into earth orbit , including to the international space station , cost - effectively and safely ? .

for human spaceflight beyond earth orbit , will the spacecraft now in development be ready on schedule , and how should they be used when operational ? .

how will the needs of the human spaceflight program affect resources for nasa's science missions , aeronautics research , and education programs ? .

what is the appropriate level of nasa support for earth science , planetary science , and other scientific fields ? .

in general , is nasa being asked to do more than it can afford ? .

major nasa policy developments since the start of the current administration include: in october 2009 , the influential augustine report on the future of u.s. human spaceflight ; early in 2010 , the obama administration's announcement of a plan to cancel the bush administration's vision for space exploration and rely on commercial services for crew access to earth orbit ; later in 2010 , congress's passage of the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) , mandating the development of new spacecraft for human exploration beyond earth orbit ; the final flight of the space shuttle in july 2011 ; and in fy2011 , fy2012 , and fy2013 , annual reductions in nasa's budget as a result of government - wide fiscal constraints .

this report begins with some context: a brief survey of nasa's organization and programs , a summary of recent nasa authorization legislation , and an overview of nasa's budget .

subsequent sections address policy topics in each major nasa mission area .

nasa was created by the national aeronautics and space act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-568 ) to conduct civilian space and aeronautics activities .

its fy2015 budget is $18.010 billion .

nasa employs approximately 17,700 civil servants ( full - time equivalents ) .

it is led by administrator charles f. bolden , jr. nasa has four mission directorates .

the human exploration and operations mission directorate is responsible for human spaceflight activities , including the international space station and development efforts for future crewed spacecraft .

the science mission directorate manages robotic science missions , such as the hubble space telescope , the mars rover curiosity , and satellites for earth science research .

the space technology mission directorate develops new technologies , such as advanced propulsion and laser communications , for use in future space missions .

the aeronautics research mission directorate conducts research and development on aircraft and aviation systems .

in addition to the mission directorates , the office of education manages formal and informal education programs for school children , college and university students , and the general public .

most of the activities that make up these programs are managed and conducted by a system of field centers .

the nine nasa field centers are ames research center at moffett field , ca ; armstrong flight research center in edwards , ca ; glenn research center in cleveland , oh ; goddard space flight center in greenbelt , md ; johnson space center in houston , tx ; kennedy space center in cape canaveral , fl ; langley research center in hampton , va ; marshall space flight center in huntsville , al ; and stennis space center near slidell , ms .

the jet propulsion laboratory in pasadena , ca , which is sometimes considered a tenth field center , is operated for nasa by the california institute of technology .

goddard space flight center manages the goddard institute for space studies in new york , ny ; the independent validation and verification facility in fairmont , wv ; and the wallops flight facility in wallops island , va. marshall space flight center manages the michoud assembly facility in new orleans , la .

the nasa shared services center is on the grounds of stennis space center .

for most of the three decades after nasa's establishment in 1958 , congress passed a nasa authorization act nearly every year .

starting in the 1990s , these acts became less frequent .

in the past decade , congress has enacted three nasa authorization acts: the national aeronautics and space administration authorization acts of 2005 ( p.l .

109-155 ) , 2008 ( p.l .

110-422 ) , and 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) .

the 2010 act set a new direction for nasa's human spaceflight programs .

it confirmed the already planned termination of the space shuttle program , which had provided access to space for u.s. astronauts since 1981 .

in place of the space shuttle , the act established two new programs for human spaceflight .

first , for access to low earth orbit , including the international space station ( iss ) , it confirmed nasa's plans to develop a commercial space transportation capability for both cargo and astronauts .

second , for human exploration beyond earth orbit , the act mandated the development of a crew capsule , to be known as the multipurpose crew vehicle ( mpcv ) , and a heavy - lift rocket to launch the capsule , to be known as the space launch system ( sls ) .

the act directed that the mpcv and sls should serve as backup systems for cargo and crew access to the iss , in the absence of a successful commercial capability .

it also supported "full and complete utilization" of the iss through at least 2020 and gave direction to nasa regarding iss utilization and management .

in making these changes , the 2010 act assented to the obama administration's cancellation of the constellation program .

the purpose of constellation had been to implement the vision for space exploration , a policy announced by president bush in january 2004 as a new direction for nasa following the february 2003 columbia space shuttle disaster .

under the vision , nasa was to focus its efforts on returning humans to the moon by 2020 and eventually sending humans to mars and "worlds beyond. .

the main elements of the vision were as follows: return the space shuttle to flight status following the columbia disaster , but then retire the space shuttle in 2010 ( later changed to 2011 ) .

after the retirement of the space shuttle , use russian soyuz spacecraft for human access to space while developing a replacement vehicle .

complete construction of the iss in accord with existing international commitments , but then terminate u.s. use of the iss at the end of 2015 .

under the constellation program , develop new systems for human space exploration: the ares i rocket to launch astronauts into low earth orbit ; the orion crew capsule , to be launched atop ares i , to carry astronauts into orbit and beyond ; the ares v heavy - lift rocket to send astronauts and equipment to the moon ; the altair lunar lander ; and various lunar surface systems .

although congress endorsed the broad goals of the vision in the 2005 and 2008 nasa authorization acts , concerns grew about its cost and schedule .

in 2009 , nasa and the office of science and technology policy chartered a committee chaired by norman r. augustine to reexamine nasa's human spaceflight goals .

the report of the augustine committee found that developing ares i , orion , and the other constellation systems was likely to take longer than nasa anticipated ; without substantial increases in nasa funding , human exploration could not continue "in any meaningful way" ; not extending u.s. use of the iss past 2015 would "significantly impair u.s. ability to develop and lead future international spaceflight partnerships" ; and commercial services to launch crews into earth orbit were "within reach. .

the report also examined alternatives to the spacecraft being developed under constellation and considered several alternatives to the moon as the first destination for future human exploration beyond earth orbit .

in february 2010 , the obama administration's budget for fy2011 proposed a number of changes for nasa , some of them based on the augustine report .

the proposals were controversial in congress and led to an extensive debate about whether to retain constellation and the vision or , if not , what alternative approach to take .

the 2010 nasa authorization act was the result of this debate , but some advocates of other approaches remained unsatisfied .

in addition to human spaceflight , the 2010 act addressed nasa's programs in science , aeronautics , space technology , and education , as well as cross - cutting institutional and management issues .

it also authorized nasa appropriations for fy2011 through fy2013 .

because the provisions authorizing appropriations did not extend past fy2013 , and in order to address other policy concerns , the 113 th congress considered new authorization legislation .

in july 2013 , the house committee on science , space , and technology ordered reported the nasa authorization act of 2013 ( h.r .

2687 ) by a vote of 22 to 17 .

the ranking member of the subcommittee on space introduced an alternative bill with the same title ( h.r .

2616 ) .

these bills were effectively superseded by a bipartisan compromise bill , the nasa authorization act of 2014 ( h.r .

4412 ) , which was passed by the house in june 2014 .

in the senate , in july 2013 , the committee on commerce , science , and transportation ordered reported another nasa authorization act of 2013 ( s. 1317 ) by a vote of 13 to 12 .

an amended version of s. 1317 was reported on december 10 , 2014 , but did not receive floor action before the 113 th congress adjourned .

none of these bills was ultimately enacted .

the 114 th congress is widely expected to make a renewed effort to pass nasa authorization legislation .

funding for nasa is provided in the annual commerce - justice - science appropriations act .

for fy2015 , this was division b of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , enacted in december 2014 , which provided $18.010 billion for nasa .

for further information about fy2015 appropriations legislation , see crs report r43509 , commerce , justice , science , and related agencies: fy2015 appropriations .

congressional budget justifications provide detailed information about the administration's annual budget proposals for nasa and how the requested funding would be used .

the administration's fy2015 budget , released in march 2014 , requested a total of $17.461 billion for nasa , plus an additional $886 million as part of the proposed opportunity , growth , and security initiative ( ogsi ) , which was not considered part of the base budget request .

table 1 summarizes recent nasa funding .

more detailed figures for particular programs are provided later in this report .

for additional information , including historical data by program , see crs report r43419 , nasa appropriations and authorizations: a fact sheet .

in arguing for additional nasa funding , advocates often compare current funding levels with historical trends .

figure 1 shows nasa funding in current dollars and inflation - adjusted fy2015 dollars from the agency's establishment in 1958 to the present .

the large peak in the 1960s is the apollo program .

the narrow peak in fy1987 is the construction of a replacement space shuttle after the challenger disaster in january 1986 .

in inflation - adjusted terms , nasa funding was fairly steady for most of the past 20 years , but dropped in fy2013 to a level below any other year since fy1988 .

another historical trend often cited by nasa advocates is the ratio of nasa funding to u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

this is shown in figure 2 .

the apollo and post - challenger peaks are again evident .

in these terms , the past 20 years have been a steady decline , except for a brief plateau in the early 2000s , an uptick in fy2009 , and a smaller uptick in fy2014 .

as a share of gdp , the fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2015 appropriations are lower than any other year since fy1960 .

while advocates of more funding for nasa generally consider these trends persuasive , others may not .

one counterargument is that federal funding should be allocated based on the merit and importance of current programs , without regard to the funding those programs have received in the past .

another is that federal programs in general should represent a lower share of gdp , in order to address the federal deficit and debt or to reduce the tax burden on the economy .

analysts also often compare actual appropriations for nasa with the amounts authorized in nasa authorization acts , the amounts requested by current and former administrations , the amounts projected for future years by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and the "notional" amounts given for future years in nasa's congressional budget justifications .

as shown in figure 3 , actual appropriations rarely match the amounts authorized and may not even trend in the same direction .

the authorized increase from fy2007 to fy2009 corresponded to an actual increase , but the authorized increase from fy2011 to fy2013 corresponded to an actual decrease .

a frequent concern is that nasa is being asked to do more than it can afford .

this concern is not new .

for example , when the bush administration announced the vision for space exploration in 2004 , it proposed little new funding to implement it .

a widely discussed "sand chart" showed modest funding increases in fy2005 and fy2006 , but otherwise projected a nasa budget out to fy2020 that increased only at about the rate of inflation .

because of the vision's strong emphasis on human spaceflight , supporters of other nasa programs , especially science and aeronautics , feared that the vision's funding needs would put the rest of the agency under great budget pressure .

in early 2006 , a former nasa associate administrator for space science testified: two years ago , the president released his vision for space exploration and provided a budget that would support it .

in the intervening two years , the administration has reduced this budget to the point where the plan is insupportable .

last year , aeronautics and technology suffered .

this year , the agency's science program is to be cannibalized , even though the nasa administrator had promised not to transfer "one thin dime" from scientific exploration into human space flight .

by 2009 , the augustine report concluded that executing nasa's plans would require an additional $3 billion per year , even with some schedule delays .

the augustine report's conclusions were a major impetus behind the passage of the 2010 nasa authorization act , but despite the changes in direction made by that act , concerns remain .

actual appropriations fell short of the authorized amounts without any major tasks being taken off nasa's agenda .

in september 2012 , the chairman of the nasa advisory council testified: as i look at nasa's response to the authorization act of 2010 , i cannot escape the conclusion that the agency is being asked to do too much with too little .

the act provides the agency with a clear set of goals and priorities .

the administration has provided another set of goals and priorities .

these two sets of guidance are not dramatically dissimilar , but taken together they call for more than the agency can do with the budget it has .

in may 2014 , the nasa inspector general testified that: we agree ... that , in effect , too many programs are chasing too few dollars at nasa .

accordingly , we continue to view declining budgets and fiscal uncertainties as the most significant external challenges to nasa's ability to successfully move forward on its many projects and programs .

shortly after nasa was established in 1958 , its mercury program launched u.s. astronauts into suborbital space ( 1961 ) and then earth orbit ( 1962 ) .

between 1969 and 1972 , the apollo program landed 12 u.s. astronauts on the moon .

after the final apollo mission , the united states did not launch humans into space again until the first flight of the space shuttle in 1981 .

following the columbia space shuttle disaster in 2003 , nasa limited use of the space shuttle to the flights necessary for construction of the international space station ( iss ) .

the last space shuttle flight was completed in july 2011 .

at present , nasa relies on russian soyuz spacecraft for astronaut access to the iss , and nasa's human spaceflight activities are focused on iss operations and research , the development of a u.s. commercial capability to launch crews into earth orbit , and the development of future spacecraft for human exploration beyond earth orbit .

nasa's science mission directorate conducts research through its earth science , planetary science , astrophysics , and heliophysics divisions .

in addition , the joint agency satellite division conducts systems engineering , hardware development , and acquisition of operational satellites on behalf of other agencies .

this section discusses selected issues of interest to congress: the use of decadal surveys for science program planning at nasa ; the earth science program and its relationship with earth - observing satellite activities at other agencies ; mars exploration and near - earth object research in the planetary science program ; the james webb space telescope in the astrophysics program ; and fy2015 budget and appropriations issues for nasa science .

in 2009 , both the augustine committee and the nrc recommended a greater emphasis on technology development as a complement to nasa's human spaceflight activities .

the augustine committee described nasa's space technology program as "an important effort that has significantly atrophied over the years. .

it recommended that technology development be closely coordinated with ongoing programs , but conducted independently of them .

the nrc recommended that nasa revitalize its advanced technology development program by establishing an independent , darpa - like organization that would support research serving both nasa and the private sector .

the nasa authorization act of 2010 gave formal approval to the establishment of a new space technology program .

initially , the program was conducted through the office of the chief technologist .

in february 2013 , nasa established it as a separate space technology mission directorate ( stmd ) .

in addition to its space activities , nasa conducts research on aeronautics , the science and technology of flight within earth's atmosphere .

there is a history of disagreement in congress about the appropriate role of this program .

supporters argue that the aviation industry is vital to the u.s. economy , especially because aircraft are a major component of u.s. exports .

they claim that government funding for aeronautics research can contribute to u.s. competitiveness and is necessary in light of similar programs in europe and elsewhere .

opponents counter that the aviation industry itself should pay for its research and development needs .

against the background of this debate , nasa aeronautics programs have focused increasingly on long - term fundamental research and on research and development topics with clear public purposes , such as reducing noise and emissions , improving safety , and improving air traffic control .

in addition to nasa's office of education , the mission directorates historically conducted substantial education activities .

notably , the science mission directorate had a policy for many years that each spacecraft mission should "allocate at least 1% of the mission budget for education and public outreach activities. .

in some years , funding for education activities in the mission directorates was comparable to the funding of the office of education .

although the 2010 authorization act set a new direction for nasa , especially in the area of human spaceflight , some advocates of other approaches remain unsatisfied , and many issues remain .

among these: can commercial services transport u.s. astronauts into earth orbit , including to the international space station , cost - effectively and safely ? .

will these services be available by 2017 , as planned ? .

is the demand for such services sufficient to support more than one competing provider ? .

are current nasa requirements and faa regulations sufficient to ensure the safety of commercial spacecraft that carry crews ? .

for human spaceflight beyond earth orbit , will the orion and sls spacecraft now in development be ready on schedule , and how should they be used when operational ? .

are their budgets sufficient to meet their schedules , and could budget increases accelerate their development ? .

what lift capability should the sls have ? .

are orion and the sls a realistic backup option for crew access to the international space station , if commercial services do not materialize ? .

what destinations should be explored using these spacecraft , once they are operational ? .

is the proposed asteroid redirect mission a good choice of destination for the first crewed flight ? .

how will the needs of the human spaceflight program affect resources for nasa's science missions , aeronautics research , and education programs ? .

in a time of declining budgets and fiscal uncertainty , how should nasa and congress balance these competing priorities ? .

what is the appropriate level of nasa support for earth science , planetary science , and other scientific fields ? .

should the share of earth science in nasa's overall science portfolio continue to expand ? .

how would proposed reductions in funding for planetary science , including near - term reductions in funding for robotic mars exploration , affect the field in the longer term ? .

how should nasa and congress respond to concerns about the threat of collisions with near - earth objects such as asteroids ? .

in general , is nasa being asked to do more than it can afford ? .

is the nasa inspector general correct that "too many programs are chasing too few dollars" ? .

if so , then which programs should be scaled back , and how should those decisions be made ? .

as the 114 th congress conducts oversight of nasa and considers authorization and appropriations legislation , it will likely seek to address many of these concerns .

