since 2009 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has begun to address emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) from both mobile and stationary sources , using broad regulatory authority provided by congress decades ago in the clean air act .

although congress has never specifically directed epa to regulate emissions of ghgs , the clean air act as enacted in 1970 and as amended in 1977 and 1990 gave the agency authority to identify air pollutants and promulgate regulations to limit their emission .

from the late 1990s until 2007 , epa and various interested parties debated whether that authority covered greenhouse gases .

this debate was settled by the supreme court in april 2007 , in massachusetts v. epa .

in a 5-4 decision , the court found that greenhouse gases are unambiguously air pollutants: the clean air act's sweeping definition of 'air pollutant' includes ' any air pollution agent or combination of such agents , including any physical , chemical ... substance or matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters the ambient air... ( emphasis added ) .

.. .

carbon dioxide , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons are without a doubt 'physical [and] chemical ... substances[s] which [are] emitted into ... the ambient air. .

the statute is unambiguous .

since the court's massachusetts decision , epa has addressed ghg emissions in a number of steps , among them: in december 2009 , the agency laid the groundwork for regulations by finding that emissions of greenhouse gases may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health and welfare , and that ghgs from new motor vehicles cause or contribute to that endangerment .

in may 2010 , the agency promulgated ghg emission standards for model year 2012-2016 cars and light trucks .

in january 2011 , the agency began requiring permits and the imposition of best available control technology on new stationary sources ( and major modifications of existing sources ) that emit more than a threshold amount of ghgs .

in september 2011 , epa promulgated ghg emission standards for model year 2014-2018 medium - and heavy - duty trucks .

in october 2012 , the agency promulgated a second phase of ghg emission standards for cars and light trucks , covering model years 2017-2025 .

as extensive as these actions may seem , they have had relatively minor impacts on ghg emissions to date .

the rules are prospective , and in most cases have not yet taken effect .

the auto and truck manufacturing industries have been the major focus of the ghg regulations ; in both cases , they are eager to improve fuel economy ( coincidentally reducing ghg emissions ) , because the high cost of fuel has affected consumer purchasing decisions over the last five years .

the stationary source permitting requirement has yet to affect most sources .

as of early september 2013 , epa and the states have issued only 110 ghg permits to stationary sources since the requirement was implemented in january 2011 .

 ( for comparison , epa estimates that there are more than 6 million stationary sources. ) .

epa set the emission threshold for requiring permits at a high level , exempting most new sources of ghgs ; and few new facilities have been constructed in the recession's aftermath .

ultimately , if epa is to reduce the nation's ghg emissions , as the president has committed to do , it will have to issue emission standards for broad categories of existing stationary sources .

epa took the first step toward setting such standards on april 13 , 2012 , with the proposal of standards for new electric generating units ( egus ) .

in a june 25 , 2013 , memorandum to the epa administrator , the president directed the agency to re - propose those standards by september 20 , 2013 , finalize them "in a timely fashion after considering all public comments," and propose guidelines for existing egus by june 1 , 2014 .

the re - proposed standards for new sources were announced on september 20 , 2013 .

as shown in table 1 , egus — principally , coal - fired power plants — are the most significant u.s. source of greenhouse gases , accounting for about one - third of the nation's total emissions .

with the principal mobile source categories already subject to ghg regulations , epa will have addressed the sources of more than half of all u.s. emissions once it promulgates regulations for existing egus .

to control ghg emissions from stationary sources , epa intends to use section 111 of the clean air act , which requires the agency to set new source performance standards ( nsps ) when , in the administrator's judgment , a category of sources causes , or contributes significantly to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

as noted , epa proposed the first such nsps / ghg standard , for electric generating units , on april 13 , 2012 , and following extensive public comment , at the president's direction , re - proposed the standard on september 20 , 2013 .

the agency has also committed to the promulgation of nsps for petroleum refineries , although it is unclear when those standards will be proposed .

under section 111 , the epa administrator is required to set standards for categories of new ( or substantially modified ) major sources if , in her judgment , they cause or contribute significantly to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

over the past four decades , epa administrators have used this authority to set emission standards for numerous sources of conventional pollutants , such as sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides .

the standards are to reflect the degree of emission limitation achievable through application of the best "adequately demonstrated" system of emission reduction .

the administrator can take costs , health impacts , environmental impacts , and energy requirements into account in setting the standards ; she can distinguish among classes , types , and sizes of sources ; and she must review the standards at least every eight years .

as noted , the president directed epa in his june 25 memorandum to re - propose the nsps standards for power plant carbon pollution .

to understand what issues the agency has addressed in the re - proposed standards , this report discusses both the 2012 proposal and the september 2013 re - proposal .

many in the electric power and coal industries view the proposed and re - proposed standards , if either were finalized , as effectively prohibiting the construction of new coal - fired power plants other than those granted exemptions .

whether carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) technology has been "adequately demonstrated" is the key question they raise .

other questions involve whether the cost of compliance , assuming ccs is available , and the increased energy required to capture and store carbon should lead the administrator to propose a less stringent standard .

whether the proposed standard is barred by statutory language that prohibits the administrator from requiring the installation and operation of any particular emission reduction system is another issue that has been raised .

the potential impacts of the nsps rule extend beyond new sources , because the agency is obligated under section 111 ( d ) of the act to promulgate guidelines for existing sources within a category whenever it promulgates ghg standards for new sources .

using these guidelines , states will be required to develop performance standards for existing sources .

these could be less stringent than the nsps — taking into account , among other factors , the remaining useful life of the existing source to which the standard applies .

but the standards could have far greater impact than the nsps , given that existing plants account for one - third of total u.s. ghg emissions .

the average coal - fired power plant is about 40 years old ; some are more than 60 years old .

the older plants are generally less efficient than newer units , and most operate only a small percentage of the time .

thus , the agency might choose to set a guideline based on a less costly approach than application of ccs to the units' emissions .

in presentation slides that the agency has used in stakeholder discussions , emphasis has been placed on improving efficiency as a preferred approach to reducing ghg emissions .

in recent months , considerable attention has been given to a proposal by the natural resources defense council ( nrdc ) as to how section 111 ( d ) guidelines might be structured .

under nrdc's plan , each state would be given an emission "budget" or cap based on the mix of fuels used by egus in the state to generate electricity in a base period ( 2008-2010 in the nrdc proposal ) .

states with more coal - fired generation would receive higher budgets than those with more natural gas or renewable sources .

the state budgets would be reduced in phases , with a target reduction of about 26% in ghg emissions overall by 2020 , compared to 2005 emission levels — significantly less stringent than the re - proposed standard for new units .

under this approach , egus could comply in a variety of ways: by shifting power dispatch to lower emitting plants ( and thus running higher emitting plants less often ) , by switching fuels , by co - firing lower emitting fuels with coal , by retiring their least efficient plants , by efficiency improvements at existing plants , or by reducing demand .

egus could average , bank , or trade emission credits ; as a result , individual units would have an emissions target , but they could exceed the target if they had sufficient credits obtained from earlier reductions or from other units in the state's electric system .

since the goal would be to reduce emissions overall , rather than in specific states , states might also combine their markets for allowances , giving individual electric generating units and companies additional flexibility .

whatever their form , a key question regarding the 111 ( d ) guidelines has been when epa would propose them .

in his climate action plan , the president resolved this question , as noted earlier , directing the agency to propose the guidelines by june 1 , 2014 , finalize them by june 1 , 2015 , and require the states to submit implementation plans by june 30 , 2016 .

in cases where a state fails to submit a satisfactory plan , section 111 ( d ) also gives epa the authority to prescribe and enforce a federal plan .

many in congress oppose epa standards for ghg emissions .

the house passed two bills in 2011 ( h.r .

1 and h.r .

910 ) that would have prohibited epa from promulgating ghg emission standards for any source , and it repeated itself in september 2012 with h.r .

3409 , the stop the war on coal act .

the senate did not follow suit .

legislation to limit or prevent epa regulatory action is considered possible in the 113 th congress , and may be given a boost by epa's re - proposal of the carbon pollution standard .

enacting such legislation faces hurdles similar to those encountered in the last congress , however .

although the house could take action to block nsps regulations , the senate is less likely to do so .

if the house and senate did act to limit executive branch authority , a bill sent to president obama would almost certainly be subject to a veto , given the president's recent statements regarding the importance of dealing with climate issues .

the debate over epa's proposed carbon pollution standard for new power plants is largely symbolic , and is characterized by exaggeration on both sides .

it is symbolic because this rule by itself will have little impact .

its real significance is that without the promulgation of a rule for new sources , epa cannot , under the clean air act , proceed to regulate existing sources .

it is the standards for those existing plants that may actually reduce the nation's ghg emissions , and in the process , could have significant impacts on coal - fired electricity .

it is exaggerated because both epa and the affected industries describe the rule itself as having far more impact than it will .

if epa ( among many sources ) is correct that no new coal - fired power plants ( other than demonstration projects ) will be built in the foreseeable future even in the absence of the proposed rule , then the rule will have little effect .

it will have little impact on the coal industry or the electric power industry in the near term , and it will not cause emission reductions from these industries .

both are adjusting to a new set of economic conditions , in which coal finds it harder to compete with natural gas .

gas is projected by most experts to be cheap and abundant for the foreseeable future .

since the early 1990s , new coal - fired plants have accounted for less than 10% of new power - generating capacity ( see figure 1 ) .

in these conditions , the electric power industry is likely to continue what it has already been doing for two decades: building gas - fired plants ( or relying on renewable sources ) when it needs new capacity .

the coal industry is unhappy with this , and has tended to place the blame for its current difficulties on epa ; but , actually , the market is the key factor in coal's recent decline .

this market is affected by a number of elements , including the development of new technologies that have revolutionized production of natural gas , by state - level requirements for the use of renewable power sources , by stagnant growth in demand for electricity , and by environmental regulations mandated by congress in the 1990 clean air act amendments that are only now being implemented .

the net result is that coal is simply not competitive with natural gas in most areas of the country when power producers consider new generation facilities in current and foreseeable conditions .

epa's analysis finds that natural gas would need to triple in price for coal to be competitive with it , even without the potential cost of this rule .

further , the agency concludes , in every year since 1996 , the economics of gas have made it a more cost - effective choice when planning new power generation .

this rule will tilt the playing field even further against new coal - fired generation , but the field was already tilted far in that direction .

to say that the rule will effectively prohibit the construction of new coal - fired power plants , as many in the coal and electric power industries do , is to focus on only one among many factors .

while epa is essentially correct in saying that this rule will have little effect on industry , the agency seems to exaggerate the benefits of the rule .

in her speech at the national press club on september 20 , epa administrator mccarthy maintained that the standards set the stage for continued public and private investment in technologies like carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) .

with these investments , technologies will eventually mature and become as common for new power plants as scrubbers have become for well - controlled plants in generation today .

if the standards won't have any cost or impact , because no new coal - fired capacity subject to them will be built , then they will do little to stimulate the development of ccs technology .

the rule does not mean the end of coal mining , or the end of coal - fired power , however .

existing coal - fired plants , which have amortized much of their capital cost , still generate about 40% of the nation's electricity , even with the low price of natural gas and even with the costs of current environmental regulations .

since power plants can last for decades , coal could play an important role in the nation's energy future for decades to come .

furthermore , as many in the utility industry maintain , power producers have an interest in maintaining a diverse mix of fuel sources .

projections regarding the cost of generation a decade or more in the future are uncertain at best: few would have predicted the current glut of natural gas a decade ago .

energy markets are notoriously volatile and difficult to foresee .

with that in mind , coal is likely to remain in the mix , in part as an insurance policy against uncertain future conditions , especially at plants that are already in operation and meeting existing standards for other pollutants .

but here the spotlight returns to epa .

the future of coal and coal - fired electricity could be greatly affected by the next carbon pollution standard , the guidelines for existing units .

the fight over that rule , which is due to be proposed in june 2014 , should place the current debate in its true perspective .

