schools have a mission of great importance to our nation — they are responsible for keeping our children safe while educating them and helping prepare them to be responsible and productive citizens .

the december 14 , 2012 , shooting at sandy hook elementary school in newtown , ct , that claimed the lives of 20 children and 6 adults , has heightened congressional interest in school security .

policymakers have begun debating whether school security can be further enhanced , and if so , how best to accomplish that goal .

a wide variety of proposals have been offered at the federal level , such as funding for expanded mental health services for students , funding for training on mental health awareness for school staff , funding to assist schools in improving school climate , funding for more school counselors , and funding for more school resource officers ( sros ) or other armed security personnel .

wayne lapierre , executive vice president and ceo of the national rifle association , has proposed putting an armed police officer in every school in the country as a way to prevent mass shootings .

president obama has proposed creating incentives for community oriented policing services ( cops ) grants to be used to hire more sros in the current year .

in addition , he has requested $150 million in funding for a new comprehensive school safety program .

this new grant program would provide school districts and law enforcement agencies with funding to hire new sros and school psychologists , among other things .

this report focuses on one of these proposals — the renewed focus on providing federal funding for more sros as a means to preventing school shootings .

it examines the distribution of and current number of sros , the potential sustainability of any increase in the number of sros , and the effect that sros may have on students and the academic setting .

it also examines what available research studies suggest about the extent to which sros may reduce school violence .

these are issues congress may consider while contemplating an expansion of sro programs .

many people probably have a basic understanding of what an sro is: a law enforcement officer who works in a school .

however , some policymakers , before considering legislation to increase the number of sros in schools across the country , are likely to have questions beyond "what are sros ? .

some of these questions might include the following: what role do sros play in the school environment ? .

why have schools and law enforcement agencies started sro programs ? .

how many sros are there around the country ? .

each of these questions is addressed in this section of the report .

subsequent sections discuss: the federal role in promoting sros ; research on the effectiveness of sros ; the administration's proposals ; and select issues for congress .

sro programs have been encouraged by the federal government through grants provided to local jurisdictions .

two federal grant programs provided funding for the hiring and placement of law enforcement officers in schools across the country: the cops in schools ( cis ) program and the state formula grants program through the safe and drug free schools and communities act .

funding for these programs ended , respectively , in fy2005 and fy2009 .

sros engage in many activities that could contribute to school safety .

a national survey of schools found that schools with sros had significantly greater levels of law enforcement involvement compared to schools without assigned officers .

schools with sros were more likely to report that school facilities and grounds were patrolled , safety and security inspections were conducted , student leads about crimes were investigated , arrests were made , and there were responses to crime reports from staff and students .

in addition , schools with sros were more likely to work with law enforcement to create an emergency plan agreement ; develop a written plan to deal with shootings , large scale fights , hostages , and bomb threats ; and conduct risk assessments of the security of school buildings or grounds .

schools with sros were also more likely to have police officers involved in mentoring students and advising school staff .

however , while the results of the survey show that sros are undertaking actions that might contribute to safer schools , they do not indicate whether these actions reduce school violence .

despite the popularity of sro programs , there are few available studies that have reliably evaluated their effectiveness .

a more specific critique of the literature on sro programs notes that to properly assess the effect of sro programs it is necessary to collect data on reliable and objective outcome measures during a treatment period ( i.e. , a period in which sros worked in schools ) and a control period ( i.e. , a period in which no sros were present ) .

data on the control period could be collected from comparable schools without sros or from the same school before the sro was assigned to the school .

data from both the treatment and control conditions should be collected over a long enough period of time that they generate a stable estimate of the outcome measures , and the outcome measure should not be influenced by the placement of the sro in the school ( eg , using the sro's incident reports ) .

at the time this review of the literature was published ( 2011 ) , no evaluations of sro programs met this standard .

one summary of the body of literature on the effectiveness of sro programs notes that [s]tudies of sro effectiveness that have measured actual safety outcomes have mixed results , some show an improvement in safety and a reduction in crime ; others show no change .

typically , studies that report positive results from sro programs rely on participants' perceptions of the effectiveness of the program rather than on objective evidence .

other studies fail to isolate incidents of crime and violence , so it is impossible to know whether the positive results stem from the presence of sros or are the results of other factors .

a study of 19 sro programs sponsored by the national institute of justice did not draw any conclusions about their effectiveness because very few of the programs included in their study "conducted useful and valid assessments of their programs. .

more recent research has attempted to address some of the shortcomings of previous studies on the topic by using broader datasets and statistical techniques that control for possible confounding variables , but they still suffer from some limitations .

for example , a study by tillyer , fisher , and wilcox found that students in schools where police were present and / or involved in the school's daily decision making were no less likely than students in schools where the police were not present and / or involved in decision making to report that they were the victims of a serious violent offense , believe they were at risk for being victimized , or were afraid of being victimized .

however , this study used data collected mostly from children in rural schools in kentucky , which could raise questions about whether the results are generalizable to other locales .

another study by jennings et al .

found that the number of sros in a school had a statistically significant negative effect on the number of reported serious violent crimes , but not on the number of reported violent crimes .

nonetheless , this study only used one year of data , which means that it is not possible to determine if reported crimes in high schools decreased after the school started an sro program .

a third study by na and gottfredson used a dataset that allowed the researchers to evaluate whether the reported number of offenses decreased after schools started sro programs .

the results of the analysis show that schools that added sros did not have a lower number of reported serious violent , non - serious violent , or property crimes .

however , schools that added sros had a higher number of reported weapon and drug offenses .

there are some limitations to this study , namely ( 1 ) the reported number of crimes might be influenced by the presence of an sro ; ( 2 ) the sample of schools included in the study is not representative of all schools in the united states ( it over - represents secondary schools , large schools , and non - rural schools ) ; and ( 3 ) the effects of adding sros may be confounded with the installation of other security devices ( eg , metal detectors ) or other security - related policies .

the body of research on the effectiveness of sro programs is noticeably limited , both in terms of the number of studies published and the methodological rigor of the studies conducted .

the research that is available draws conflicting conclusions about whether sro programs are effective at reducing school violence .

in addition , the research does not address whether sro programs deter school shootings , one of the key reasons for renewed congressional interest in these programs .

there are logical reasons to believe that sros might help prevent school shootings ; to wit , that someone might not attack a school if he or she knows that there is an officer on - site , or sros developing a relationship with the student body might facilitate reporting of threats made by other students .

in addition , placing an officer in a school might facilitate a quicker response time by law enforcement if a school shooting occurs .

however , none of the research on the effectiveness of sro programs addresses this issue .

the administration requested $150 million in funding for a comprehensive schools safety program as a part of its fy2014 budget request for the cops program .

congress appropriated $75 million for a comprehensive school safety initiative under the state and local law enforcement assistance account in the continuing appropriations act , 2014 ( division b , p.l .

113-76 ) .

congress tasked the national institute of justice ( nij ) with developing and implementing the initiative .

congress required the nij to collaborate with key partners from law enforcement , mental health , and education disciplines to develop and publish a comprehensive strategy and model for school safety .

within the amount provided , $50 million is for pilot programs to improve school safety consistent with the school safety model published by the nij .

pilot program grants can be used to test and evaluate technologies and strategies to improve school safety ; develop and update school safety assessments and plans ; provide technical assistance or training ; and support and assess other programs and technologies that are intended to enhance overall school safety efforts .

congress emphasized that funding for pilot programs should conform with each school's safety assessment and plans , and should "advance the goal of developing , testing and discerning best practices for school safety. .

the remaining $25 million is for research and evaluation into potential root causes of school violence .

funding under this portion of the initiative can also be used to "examine promising new approaches and technologies to determine the most effective measures for the improvement of school safety , such as the development of comprehensive school safety assessments ; the development and implementation of appropriate training modules ; effectiveness of surveillance cameras ; or new ways of designing schools to improve survivability in the event of a mass shooting incident. .

while funding under the comprehensive school safety initiative cannot be used for hiring sros , congress did appropriate $151 million under the community oriented policing services account for the cops hiring program , under which , as mentioned previously , grant recipients can use their funding to hire sros .

there are several issues congress could consider should policymakers choose to debate whether to provide funding for sro programs .

some of these issues might include the following: do current trends in school violence warrant congressional efforts to expand sro programs ? .

is it possible to sustain a significant expansion in sro programs ? .

what effect might an expansion of sro programs have on the educational setting ? .

the practice of placing sros in schools has become more popular over the past two decades .

as of 2007 , there were more sros working in schools across the country than there were in 1997 , though the number of sros was down from its peak in 2003 .

data show that police departments and sheriff's offices have , by - and - large , sustained their sro programs over the years , even as federal grants for hiring sros have waned .

the expansion of sro programs coincided with a decrease in reported serious violent victimizations of students while at school and generally lower numbers of violent deaths and homicides at schools .

the extent to which sro programs contributed to the decrease is not known .

indeed , trends in at - school violence mirror a downward trend in overall violence against children and juvenile homicides .

yet schools are not free of violence and crime , and some schools — such as city schools , middle schools , and schools with a higher proportion of low income students — have higher rates of violent incidents .

policymakers might contemplate increasing the number of sro programs across the country as a way to address the threat of mass shootings at or violence in schools .

however , the body of research on the effectiveness of sro programs is noticeably limited , and the research that is available draws conflicting conclusions about whether sro programs are effective at reducing school violence .

in addition , the body of research on the effectiveness of sros does not address whether their presence in schools has deterred mass shootings .

while a law enforcement presence at a school might facilitate actions , such as security planning or threat assessments , that might promote school safety , and the presence of an sro might serve as a deterrent to a potential school shooter or provide for a quick response if a shooting occurs , some might be concerned that a regular law enforcement presence might have some unintended consequences for students .

research suggests that the presence of sros might result in more children being involved in the criminal justice system for relatively minor offenses , and this , in turn , can result in other negative consequences , such as higher rates of suspension or a greater likelihood of dropping - out of school .

the school shooting in newtown , ct , might lead some policymakers to consider ways to provide funding to law enforcement agencies or school districts to establish or expand sro programs .

however , even a conservative estimate of the cost of placing an sro in every school across the country shows that this proposal might be too expensive to be feasible .

also , these grants typically have been meant to provide "seed" money for the recipient agencies , and at some point local governments would be required to absorb the cost of a wide - scale expansion of sro programs .

the analysis presented in this report raises several even more specific issues policymakers might contemplate should congress consider measures to promote placing more sros in schools .

should the federal government provide grants for school safety that can only be used for hiring sros , like the cis program , or should grants be for a more comprehensive approach to school safety , like the administration's proposed comprehensive school safety program ? .

should the federal government collect annual data on the number of sros , the type of schools they serve , and their roles in schools ? .

if funding is available for hiring sros , should there be a requirement that the officer ( s ) attend sro training before being assigned to a school ? .

also , should applicants for potential sro grants be required to submit a signed memorandum of understanding that outlines the responsibilities of the sro ? .

if there are concerns about the presence of sros resulting in more children being arrested for minor offenses , should there be a limitation on what sros can do while working at a school ? .

if limitations are placed on the role of sros , would placing an officer at a school represent the most effective use of the officer's time ? .

should funding for school safety programs be awarded to schools that have higher rates of reported violent incidents or should funding be distributed to law enforcement agencies or leas based upon a formula ? .

if congress adopts the administration's proposal and provides funding for the comprehensive school safety program , would requiring local jurisdictions to submit a comprehensive school safety plan prove to be too onerous a task for some jurisdictions , thereby limiting who would be able to apply for funding ? .

on the other hand , might it provide an indication of which jurisdictions are the best suited for implementing comprehensive school safety programs ? .

should applicants for any potential funding for school safety programs be required to submit a plan for how they will continue funding the program after federal funding ends ? .

should priority be given to applicants who can continue to operate programs after the grant expires ? .

if grants are awarded for hiring sros , should grant recipients be required to submit data that could be used to analyze the effectiveness of sro programs and their effect on the educational environment ? .

for example , should grant recipients be required to submit data on reported crimes and arrests of students both before and after an sro is assigned to the school ? .

if so , what if the school district already has a working relationship with the local law enforcement agency and wants to use a grant to permanently assign an officer or officers to one or more schools ? .

would such a school district be prohibited from receiving a grant for hiring an sro since it could not provide unbiased baseline data ? .

would school districts that could not provide baseline data be prohibited from applying for grants ? .

this appendix provides tables for some of the data referenced in the body of the report .

table a - 1 and table a - 2 provide data on the percent of police departments and sheriff's offices using sros , the total number of officers and deputies who were assigned to work as sros , and the average number of sros by the size of the jurisdiction served .

