t he buy american act of 1933 is the earliest and arguably the best known of the various statutes regarding federal procurement of domestic products .

essentially , the act attempts to protect domestic businesses and labor by establishing a price preference for domestic end products and construction materials in government acquisitions .

the act is of perennial interest to congress , which has periodically enacted or considered measures to expand the scope of domestic preferences in federal procurements or , more rarely , to narrow it .

the act itself has seldom been amended .

however , numerous statutory requirements like those of the buy american act have been enacted .

see generally crs report r43354 , domestic content restrictions: the buy american act and complementary provisions of federal law , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

this report supersedes crs report 97-765 , the buy american act: requiring government procurements to come from domestic sources , by [author name scrubbed] .

on its face , the buy american act appears to prohibit the acquisition of foreign goods by federal agencies by providing that [o]nly unmanufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been mined or produced in the united states , and only manufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been manufactured in the united states substantially all from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , shall be purchased for public use .

as implemented , however , the act is better understood as generally establishing a price preference for domestic end products and construction materials .

specifically , the provisions of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) implementing the buy american act require that , when a domestic offer ( i.e. , an offer of a domestic end product ) is not the low offer , the procuring agency must add a certain percentage of the low offer's price ( inclusive of duty ) to that offer before determining which offer is the lowest priced or "best value" for the government .

this percentage typically ranges from 6% , in cases where the lowest domestic offer is from a large business ; to 12% , when the lowest domestic offer is from a small business ; to 50% , for department of defense procurements , although agencies may adopt higher percentages by regulation .

if the domestic offer is the lowest , or tied for lowest , after the application of this price preference , the agency must award the contract to the domestic offeror .

however , if the foreign offer still has the lowest price , the agency generally awards the contract to the foreign offeror pursuant to provisions of the buy american act permitting the purchase of foreign end products ( and the use of foreign construction materials ) when the costs of domestic ones are "unreasonable. .

determining the act's applicability to specific procurements — and , particularly , determining whether the act's requirements were violated in particular cases — can raise complicated legal and factual questions .

much depends upon how particular terms ( eg , end product , component ) are defined and construed for purposes of the buy american act .

however , the details of manufacturing processes are often also relevant .

acquisitions of services are generally not subject to the buy american act .

nor does the act restrict purchases from foreign persons so long as their products are mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , as required by the act .

the far lists five "exceptions" to the buy american act , or five circumstances in which an agency may purchase foreign end products or use foreign construction materials without violating the act .

these exceptions apply when ( 1 ) the procurement of domestic goods or the use of domestic construction materials would be inconsistent with the public interest ; ( 2 ) domestic end products or construction materials are unavailable ; ( 3 ) the contracting officer determines that the costs of domestic end products or construction materials would be unreasonable ; ( 4 ) the agency is procuring information technology that is a commercial item ; or ( 5 ) the goods are acquired specifically for commissary resale .

however , some commentators also view the requirements that purchases be above the micro - purchase threshold , and for use in the united states , as exceptions to the buy american act .

the procuring agency may determine , on its own initiative , whether one of these exceptions applies .

alternatively , particularly in the case of construction contracts , vendors may request that the contracting officer make a determination regarding the applicability of an exception prior to or after contract award .

contractors are , however , generally not entitled to a determination that an exception applies .

although not an exception to the buy american act , per se , the trade agreements act ( taa ) of 1979 , as amended , can result in certain "foreign" products being treated the same as "domestic" ones in specific procurements .

the taa generally authorizes the waiver of "any law , regulation , procedure , or practice regarding government procurement" that would result in "eligible products" from countries with which the united states has a trade agreement , or that meet certain other criteria ( eg , "least developed countries" ) , being treated "less favorably" than domestic products and suppliers .

the buy american act has been so waived .

this means that products that are wholly grown , produced , or manufactured in certain foreign jurisdictions , or "substantially transformed" into new and different articles within these jurisdictions , may be treated the same as "domestic" ones in particular procurements .

however , such nondiscriminatory treatment only applies when ( 1 ) the procuring agency is one covered by the agreement ; ( 2 ) the goods or services being procured are covered by the agreement ; ( 3 ) the value of the goods or services meets or exceeds certain monetary thresholds specified in the agreement ; and ( 4 ) the circumstances of the procurement are not such that it is otherwise exempt from the taa's waiver of the buy american act ( eg , procurements set - aside for small businesses ) .

when the procurement is for the acquisition of supplies , prospective vendors are required to provide a buy american certificate , wherein the vendor attests that each end product , except [any] listed [below] ... is a domestic end product and that , for other than cots items , the offeror has considered components of unknown origin to have been mined , produced , or manufactured outside the united states .

similar certificates are not required with construction contracts , although construction contractors are to request any "waivers" of the act at the time when they submit their offer , and must also submit data adequate for the government to evaluate their requests .

agency officials are generally entitled to rely upon the representations made by vendors regarding their products , and need not inquire further into the origins of particular products or components unless they have reason to believe that the contractor might have misrepresented whether its products are mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , as required by the act .

vendors could potentially challenge an agency's implementation of the buy american act , or another vendor's compliance with it , prior to contract award as part of a bid protest .

however , after the time for a post - award protest has passed , the vendor's compliance with the buy american act is generally viewed as a matter of contract administration .

in other words , any noncompliance does not affect the validity of the contract , and cannot be protested by the vendor's competitors .

the procuring agency , however , has various contractual and administrative remedies for any noncompliance after contract award .

these remedies include monetary damages , termination for default , and debarment or suspension .

prime contractors , in turn , are responsible for ensuring subcontractors' compliance with the buy american act .

in addition , compliance with the buy american act's requirements is also subject to congressional and other oversight .

for each of fiscal years 2009 through 2011 , agencies were required by statute to submit a report to congress each year "on the amount of the acquisitions made by the agency in that fiscal year of articles , materials , or supplies purchased from entities that manufacture the articles , materials , or supplies outside of the united states. .

the information in these reports was based , in part , on contractors' certificates of compliance , discussed above .

however , the reports focused on the place of manufacture , per se , without regard to the origin of the components .

thus , certain goods that would not count as domestic end products or construction materials for purposes of the buy american act could potentially have counted as made in the united states for purposes of these reports ( eg , goods made in the united states from 100% foreign components ) .

separate from the annual reports to congress , agencies are required to input data into the federal procurement data system ( fpds ) regarding whether the goods they procure are manufactured inside the united states "in accordance with the buy american act. .

agencies must also note any exceptions to or waivers of the act's requirements .

these requirements are not tied to particular fiscal years , unlike the government - wide reports to congress .

