in the united states , how a business is taxed at the federal level is partly dependent on how it is organized .

the income of subchapter c corporations , also known as "regular" corporations , is taxed once at the corporate level according to the corporate tax system , and then a second time at the individual - shareholder level according to the individual tax rates when corporate dividend payments are made or capital gains are recognized .

this leads to the so - called "double taxation" of corporate income ( profits ) .

businesses that choose any other form of organization are , in general , taxed only at the individual level .

that is , the income of certain business types passes through to their owners where it is taxed at individual income tax rates .

examples of these alternative "pass - through" forms of organization include sole proprietorships , partnerships , subchapter s corporations , and limited liability companies ( llcs ) .

this report provides a general overview of the tax treatment of the major business types , including sole proprietorships , partnerships , c corporations , subchapter s corporations , and llcs .

important nontax aspects of each business type are also presented and contrasted where appropriate .

this report does not , however , address every issue ( tax or otherwise ) related to the major business types that could be of interest to congress .

nor does this report discuss the tax treatment of all the organizational forms available to businesses , such as trusts , regulated investment companies ( rics ) , and real estate investment trusts ( reits ) .

interest in the various business types available to u.s. companies has increased recently for several reasons .

first , most corporate tax reform proposals offered to date include a reduction in the top corporate rate , which currently stands at 35% .

it is often proposed that the revenue loss from a reduced corporate tax rate could be offset ( either fully or partially ) with the repeal or reduction of certain business tax incentives , formally known as tax expenditures .

pass - throughs , however , could experience a tax increase if such an approach were followed .

this is because most business tax incentives are incentives that are available to all businesses , not just corporations .

thus , offsetting a corporate rate reduction by curtailing business tax incentives could negatively impact pass - throughs , which do not pay corporate taxes , and therefore would not benefit from the corporate rate reduction .

second , a reduction in the top corporate tax rate without a corresponding reduction in the top individual tax rate could lead to an increase in the number of firms that incorporate to take advantage of the more favorable corporate rate structure .

in late 2012 , the top individual tax rate was increased above the top corporate rate for the first time since 2002 as the result of the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

because pass - through income is taxed according to individual rates , a differential between the top corporate and individual tax rates can encourage firms to incorporate .

if tax reform results in a corporate rate that is lower than the top individual tax rate , the incentive to incorporate would increase .

and third , there have been discussions about moving to a more uniform business tax environment .

according to traditional economic theories of taxation there is no reason why otherwise identical businesses should be taxed differently .

according to the same theories , when such differences do exist , the result is an inefficient allocation of resources , which occurs at the expense of stronger economic performance .

the current tax disparity could be reduced via two general approaches .

first , the corporate and individual tax systems could be combined or "integrated" so that corporations were treated similar to pass - throughs .

second , pass - throughs could be subjected to the corporate tax .

it is perhaps useful to briefly quantify the business landscape across the various business forms before proceeding .

figure 1 displays the distribution of business tax returns filed in tax year 2013 .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) reports that there were approximately 33.2 million corporate and pass - through tax returns filed .

the majority ( 72% ) were sole proprietorships .

the next most popular was s corporations ( 13% ) , followed by llcs ( 7% ) , and c corporations ( 5% ) .

partnerships ( excluding llcs ) comprised the smallest share of business returns filed ( 3% ) .

figure 2 displays the share of net business income generated by the various business types between 1980 and 2013 .

the most noticeable trend had been the decline in the share of income generated by c corporations until the mid - 2000s .

corporate income then spiked partially in response to the 2004 corporate repatriation tax holiday , before falling during the great recession .

since 2008 , corporate income trended upward as the economy has recovered .

at the same time , the shares generated by s corporations and partnerships have generally trended upward aside from a recent slide in earnings that may be related to cyclical factors .

llcs have also slowly increased their share of business income since 1993 , when llcs first appeared as an option on the partnership tax form ( this is discussed in the " limited liability companies " section ) .

sole proprietorships appear to have possibly decreased in importance as a generator of business income , although it is difficult to conclude whether this decrease is the result of a cyclical downturn followed by a relatively modest recovery toward the end of the sample period , or a more permanent trend .

in the end , figure 2 highlights the fact that pass - throughs are just as significant as corporations when it comes to economic activity .

a popular business structure is the corporate form , of which there are two types ; c corporations , which are discussed in this section , and s corporations , which are discussed later .

c corporations , also known as ordinary corporations , are named for subchapter c of the internal revenue code ( irc ) , which details their tax treatment .

businesses incorporate under state law and the exact requirements for incorporation may vary from state to state .

typically , a business must first file articles of incorporation at the state level in order to incorporate .

a c corporation is considered to be an entity that is separate from its owners ( shareholders ) for legal purposes .

as a result , shareholders are generally not legally liable for the actions of the corporation .

the corporate form of organization allows a business to take advantage of a number of benefits not available with other forms of organization .

specifically , a c corporation is not limited in the number of shareholders it may have , the classes of stocks it may issue , the types of shareholders it may have , or the citizenship of its shareholders .

this is in contrast to the s corporations , which are limited to one class of share they may offer , the types of shareholders , and the citizenship of their shareholders .

shares of c corporation stock are also traded on well - developed exchanges , which allows ownership interests to be transferred readily and at low transaction costs .

as a result , c corporations have the ability to raise capital globally from a variety of investors .

for tax purposes , the distinguishing feature of a c corporation is that it is a taxable entity .

a corporation's business income is subject to taxation at the corporate level according to the corporate income tax rate schedule .

any after - tax income that is then distributed to shareholders in the form of dividends or recognized as capital gains is taxed again at individual rates .

this extra layer of taxation gives rise to what is known as the "double taxation" of corporate profits .

because a corporation itself is a taxable entity and directly responsible for paying taxes , taxable income is computed at the corporate level .

a corporation begins by aggregating all sources of business income to arrive at total income .

income sources include sales revenue , investment income , royalties , rents , and capital gains .

to arrive at taxable income , the corporation then deducts business expenses and other special deductions .

deductions include such things as salaries and wages , bad debts , depreciation , advertising costs , and a portion of domestic production activities , among others .

corporations are also allowed to deduct interest paid to bond holders ( but not dividend payments made to shareholders ) .

as a result , corporations may rely more on debt financing than they otherwise would .

like individuals , a corporation may be required to compute its income tax liability twice , once according to the regular corporate tax , and again according to the corporate alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .

a corporation must pay the higher of the two taxes .

the amt is designed to guarantee that corporations are subject to a minimum rate of taxation by limiting the degree to which tax deductions and credits may be used to calculate tax liability .

a sole proprietorship is a business owned by a single individual and that is treated as identical with its owner for tax and legal purposes .

the sole proprietorship is the most common and basic form of business organization .

unlike some other forms of business organization , a sole proprietorship does not limit its owner's liability .

the business assets of the proprietorship as well as the personal assets of its owner may be used to settle any legal judgment against the business .

in contrast , the limited liability protection provided by some other forms of business protects , to a certain degree , the personal assets of the business owners from judgments against the firm .

the business income of a sole proprietorship is reported on a schedule c attached to the owner's individual income tax return .

the income is then taxed at the applicable individual income tax rates .

taxable business income includes net profits distributed to the owner as well as retained earnings .

in addition , a sole proprietor is responsible for paying the self - employment tax .

the self - employment tax rate is 15.3% and is composed of two parts: a medicare tax ( 2.9% ) and a social security tax ( 12.4% only on the first $127,200 in 2017 ) .

since 2013 , an additional medicare tax of 0.9% applies to wage , compensation , and self - employment income exceeding $250,000 for married joint filers , $125,000 for married separate filers , or $200,000 for all other filers .

the self - employment tax is analogous to the combined employer's and employee's share of the social security and medicare taxes , half of which is a payroll tax withheld by most employers .

a partnership is a joint venture consisting of at least two partners , with each partner sharing profits , losses , deductions , credits , and the like .

a partner is an investor in such an entity and may be an individual , a trust , a partnership , a corporation , another entity ( such as a limited liability company ) , or a broker that is holding the ownership interest of an unnamed partner .

partnerships are established under the individual laws of each state , although their tax treatment at the federal level is determined by the irc .

the most common partnerships include general partnerships , limited liability partnerships , and limited partnerships .

a general partnership is one in which all partners are liable for the actions and debts of the business .

that is , the business assets of the partnership , as well as the assets of the partners , may be used to settle a legal judgment against the business .

a limited liability partnership ( llp ) is a general partnership , usually a professional firm , in which the partners are mutually liable for the partnership debts but are protected from the harmful actions of the other partners .

a limited partnership ( lp ) consists of at least one general partner and one or more limited partners .

the general partners oversee the management of the business and are liable for the partnership's debts .

the liability of the other partners is limited to their capital contribution and any additional amounts specified in the partnership agreement .

partnerships themselves are not taxable ; instead all tax items , such as income , losses , deductions , and credits , pass through the partnership to the partners .

the partnership reports each partner's allocation to the irs and to the partners according to the partnership agreement .

the partners then include their shares of income or loss on their own tax returns , even if there was no actual distribution of income to the partners .

as long as there are no corporate partners , business income is taxed only at individual income tax rates .

when a partnership does have a corporate partner , the share of income allocated to that partner will be reported on the corporate tax return .

although the partnership agreement determines the final allocation of tax items to each partner , the partnership must distinguish between ordinary income and separately stated items when making the allocation .

some items must be stated separately because the partners may face limitations to the degree to which they may utilize certain tax items .

for example , a capital loss may affect partners differently if some are able to use it to offset a capital gain .

separately stated items include capital gains and losses , dividends , tax - exempt interest , rents , royalties , deductions attributable to portfolio income , charitable contributions , foreign taxes paid , and special allocation items determined by the partnership agreement .

ordinary income is the sum of income , gains , losses , and deductions that need not be separately stated .

in addition to being entitled to a share of the partnership's profits or losses , partners may also be given guaranteed payments for their contributions of capital or service .

such payments are fixed and do not depend on the profitability of the firm .

fringe benefits such as health insurance are also considered a guaranteed payment .

the partnership deducts guaranteed payments as ordinary business expenses , and the partners include them as ordinary income .

to the extent that the guaranteed payments are for personal services performed by a partner , the income is subject to self - employment tax .

an s corporation is a "closely held" corporation that elects to be treated as a pass - through entity for tax purposes .

s corporations are named for subchapter s of the irc , which details their tax treatment .

by electing s corporation status , a business is able to combine many of the legal and business advantages of a c corporation with the tax advantages of a partnership .

several criteria must be met if a corporation wishes to elect s corporation status .

the corporation must be incorporated and organized in the united states .

an s corporation can only issue one class of stock and is limited to no more than 100 shareholders .

the shareholders must be individuals , estates , certain types of trusts , tax - exempt pension funds , or charitable organizations .

all shareholders must be u.s. citizens or residents .

certain banks , insurance companies , possession corporations ( i.e. , corporations predominately operating in a u.s. possession ) , and other select business operations are ineligible to elect s corporate status .

an eligible corporation that seeks s corporation status must file a timely election with the irs .

each shareholder must consent in writing to the election .

the shareholders agree to report and pay tax on their shares of the corporation's income .

the election can be revoked with the consent of shareholders holding more than 50% of the outstanding shares of stock .

if an s corporation election is revoked , the corporation cannot elect s status for five years without the consent of the irs .

s corporations generally do not pay corporate - level income taxes .

as with partnerships , operating income and loss are computed at the corporate level and passed through to the shareholders , while other items with special tax attributes are passed through separately .

separately stated items include portfolio income , capital gains and losses , passive income and losses , charitable contributions , foreign taxes paid , and the like .

these tax items retain their character in the hands of the shareholders , who report allocations on their own returns , where the income is taxed for individuals .

if the shareholder is a pass - through entity , the income is passed through the shareholder to the income beneficiaries of the pass - through entity .

an s corporation is not afforded the same flexibility as a partnership with respect to allocations among its owners .

because an s corporation is only permitted to issue one class of stock , all allocations must be proportionate to ownership .

this includes the portion of allocations that are separately stated .

s corporation shareholders are not subject to self - employment taxes on items passed through the corporation .

like partners , shareholders who provide services to the corporation generally are employees of the corporation .

the corporation may deduct as expenses wages , salaries , and some fringe benefits paid to these employees , but must also pay employment taxes and withhold income and payroll taxes .

an area of contention between s corporations and the irs is the structure of employee - shareholder compensation .

compensation in the form of regular wages or salary is generally subject to payroll taxes and unemployment taxes .

dividend distribution , however , avoids these taxes .

this provides an incentive for s corporations to pay and for employee - shareholders to receive dividends in lieu of wages or salary .

the irs has attempted to address this issue by reminding s corporations that they must pay "reasonable compensation" ( subject to employment taxes ) to shareholder - employees in return for services , before dividend distributions .

compensation is considered reasonable when it matches what the market return would be to the services provided by the employee .

failure to follow the irs's suggestion could result in the reclassification of dividend compensation as wage or salary compensation for tax purposes .

an s corporation may be subject to the corporate income tax in certain instances .

one such instance is the recognition of a built - in - gain .

a built - in - gain is recognized when an s corporation , during the first 10 years of being an s corporation , disposes of an asset that had appreciated in value while the business was organized as a c corporation .

the tax rate on a built - in - gain is equal to the highest corporate tax rate ( currently 35% ) .

to the extent that built - in - gain exceeds the corporate tax owed on it , the built - in - gain passes through to shareholders who must report it as taxable income .

taxes may also be imposed to recapture previous benefits from the use of investment credits or the last - in - first - out inventory method by the c corporation .

finally , in instances where more than 25% of a converted corporation's gross receipts consist of "passive investment income," a corporate income tax may be imposed .

the tax is equal to the highest corporate tax rate and is applied to net income attributable to the excess over 25% of gross receipts .

passive investment income includes such things as dividends , interest , rents , royalties , and capital gains .

a limited liability company ( llc ) can combine the favorable tax treatment of a partnership with the limited liability features of a corporation .

an llc , like a partnership , is provided the flexibility to allocate income , losses , deductions , and credits in an amount different than members' ownership interests .

the income of a c corporation , on the other hand , is generally distributed to its shareholders in a manner predetermined by rights inherent in each class of stock and the amount of each class of stock a shareholder owns .

an s corporation is similarly constrained in the allocation of income , losses , and deductions to its shareholders .

llcs , like corporations , are entities that are separate from their members or owners .

as a result , members may not be responsible for the debts of the company .

there is no limit to the number of members an llc may have , unlike with an s corporation .

in addition , llcs are permitted to have multiple classes of ownership interests .

llcs are relatively recent creations .

wyoming was the first state to allow llcs in 1977 , followed by florida in 1982 .

by the mid - 1990s , llc laws had been enacted in all states .

for many years , the irs had held that any organization would be taxed as a corporation if it had the major characteristics of a corporation .

llcs were designed to lack enough corporate characteristics to avoid such a classification .

in most cases , this was accomplished in one of three ways: having the company nominally cease to exist upon the withdrawal of a member ; placing restrictions on the transferability of ownership interests ; or designating all members as nominal managers .

in 1997 , the irs issued final regulations that in effect allow companies to elect how they will be taxed by simply checking a box on a form .

these regulations are typically referred to as "check - the - box" regulations .

a single - member llc can elect to be taxed as either a c corporation or a sole proprietorship .

a multimember llc can elect to be taxed as either a partnership or a c corporation .

these rules apply to any entity that is not otherwise required to file as a corporation or a trust .

in general , a business may not change its classification during the 60 months following a check - the - box election .

