in response to concern about the u.s. government's inability to close or consolidate unneeded military facilities , congress in 1988 , and again in 1990 , enacted statutory provisions establishing a process intended to insulate base closings from the "political" considerations that are part of the regular lawmaking process .

pursuant to these provisions , in 1988 , 1991 , 1993 , 1995 , and 2005 , an independent defense base closure and realignment ( brac ) commission recommended the closure and realignment of more than 100 defense facilities throughout the united states .

the department of defense ( dod ) formally asked congress to provide it with statutory authority to conduct another round of base closures and realignments in 2015 , but no round was authorized .

under the brac process , the final recommendations of a bipartisan commission are submitted to congress and automatically take effect unless congress passes and the president signs legislation disapproving the recommendations within a stated time period .

to ensure that congress can promptly act if it so chooses , the brac procedure includes special "fast track" or expedited legislative procedures laying out the terms for house and senate consideration of legislation striking down the brac commission's report .

such "fast track" procedures have governed congressional consideration of the five previous rounds of base closures and are included in the dod's recent request to congress for authority to pursue a 2015 brac round .

under the parliamentary procedures laid out in the brac process , a package of suggested base closures and realignments is to be implemented by the secretary of defense unless congress passes a joint resolution of disapproval rejecting the entire package within the 45-day period beginning on the date of the president's submission of the package to congress or the sine die adjournment of the session , whichever occurs earlier .

congressional consideration of such a brac resolution of disapproval is governed not by the standing rules of the house and senate but by special expedited parliamentary procedures laid out in the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 , as amended ( p.l .

101-510 , 10 u.s.c .

2687 note ) .

the procedures have the same force and effect as standing house and senate rules and exempt the joint resolution of disapproval from many of the time - consuming steps and obstacles that apply to most measures congress considers .

for example , the procedure dictates when a joint resolution may be introduced , specifies its text , limits committee and floor consideration of the measure , prohibits amendments and other motions , and establishes an automatic "hook - up" of joint resolutions passed by both chambers .

this report outlines the "fast track" parliamentary procedures that have governed congressional consideration of the recommendations of the brac commission in prior rounds and have been included in the dod's recent requests for authority to conduct a brac round .

this section describes the parliamentary procedures that have governed congressional consideration of recent brac commission reports and were included in a legislative proposal dod recently submitted to congress requesting authority for a brac commission round in 2015 .

the fact that an expedited legislative procedure is contained in statute does not mean that another law must be enacted to alter it .

article i , section 5 , of the constitution gives each chamber of congress the power to determine the rules of its proceedings ; as a result , statutory expedited procedures such as those governing brac can ( like all rules of the house or senate ) be set aside , altered , or amended by either chamber at any time .

as several house parliamentarians have observed , a chamber may "change or waive the rules governing its proceedings .

this is so even with respect to rules enacted by statute. .

these changes can be accomplished , for example , by the adoption of a special rule from the house committee on rules , by suspension of the rules , or by unanimous consent agreement .

instances of this ability to "rewrite" expedited procedure statutes have occurred during consideration of base closure joint resolutions of disapproval .

for example , in the 101 st congress , representative george e. brown jr. introduced h.j.res .

165 , a joint resolution disapproving the recommendations of the 1988 commission on base realignment and closure .

under the terms of the 1988 brac statute , the house committee on armed services had to report a joint disapproval resolution prior to march 15 , 1989 , or see it be automatically discharged of its further consideration .

the statute further permitted any member , at any time three days after this report or discharge , to make a motion to proceed to the immediate consideration of the resolution .

the house , however , "rewrote" these statutory terms as they related to the consideration of h.j.res .

165 .

on march 21 , 1989 , representative les aspin asked unanimous consent that , notwithstanding the provisions of the brac law , it not be in order to move to proceed to the consideration of h.j.res .

165 prior to april 18 , 1989 .

still later , on april 11 , 1989 , a second unanimous consent request laid aside not only the terms of the brac expedited procedure statute but those of representative aspin's march 21 unanimous consent request as well .

as noted above , the house again agreed to lay aside certain provisions of the brac statute that governed its consideration of the 2005 round of closures .

on september 29 , 2005 , the house adopted h.res .

469 , which stated that , despite the brac statute's provision permitting any member to make a motion to proceed to the consideration of a joint resolution of disapproval , that motion "shall be in order only if offered by the majority leader or his designee. .

the senate has also overridden the brac fast - track procedure by unanimous consent .

on september 15 , 1993 , the senate agreed to a unanimous consent agreement governing the subsequent consideration of s.j.res .

114 , disapproving the recommendations of the 1993 brac commission .

this consent agreement limited debate on the disapproval resolution to one hour ( instead of two as provided for in the statute ) and permitted the senate to consider separate legislation in the midst of its consideration of the joint disapproval resolution .

in a sense , then , the expedited procedures in the brac statute establish a default set of parliamentary ground rules for consideration of a disapproval resolution ; these provisions can be tailored by members in either chamber to meet specific situations or for their convenience .

table 1 lists all joint resolutions of disapproval introduced in congress relating to prior brac rounds and their disposition .

