title iv of the higher education act ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) , as amended , authorizes programs that provide financial assistance to students to attend certain institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

in academic year ( ay ) 2016-2017 , 6,760 institutions were classified as title iv eligible ihes .

of these ihes eligible to participate in title iv programs , approximately 29.4% were public institutions , 27.8% were private nonprofit institutions , and 42.9% were proprietary ( or private , for - profit ) institutions .

it is estimated that $122.5 billion was made available to students through title iv federal student aid in fy2017 .

to be able to receive title iv assistance , students must attend an institution that is eligible to participate in the title iv programs .

ihes must meet a variety of requirements to participate in the title iv programs .

first , an ihe must meet basic eligibility criteria , including offering at least one eligible program of education .

in addition , an ihe must satisfy the program integrity triad , under which it must be legally authorized to provide a postsecondary education in the state in which it is located ; accredited or preaccredited by an agency recognized by the department of education ( ed ) for such purposes , and certified by ed as eligible to participate in title iv programs .

the state authorization and accreditation components of the triad were developed independently to address the issues of quality assurance and consumer protection , and the federal government ( ed specifically ) generally relies on states and accrediting agencies to determine standards of educational program quality .

the federal government's only direct role in determining title iv eligibility is through the process of certification of eligibility and ensuring ihes meet some additional title iv requirements .

certification , as a component of the program integrity triad , focuses on an institution's fiscal responsibility and administrative capacity to administer title iv funds .

an ihe must fulfill a variety of other related requirements , including those that relate to institutional recruiting practices , student policies and procedures , and title iv program administration .

finally , additional criteria may apply to an institution depending on its control or the type of educational programs it offers .

for instance , proprietary institutions must derive at least 10% of their revenues from non - title iv funds ( also known as the 90 / 10 rule ) .

failure to fulfill some of these requirements does not necessarily end an ihe's participation in the title iv programs , but may lead to additional oversight from ed and / or restrictions placed an ihe's title iv participation .

this report provides a general overview of hea provisions that affect a postsecondary institution's eligibility for participation in title iv student aid programs .

it first describes general eligibility criteria at both the institutional and programmatic level and then , in more detail , the program integrity triad .

next , it discusses several issues that are closely related to institutional eligibility: program participation agreements , campus safety policies and crime reporting required under the clery act , the return of title iv funds , and distance education .

to be eligible to participate in hea title iv student aid programs , institutions must meet several criteria .

these criteria include requirements related to programs offered by the institutions , student enrollment , institutional operations , and the length of academic programs .

this section discusses the definition of an eligible ihe for the purposes of title iv participation and program eligibility requirements .

title iv of the hea sets forth three requirements to ensure program integrity in postsecondary education , known as the program integrity triad .

the three requirements are state authorization , accreditation by an accrediting agency recognized by ed , and eligibility and certification by ed .

this triad is intended to provide a balance in the title iv eligibility requirements .

the states' role is to provide consumer protection , the accrediting agencies' role is to provide quality assurance , and the federal government's role is to provide oversight of compliance to ensure administrative and fiscal integrity of title iv programs at ihes .

several other requirements affect institutional eligibility for title iv programs .

some of these requirements include institution program participation agreements , which include provisions related to incentive compensation and campus crime reporting requirements ; return of title iv funds ; and distance education .

the failure to meet the requirements for any of these may result in the loss of title iv eligibility or other sanctions .

hea section 487 specifies that each institution wanting to participate in title iv student aid programs is required to have a current program participation agreement ( ppa ) .

a ppa is a document in which the institution agrees to comply with the laws , regulations , and policies applicable to the title iv programs ; it applies to an ihe's branch campuses and locations that meet title iv requirements , as well as its main campus .

it also lists all of the title iv programs in which the ihe is eligible to participate , the date on which the ppa expires , and the date on which the ihe must reapply for participation .

by signing a ppa , an institution agrees that it will act as a fiduciary responsible for properly administering title iv funds , will not charge students a processing fee to determine a student's eligibility for such funds , and will establish and maintain administrative and fiscal procedures to ensure the proper administration of title iv programs .

the ppa reiterates many provisions required for institutional eligibility and ed certification discussed earlier in this report and contains several additional notable requirements that may affect an ihe's title iv eligibility , which are described below .

along with the general participation requirements with which an institution must comply , a ppa may also contain institution - specific requirements .

as part of their ppas , domestic and foreign proprietary ihes must agree to derive at least 10% of their revenue from non - title iv funds ( i.e. , no more than 90% of their revenue can come from title iv funds ) .

this is known as the 90 / 10 rule .

examples of non - title iv funds include private education loans and some military and veterans' benefits , such as benefits provided under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill program .

if an ihe violates the 90 / 10 rule in one year , it does not immediately lose its title iv eligibility .

rather , it is placed on a provisional eligibility status for two years .

if the ihe violates the 90 / 10 rule for two consecutive years , it loses its eligibility for at least two years .

in a ppa , an ihe must agree it will not provide any commission or incentive compensation to individuals based directly or indirectly on their success in enrolling students or the enrolled students' obtaining financial aid ; however , some exceptions apply to this general rule .

for instance , ihes can provide incentive compensation to individuals for the recruitment of foreign students who are ineligible to receive title iv funds or they can provide incentive compensation through a profit - sharing plan .

the ban on incentive compensation only applies to the activities of securing enrollment ( recruitment ) and securing financial aid .

other activities are not banned , and ed draws a distinction between activities that involve directly working with individual students and policy - level determinations that affect recruitment and financial aid awards .

for instance , an individual who is responsible for contacting potential student applicants or assisting students in filling out an enrollment application cannot receive incentive compensation , but an individual who conducts marketing activities , such as the broad dissemination of informational brochures or the collection of contact information , can receive incentive compensation .

hea section 485 ( f ) , referred to as the clery act , requires domestic title iv participating ihes ( 1 ) to report to ed campus crime statistics and ( 2 ) establish and disseminate campus safety and security policies .

both the campus crime statistics and campus safety and security policies must be compiled and disseminated to current and prospective students and employees in an ihe's annual security report ( asr ) .

campus crime statistics required to be reported to ed and included in an asr include data on the occurrence on campus of a range of offenses specified in statute , including murder , burglary , robbery , domestic violence , rape , and other forms of sexual violence .

in addition to campus crime statistics , asrs must include statements of campus safety and security policies regarding , for example , procedures and facilities for students and others to report criminal actions or other emergencies occurring on campus and an ihe's response to such reports ; security and access to campus facilities ; campus law enforcement , including the law enforcement authority of campus security personnel , and the working relationship between campus security personnel and state and local law enforcement ; programs designed to inform students and employees about the prevention of crimes ; and the possession , use , and sale of alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs ; enforcement of state underage drinking laws ; enforcement of federal and state drug laws ; and any drug or alcohol abuse education programs required under the hea .

an asr must also include statements of policies specifically relating to incidence of domestic and sexual violence .

for example , an asr must include statements of policy regarding programs to prevent such incidents ; procedures a victim should follow if such an incident as occurred ; procedures an ihe will follow once such an incident has been reported and procedures for institutional disciplinary actions in cases of alleged incidents ( including a statement of the standard of evidence that will be used in any school proceeding arising from the incident report ) ; and possible sanctions and protective measures that an ihe may impose following a final determination in an institutional proceeding regarding such incidences .

the clery act prohibits the secretary of education from requiring ihes to adopt particular policies , procedures , or practices ; and prohibits retaliation against anyone exercising his or her rights or responsibilities under the act .

hea section 484b specifies that when a title iv aid recipient withdraws from an ihe before the end of the payment or enrollment period for which funds were disbursed , title iv funds must be returned to ed according to a statutorily prescribed schedule .

in general , when a student withdraws from an ihe , an ihe first determines the portion of title iv aid considered to be "earned" by the student while enrolled and the portion considered to be "unearned. .

unearned aid must be returned to ed .

up to the 60% point of a payment or enrollment period , unearned funds must be returned on a pro rata schedule .

after the 60% point of a payment or enrollment period , the total amount of funds awarded is considered to have been earned by the student and no funds are required to be returned .

whether an ihe and / or the student is required to return the funds to ed depends on a variety of circumstances , including whether title iv funds have been applied directly to a student's institutional charges .

unearned funds must be returned to their respective programs in a specified order , with loans being returned first , followed by pell grants , and then other title iv aid .

in some instances , a student may have earned more aid than has been disbursed , and the difference is disbursed to the student after the student withdraws .

generally , distance education and correspondence education refers to educational instruction with a separation in time , place , or both between the student and instructor .

it is a way in which institutions can increase student access to postsecondary education by offering alternatives to traditional on - campus instruction .

recently , due to the greater availability of new technologies , there has been substantial growth in the amount and types of courses institutions offer .

section 103 ( 7 ) ( a ) and ( b ) of the hea and the accompanying regulations define distance education as instruction that uses " ( 1 ) the internet ; ( 2 ) one - way and two - way transmissions through open broadcast , closed circuit , cable , microwave , broadband lines , fiber optics , satellite , or wireless communications devices ; [or] ... ( 3 ) audio conferencing" to deliver instruction to students separated from the instructor .

a course taught through a video cassette , dvd , or cd - rom is considered a distance education course if one of the above - mentioned technologies is used to support student - instructor interaction .

regardless of the technology used , "regular and substantive interaction between the students and the instructor" must be ensured .

correspondence courses are expressly excluded from the definition of distance education .

a correspondence course is one for which an institution provides instructional materials and exams for students who do not physically attend classes at the ihe , but does not include those courses that are delivered with "regular and substantive interaction between the students and the instructor" via one of the above - described technologies .

in 1992 , partially in response to cases of some correspondence institutions' fraudulent and abusive practices used to attract unqualified students to enroll in programs of poor or questionable quality , congress incorporated provisions referred to as the "50% rules" into the hea .

the rules affected both the eligibility of institutions offering correspondence courses and their students' eligibility for title iv aid .

in general , under the rules , an institution is ineligible for title iv aid if more than 50% of its courses are offered by correspondence , or if 50% or more of its students are enrolled in correspondence courses .

as discussed earlier in this report , rules promulgated in 2016 would have required an ihe offering postsecondary distance or correspondence education in a state in which it is not physically located to meet any state authorization requirements within that state .

under the regulations , an ihe could meet this requirement if it participates in a state authorization reciprocity agreement .

these regulations were scheduled to become effective july 1 , 2018 .

however , on july 3 , 2018 ( and effective june 29 , 2018 ) , the secretary of education issued a final rule delaying the implementation of these requirements until july 1 , 2020 .

the distinction between distance education and traditional instruction is also important for the purposes of title iv program eligibility .

distance education programs provided by domestic ihes are eligible for title iv participation if they have been accredited by an accrediting agency recognized by ed to evaluate distance education programs .

a program offered by a foreign ihe , in whole or in part , through distance education ( including telecommunications ) or correspondence is ineligible for title iv participation .

