in its budget proposal for fy2014 , the obama administration proposed a "strategic review" of the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) , a federal government corporation established by the tennessee valley authority act ( tva act ) ( 16 u.s.c .

831 ) .

reform tva .

since its creation in the 1930s during the great depression , the federally owned and operated tennessee valley authority ( tva ) has been producing low - cost electricity and managing natural resources for a large portion of the southeastern united states .

tva's power service territory includes most of tennessee and parts of alabama , georgia , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , and virginia , covering 80,000 square miles and serving more than nine million people .

tva is a self - financing government corporation , funding operations through electricity sales and bond financing .

in order to meet its future capacity needs , fulfill its environmental responsibilities , and modernize its aging generation system , tva's current capital investment plan includes more than $25 billion of expenditures over the next 10 years .

however , tva's anticipated capital needs are likely to quickly exceed the agency's $30 billion statutory cap on indebtedness .

reducing or eliminating the federal government's role in programs such as tva , which have achieved their original objectives and no longer require federal participation , can help put the nation on a sustainable fiscal path .

given tva's debt constraints and the impact to the federal deficit of its increasing capital expenditures , the administration intends to undertake a strategic review of options for addressing tva's financial situation , including the possible divestiture of tva , in part or as a whole .

in proposing the strategic review , the administration says that tva has achieved its original objectives , and thus no longer requires federal participation .

however , some have expressed their disagreement with the administration's position , and support tva's current role .

the strategic review ( to be conducted by the office of management and budget ) may thus consider options for addressing tva's financial situation and its effect on the federal deficit , with divestiture of tva ( in whole or part ) to be considered among the potential alternatives .

tva , for its part , is cooperating with the strategic review .

this report will discuss the history and role of tva mostly from an energy standpoint , considering current and future obligations , and other issues related to tva's provision of electrical energy .

issues for congress may involve consideration of whether a federal role is still necessary to achieve the tva act's objectives .

tva is a federal government corporation originally established by congress in response to the great depression , essentially to "exist in perpetuity. .

the preamble to the tva act of 1933 lists flood control , reforestation , and agricultural and industrial development as primary considerations in the original establishment of the tva .

to improve the navigability and to provide for the flood control of the tennessee river ; to provide for reforestation and the proper use of marginal lands in the tennessee valley ; to provide for the agricultural and industrial development of said valley ; to provide for the national defense by the creation of a corporation for the operation of government properties at and near muscle shoals in the state of alabama , and for other purposes .

tva has incorporated the preamble into its mission statement , which lists these duties essentially in terms of tva priorities .

the mission of the tennessee valley authority is to develop and operate the tennessee river system to improve navigation , minimize flood damage , and to provide energy and related products and services safely , reliably , and at the lowest feasible cost to residents and businesses in the multi - state tennessee valley region .

tva's integrated management of the entire tennessee river watershed optimizes the benefits of the water resource .

major functions of the corporation include: management of the tennessee river system for multiple purposes including navigation , flood control , power generation , water quality , public lands conservation , recreation , and economic development ; generation of electricity ; sale and transmission of electricity to wholesale and large industrial customers ; stimulation of economic development activities that generate a higher quality of life for citizens of the tennessee valley ; preservation and environmentally - sensitive management of tva assets and federal lands entrusted to tva ; and research and technology development that addresses environmental problems related to tva's statutory responsibilities for river and land management and power generation .

the operation of the tennessee river system to improve navigation and minimize flood damage arguably remains tva's primary obligation .

power generation at tva was a part of the industrial development mission of tva , with hydroelectric generation possibly being viewed as an opportunity which arose from dams mostly built for flood control and navigation purposes .

while the focus of tva's activities originally was largely on its flood control and economic development roles , tva is now essentially a power generation company .

tva's business metrics are focused on optimizing tva's financial position , and its operational goals are focused on providing electricity at the lowest feasible rates to its wholesale customers in the multi - state tennessee valley region .

initially , federal appropriations funded all tva operations .

appropriations for the tva power program ended in 1959 , and appropriations for tva's environmental stewardship and economic development activities were phased out by 1999 .

tva is now fully self - financing , funding operations through electricity sales and power system bond financing .

tva makes no profit and receives no tax money .

as shown in figure 1 , tva's electric power service territory covers almost all of tennessee , and portions of alabama , georgia , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , and virginia .

tva is overseen by a board of directors with nine members ( appointed by the president and confirmed by the u.s. senate ) , each of whom serves a staggered five - year term .

the board of directors sets tva's wholesale electric power rates without approval by any other regulatory body .

tva provides electricity in an area that is largely free of competition from other electric power providers .

this service territory is defined primarily by two provisions of federal law: the "fence," and the "anti - cherrypicking" provision .

the fence limits the region in which tva or distributors of tva power may provide power .

the anti - cherrypicking provision limits the ability of others to use the tva transmission system for the purpose of serving customers within tva's service area .

from time to time there have been unsuccessful efforts to modify the protection of the anti - cherrypicking provision .

the electric power industry in the united states is in a period of transition .

the average age of power plants in the united states is now over 30 years , with the average life expectancy of most power plants being about 40 years .

as with electric power plants , electric transmission and distribution system components are also aging , with power transformers averaging over 40 years of age , and 70% of transmission lines being 25 years or older .

new environmental regulations under development at the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) are imposing additional costs , and lower prices for natural gas resulting from new supplies of shale gas are bringing competition with regard to power generation choices .

new and proposed epa regulations would impose new requirements on fossil fuel - fired power plants .

some of these rules would be implemented at the federal level , while others would be implemented at the state level .

they include the cross - state air pollution rule ( which replaced the clean air interstate rule ) ; the mercury and air toxics standards ( mats ) ( also known as the utility maximum achievable control technology [mact] ) rule to reduce emissions of mercury , other metallic toxics , acid gases , and organic air toxics ; proposals to regulate coal combustion residues ; and the clean water act section 316 ( b ) cooling water intake rule .

however , only the utility mact rule is currently in effect .

epa also proposed standards in april 2012 for greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions which would require all new power plants to meet carbon dioxide emissions standards .

president obama recently announced a new climate change initiative in june 2013 which directed epa to re - propose ghg emission standards for new electric power plants , and directed the agency to develop ghg standards for existing power plants by june 2015 .

electric power generation is responsible for approximately 37% of u.s. domestic carbon dioxide emissions ( the primary anthropogenic ghg ) , and over one - third of all u.s. ghg emissions .

while most of these plants are well - maintained , they are generally not as efficient as newer power plants .

with electric plant aging and new environmental requirements necessitating investment to continue operations , many utilities are looking at retirement or replacement decisions , especially for older coal plants .

tva is required by the tva act to be self - supported using funds from the sale of electric power .

the tva act also authorizes tva to issue bonds , notes , or other forms of indebtedness up to $30 billion ( total outstanding amount ) at any one time .

these instruments of indebtedness are used to provide financing for construction of power plants and other related capital needs .

the corporation [i.e. , tva] is authorized to issue and sell bonds , notes and other evidences of indebtedness ( hereinafter collectively referred to as "bonds" ) in an amount not exceeding $30,000,000,000 outstanding at any one time to assist in financing its power program and to refund such bonds .

the corporation may , in performing functions authorized by this act , use the proceeds of such bonds for the construction , acquisition , enlargement , improvement , or replacement of any plant or other facility used or to be used for the generation or transmission of electric power ( including the portion of any multiple - purpose structure used or to be used for power generation ) ; as may be required in connection with the lease , lease - purchase , or any contract for the power output of any such plant or other facility ; and for other purposes incidental thereto .

tva recognizes the challenge that this limit poses to its plans to comply with environmental requirements and modernize its power plants , and has begun to explore ways to fund these needs .

tva faces challenges related to fluctuating fuel prices and compliance with current and emerging environmental laws and regulations .

in order to comply with these laws and regulations , tva may install clean air equipment on coal - fired units and replace generating capacity of idled coal - fired units with cleaner - emissions nuclear and gas - fired units .

meeting these needs will require significant capital expenditures on tva's part , but tva is constrained by the tva act which authorizes tva to issues bonds , notes , or other evidences of indebtedness ( "bonds" ) in an amount not to exceed $30.0 billion outstanding at any one time .

without a legislative solution , this limitation may require tva to seek alternative financing arrangements .

.. .

the tva act authorizes tva to issue bonds in an amount not to exceed $30.0 billion outstanding at any time .

due to this limit on bonds , tva may not be able to use bonds to finance all of the capital investments planned over the next decade .

however , tva believes that other forms of financing not subject to the limit on bonds , including lease financings ( such as the lease - purchase transaction involving the john sevier [combined cycle facility] ) , can provide supplementary funding .

also , the impact of energy efficiency and demand response initiatives may reduce generation requirements and thereby reduce capital needs .

tva had revenues of $11.2 billion in fy2012 , but had a net income on those revenues of only $60 million , with fuel costs and purchased power being tva's single largest expense at $3.9 billion , followed by operations and maintenance expense at $3.5 billion .

tva currently has approximately $24.1 billion in indebtedness in outstanding bonds and notes , which counts toward the statutory cap of $30 billion ( which has been in place since 1979 ) .

tva's debts are paid solely from tva's net proceeds for the sale of electricity .

tva's debts are not guaranteed by , nor are they obligations of , the federal government .

however , while tva pays for this debt principally using ( non - federally guaranteed ) bonds , the federal government still records tva's debt as part of the federal deficit since it is a federal government corporation .

tva's principal mission is arguably the minimization of flood damage and stewardship of navigation , with the dams on tva's system being key to this mission .

hydropower may thus be seen as a secondary opportunity arising from the control of the tennessee river and its tributaries .

however , revenues from the sale of electricity are now required to fund tva water resource programs which were previously funded by federal appropriations and user fees .

in 2011 , tva received almost $12 billion from sales of electricity .

multiple purpose dams and reservoirs are designed to balance water flows , taking in water during periods of high flow when rainfall is high to prevent or reduce downstream flooding , and releasing water during periods of low flow .

during dry periods , hydroelectric generation may be curtailed to allow reservoirs to fill .

the dam and reservoir system must maintain sufficient water volumes to accommodate other water resource needs , including drinking water , navigation , maintenance of fish habitats , and maintaining downstream water quality .

the operation of multiple use dams must therefore accommodate several objectives , and releases of water for hydroelectric generation must include these other uses .

if the hydropower assets were to be sold to private owners , how the navigation , flood damage mitigation , water quality , recreation , water supply , and land use missions could be safely and legally accomplished would be at question .

maximization of water flows for optimum power generation may not always be consistent with other demands of the river and reservoir system .

in its fy2014 budget , the obama administration proposed a strategic review of the tva , concerned that the agency is likely to incur substantial future costs as it seeks to modernize and meet environmental requirements .

the strategic review may involve the definition of various options affecting the structure of tva , and may involve some type of cost vs. benefits analysis of these options .

at this time , however , the details and direction of the administration's review of tva are not publicly known .

the opinion of most tva stakeholders seems to be in favor of keeping tva as a federal government corporation , and they would likely oppose any proposal which might result in higher electricity rates .

however , implementation of the current or a revised irp is likely to result in increased electricity rates , even without a change in tva's status .

the energy policy act of 1992 required tva to institute a least cost planning program , which is manifested in tva's current irp process .

under the tva's 2011 irp , certain capital expenditures were envisioned requiring tva to plan for more than $25 billion over the next 10 years in capital investment .

this projected level of investment could mean that the agency's $30 billion statutory limit would be quickly exceeded , given that current indebtedness is approximately $24 billion .

tva's own concerns on how to fund the costs of meeting anticipated environmental requirements and modernizing power plants highlighted the issue , with cost reductions , higher rates , creative lease and leaseback agreements , or raising the $30 billion statutory cap on indebtedness suggested as possible solutions .

while the potential for a sale of tva's assets ( in whole or part ) has been raised , congress may wish to examine the issue of tva's indebtedness and investigate whether it should: raise the statutory limit .

this option would allow tva to fund the projected capital investment plan recommended by the 2011 irp .

the current $30 billion statutory limit has been in place since 1979 .

an average expected service life for a fossil or nuclear steam power plant is approximately 40 years .

such an option would allow tva to continue functioning as it does now , but would increase the federal deficit .

another option would be to allow other electricity providers or competition within tva's service territory , thus reducing the need for new tva - owned or leased generation resources .

a revision to the tva act would likely be required .

maintain the current statutory limit .

such an option may require a reduced power generation mission , with strict limits on power plants or related infrastructure built to replace retired units .

a new irp would be focused on a reduced capital investment plan .

the tva act would likely have to be revised to allow other or competing entities to supply power in tva's service territory to make up for lost tva generation .

reduce the statutory limit .

such an option would likely involve a federal plan to restructure tva's indebtedness , with a goal of either reducing or paying off tva's indebtedness .

such a plan may ultimately reduce the power generation mission of tva .

funding of tva's navigation , flood damage control , and other water resource missions may have to revert to federal government appropriations .

the tva act would likely have to be revised to allow other or competing entities to supply power in tva's service territory to make up for lost tva generation .

tva's electric power mission requires that "power shall be sold at rates as low as are feasible. .

largely because of this directive , tva's electric rates have been among the lower rates for electricity .

however , given tva's projected capital requirements identified by the irp process , and tva's statutory limit on indebtedness , congress may want to consider: whether to amend the tva act , allowing tva to sell ( either in whole or in part ) its wholesale power at market - based rates .

such an option may modify the mission to provide power at costs as low as possible , but may reduce the need for tva to finance some portion of its future power plant construction needs , and thus may reduce tva indebtedness .

the administration has stated its belief that tva has achieved its original objectives , and these original objectives no longer require federal participation .

however , keeping tva as a federal government corporation appears to be the preference of most tva stakeholders .

in looking at the issue , congress may want to: allow tva to continue as it does , funding its needs from operating revenues , power program financing , and creative approaches to financing new power plant construction .

no change to the current mission of tva would be made .

however , given the ongoing strategic review , some type of administrative determination may be required at some point to ensure that tva has the means to capably address its projected future cost obligations .

redefine tva's status and designation as a government corporation .

since tva debt securities are not obligations of the u.s. government and do not carry a government guarantee , tva's current indebtedness has arguably little or no real impact on the federal budget .

since no single definition of "government corporation" currently exists , a potential definition of a new "self - sustaining" entity may be designed to remove tva's indebtedness from the balance sheets of the federal government .

new legislation would likely be required .

among other implications , such an approach is likely to increase tva's financing costs , since any perceived backing of tva's debt by the federal government would be removed .

consider modifying tva's missions .

for example , tva's navigation , flood control , and related obligations and funding could be separated from its economic development , power generation , and technology innovation missions , perhaps investing these roles in at least two separate federal corporations .

such an option would likely require legislation to revise or repeal the tva act .

examine tva's diverse missions , and determine itself whether these missions have been accomplished to such an extent that , going forward , federal participation is no longer warranted .

ending the federal role may mean a substantial portion of tva's debt could be removed from being counted under the federal deficit .

such an option would likely require legislation to revise or repeal the tva act .

if privatization were to follow , dissolution of tva as a single entity may ensue .

a market - based valuation of tva's assets would likely be required , with possible write - downs of some of these assets .

it is possible that some of tva's nuclear or fossil power generation may remain under federal ownership or trust , as decommissioning or other obligations related to these plants may inhibit sale at a fair market price or discourage private ownership altogether .

if the hydropower assets were to be sold to private owners , how the navigation , flood damage mitigation , water quality , recreation , water supply , and land use missions could be safely and legally accomplished would be at question .

maximization of water flows for optimum power generation may not always be consistent with other demands of the river and reservoir system .

