the united states has approximately 608,000 bridges on public roads subject to the national bridge inspection standards mandated by congress .

about 48% of these bridges are owned by state governments and 50% by local governments .

state governments generally own the larger and more heavily traveled bridges , such as those on the interstate highway system .

only 1.5% of highway bridges are owned by the federal government , primarily those on federally owned land .

about 9% of all bridges carry interstate highways , and another 25% serve arterial highways other than interstates .

interstate and other major arterial bridges carry almost 80% of average daily traffic .

the highest traffic loads are on interstate highway bridges in urban areas ; these account for only 5% of all bridges , but carried 37% of average daily traffic in 2013 .

federal assistance for the maintenance , rehabilitation , and construction of highway bridges comes principally through the federal - aid highway program administered by fhwa .

fhwa , however , does not make the determination as to which bridges should benefit from federal funding .

almost all funding under the federal - aid highway program is distributed to state departments of transportation , which determine , for the most part , where and on what the money is spent .

states must comply with detailed federal planning guidelines as part of the decision - making process , but otherwise are free to spend their federal highway funds in any way consistent with federal laws and regulations .

bridge projects are developed at the state level , and state departments of transportation let the contracts , oversee the construction process , and provide for the inspection of bridges .

the 2012 surface transportation reauthorization , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 , p.l .

112-141 ) , further strengthened the states' ability to determine spending on bridges by eliminating the highway bridge program ( hbp ) , which provided money to the states specifically for bridge construction and rehabilitation .

bridge improvements remain eligible for funding under two programs created by map - 21 that distribute funds to the states under formulas specified in the law , the national highway performance program ( nhpp ) and the surface transportation program ( stp ) .

under both programs , the states determine how much of their federal funding goes for bridges as opposed to other uses , primarily highway construction and improvement .

these funds may also be used for the seismic retrofitting of bridges to reduce earthquake failure risk .

fhwa is involved in the project decision - making process in two significant ways .

first , map - 21 ( §1111 ) requires fhwa , in consultation with the states and federal agencies , to classify public road bridges according to "serviceability , safety , and essentiality for public use ... [and] based on that classification , assign each a risk - based priority for systematic preventative maintenance , replacement or rehabilitation. .

however , none of the map - 21 programs appear to require the new classification and risk - based priority metric be used to determine program eligibility .

in addition to developing this metric , fhwa imposes certain performance measures that states must meet to avoid funding penalties pursuant to map - 21 .

for example , if more than 10% of the deck area of a state's bridges on the national highway system is structurally deficient , the state is subject to a penalty requiring it to dedicate an amount of its nhpp funds equal to 50% fy2009 hbp spending to bridge projects .

while the hbp existed , bridge program apportionments — the money states were entitled to receive each year under the hbp — were trending upward .

spending ( obligations ) on bridge projects , however , tended to be substantially lower than the apportioned amounts .

the transfer by the states of hbp funding to other highway programs , while permitted by law , was controversial following the collapse of the i - 35w bridge in minnesota in 2007 .

at the time , critics saw the widening gap between annual apportionments and spending as evidence of state transfer of resources to nonbridge uses .

however , bridge spending was an eligible expense under all the core formula programs , not just hbp , and total federal grants obligated for bridge work exceeded hbp apportionments every year between fy2007 and fy2012 ( table 1 ) .

under map - 21 , which eliminated the hbp , the states have even more freedom to decide how much of their federal surface transportation grants to spend on bridges .

during fy2013 , states obligated roughly 8% more federal - aid highway funds for bridge work than in fy2012 .

however , the fy2013 level was substantially lower than during fy2008 through fy2011 .

those higher levels reflect the availability of stimulus funds during fy2009 through fy2011 .

typically , federal - aid highway funds are available for obligation for four years , so through fy2016 the states may continue to obligate funds authorized prior to map - 21 .

the skagit river bridge collapse led to warnings that the large number of structurally deficient bridges indicates an incipient crisis , even though the bridge itself was not structurally deficient .

fhwa data do not substantiate this assertion .

the numbers of bridges classified as structurally deficient or functionally obsolete have fallen consistently since 1990 , and the proportion of all highway bridges falling into one or the other category is the lowest in decades .

the condition of roads has not experienced the same degree of improvement as the condition of bridges .

this raises the policy question of what priority should go to bridge repairs as opposed to roadway repairs .

in map - 21 , congress implicitly addressed this issue by giving states greater flexibility to use federal funding for roads or for bridges , at their discretion .

by doing this , congress chose not to mandate bridge spending levels sufficient to reduce the number of deficient bridges by a certain date or eliminate deficient bridges altogether ( described in figure 2 ) .

instead , responsibility for determining the amount that should be spent on bridges each year was assigned to the states .

a related issue is one of terminology .

the terms "structurally deficient" and "functionally obsolete" are not synonymous with "unsafe. .

an effort to eliminate all structurally deficient bridges quickly could lead to inefficient spending if a significant percentage of these bridges do not actually have major safety problems .

under map - 21 , fhwa is to develop performance measures in regard to bridges .

the speed of their development and the effectiveness of implementation will be oversight issues for congress .

to encourage state spending on structurally deficient bridges , map - 21 sets a penalty threshold under the nhpp: any state whose structurally deficient bridge deck area on the national highway system within the state's borders exceeds 10% of its total national highway system bridge deck area for three years in a row must devote nhpp funds equal to 50% of the state's fy2009 highway bridge program apportionment to improve bridge conditions during the following fiscal year and each year thereafter until the deck area of structurally deficient bridges falls to 10% or below .

even if a state were required to spend more of its federal highway funding on bridges ( and therefore less on roadway projects ) due to this penalty , its mandated spending on deficient bridges would be less than was required prior to the enactment of map - 21 .

given the lags in state reporting and the time required to complete major bridge projects , it is not clear whether the states' desire to spend their stp or nhpp funds on nonbridge projects is obstructing the declared national policy of reducing the number of deficient bridges .

federal motor fuel tax revenues , which have provided most of the funding for the federal - aid highway program since 1956 , have been insufficient to support the program as authorized by congress for several years .

map - 21 allocated money from the treasury's general fund for highway and bridge programs in fy2013 and fy2014 .

the highway and transportation funding act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-159 ) also used transfers to extend map - 21's funding levels and policies for eight months , through may 31 , 2015 .

if congress wishes to increase spending on bridges in a long - term reauthorization bill , it has a number of options: provide general fund monies to accelerate the repair of structurally deficient and functionally obsolete bridges .

consider resurrecting a stand - alone program for structurally deficient bridges , which would essentially reverse the change made in map - 21 and would force the states to provide minimum spending levels for bridge maintenance and repair .

raise the fuel taxes that finance the vast majority of surface transportation outlays , possibly with a portion of the increase dedicated to a federal bridge program .

emphasize public - private partnerships ( p3s ) as a mechanism to help reduce the number of structurally deficient bridges , for example , by allowing states to offer long - term leases of toll facilities to private investors in return for large up - front payments that could be used to supplement normal state and federal spending on bridge replacement and repair .

heavily traveled bridges can be attractive targets for conversion to toll facilities: many bridges have no convenient alternatives , so many drivers may be unable to avoid paying whatever toll is imposed .

an expansion of tolling could allow for more rapid improvement of major bridges .

the revenue stream provided by tolls can also make bridge building and reconstruction an attractive investment for private entities that are interested in participating in a p3 and can help projects become eligible for a federal transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) loan .

bridge tolls , however , are often very unpopular , and their acceptance varies greatly from region to region .

some states have sought to make bridge tolls more acceptable within a state by charging out - of - state users at a much higher rate than in - state residents , a practice that may face legal challenges .

historically , nearly all federal highway funding was restricted to roads and bridges on the federal - aid highway system .

the surface transportation assistance act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-599 ) stipulated that not less than 15% of a state's bridge apportionments nor more than 35% be spent "off - system. .

off - system spending of federal bridge funds has been required in every highway authorization bill ever since .

under map - 21 , stp funds equal to at least 15% of the amounts apportioned to a state for the highway bridge program in fy2009 are to be obligated for off - system bridge projects .

off - system bridges , by definition , are inherently local in nature .

by eliminating the set - aside for off - system bridges , congress could enable states to spend more of their federal funds on bridges that are more heavily used , but states would not be required to spend funds for that purpose without additional legislation .

the fhwa requirement that federal funding be directed to bridges with relatively low sufficiency ratings may encourage states to substitute bridge replacement for maintenance - type projects .

during fy2012 , of the total obligation of federal funds from all fhwa sources , 11% was obligated for new bridges , 55% was obligated for bridge replacement , 4% was for major rehabilitation , and 30% was for minor bridge work .

although these figures indicate that the lion's share of bridge funding has been obligated for new and replacement bridges , these percentages are less than they were in the late 1990s .

the percentage spent on minor bridge work has increased significantly since then .

still , the case can be made that as the number of deficient bridges decreases it might make sense to shift spending toward preventive maintenance .

map - 21 requires that the national bridge inventory classify bridges according to serviceability , safety , and essentiality for public use and , based on this classification ; assign each bridge a risk - based priority for systematic preventative maintenance , replacement , or rehabilitation .

the risk - based approach would provide an additional metric to the traditional focus on bridges that are "structurally deficient" and "functionally obsolete. .

in particular , the risk - based approach , which is still under development by fhwa , could provide statistics that more clearly identify unsafe bridges .

an august 21 , 2014 , report by the department of transportation office of inspector general audit report found that fhwa had not fully implemented all map - 21 bridge provisions , including the provision that dot establish a risk - based bridge prioritization process .

once the metric is developed , congress could consider making its use an eligibility requirement for bridge project funding under nhpp and stp .

map - 21 maintains the previous requirement that states' spending of federal funds on bridges be based on priorities established in state transportation implementation plans ( stips ) .

following the elimination of the highway bridge program in 2012 , congress may want to examine state spending on bridges under map - 21 and , in particular , whether stips pay adequate attention to bridge needs as opposed to highway needs .

fhwa could be directed to take a more active role in ensuring that inspections done by the states or their contractors are done in conformance with the national bridge inspection standards , including on - site audits of state inspections .

however , to have an impact , fhwa would have to be provided with sufficient funding to hire additional engineers and support personnel at fhwa division offices and dedicate these resources to oversight of the inspection program .

map - 21 included requirements for establishment of minimum inspection standards and an annual review of state compliance with the standards established in the act .

within two years of enactment the secretary of transportation is to update the standards for the methodology , training , and qualifications of inspectors .

congress may wish to oversee implementation of these provisions .

appendix a. bridge condition by state appendix b. bridge obligations by fhwa program: fy2007-fy201 .

