there has been significant activity in the 113 th congress concerning legislative proposals to reform the nation's immigration laws .

in june , the senate passed an omnibus immigration bill ( s. 744 ) that addresses a broad array of issues , including immigration enforcement and border security , verification of aliens' employment eligibility , the temporary and permanent admission of foreign nationals into the country , and the creation of mechanisms for some unauthorized aliens to acquire legal status .

the house , in contrast , is considering a number of stand - alone bills that would reform specific aspects of immigration law .

the house judiciary committee has ordered several of these bills to be reported .

some of these legislative proposals contain provisions that broadly correspond with provisions found in the senate bill , whereas other house proposals take a markedly different approach .

h.r .

2278 , the strengthen and fortify enforcement act ( safe act ) , is aimed at increasing immigration control and enforcement , particularly within the interior of the united states .

many of the safe act's provisions appear intended to address and override court decisions that have narrowly construed existing statutory authorities for immigration enforcement .

the bill would heighten penalties associated with violations of federal immigration laws ; clarify or establish rules intended to facilitate the detention and removal of aliens who lack authorization to remain in the united states , particularly when such aliens have been involved in criminal activity ; impose additional requirements concerning security - related background checks and screening of aliens seeking admission , status , or benefits under immigration law ; and encourage states and localities to play an increased role in immigration enforcement .

during judiciary committee hearings , several significant amendments were made to the bill , including provisions which would generally make unlawful presence by an alien a criminal offense , require the establishment of a biometric entry / exit system within two years of the bill's enactment , and generally constrain the exercise of prosecutorial discretion in the removal process .

while the safe act contains a few provisions which resemble those found in s. 744 , there are notable differences in both the breadth of the bills' enforcement provisions and their approach to the unauthorized alien population .

the safe act generally imposes more significant penalties for immigration - related violations and more stringent requirements relating to the detention and removal of aliens than the senate - passed bill .

perhaps most significantly , the safe act would make an alien's knowing unauthorized presence a criminal offense , whereas the senate bill would not make unlawful presence a crime .

in fact , the senate bill would establish procedures whereby some of the current unauthorized population could potentially acquire legal status , while neither the safe act nor the other bills ordered to be reported by the house judiciary committee , to date , make similar provisions for legalization .

indeed , the safe act's provisions much more closely resemble the last comprehensive immigration enforcement legislation passed by the house , h.r .

4437 , the border protection , antiterrorism , and illegal immigration control act of 2005 , though it differs from the earlier legislation on many specific matters .

this report describes and analyzes the safe act , as ordered reported out of the house judiciary committee .

the report's discussion of safe act is arranged by issue area , and considers how the bill modifies current laws concerning immigration - related sanctions ; the consideration and review of immigration - related applications and petitions ; the detention and removal of aliens ; visa issuance and security ; naturalization reform ; federal immigration enforcement operations ; and state and local involvement in immigration enforcement .

it will be updated as events require .

in addition to establishing a comprehensive set of rules governing the admission , continued presence , and departure of foreign nationals , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) currently provides for an enforcement regime to deter violations of these rules .

some violations may be subject to criminal fines and imprisonment ; others are subject to civil monetary penalties ; and still others , if committed by an alien , may be grounds for denying the alien admission into the country or removing the alien from the united states .

the safe act seeks to bolster this enforcement regime in various ways .

it would expand the scope of many immigration - related criminal statutes , including by making unlawful presence a criminal offense .

it would also expand the grounds for removability to cover additional types of criminal activity , and broaden the ina's definition of "aggravated felony" to include more criminal offenses .

in addition , it would expand the immigration consequences of criminal activity and certain activities posing a danger to u.s. security ( eg , terrorist activity ) .

the safe act contains a number of provisions concerning the consideration or review of petitions and applications for various rights , benefits , and statuses under the ina .

all applicants for immigration benefits are subject to criminal and national security background checks , and u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) requires applicants ( other than children under 12 ) for most immigration benefits to submit fingerprints .

in 2007 , the uscis ombudsman observed that federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) name checks did not clear on a timely basis and that this represented a "pervasive and serious" problem for uscis .

in response to such criticisms , uscis negotiated with the fbi to more expeditiously process the background checks and issued policy guidance in 2008 instructing uscis adjudicators to approve certain benefits if the fbi name checks had been pending for more than 180 days .

section 206 would seek to overturn this guidance by generally barring the granting or adjudication of applications for specified immigration benefits and privileges ( including naturalization applications and immigrant and non - immigrant petitions ) until any background or security checks required by the secretary of dhs have been completed or updated to the secretary's satisfaction .

section 206 would also provide that immigration authorities are not required to grant or adjudicate applications for specified immigration benefits and privileges when fraudulent activity in relation to the application is suspected , until such time as the activity has been investigated and resolved to the secretary's satisfaction ( also see " naturalization reform " ) .

section 206 would also add a new provision to the ina which would state that nothing in federal law requires the granting of any application , petition , status , benefit , or relief under immigration laws to either ( 1 ) persons deemed by dhs to be described under the terrorism - and security - related grounds of inadmissibility or deportability ; or ( 2 ) aliens for whom a criminal or other proceeding or investigation is open or pending , when the result of such proceeding or investigation is material to the alien's eligibility for the status or benefit sought .

during such time as immigration authorities are investigating whether a person falls under either of these two categories , they would be permitted to deny or withhold adjudication of the person's request for a benefit , status , or other privilege under immigration law , and no court would have jurisdiction to review such denials or withholding of adjudication .

section 205 addresses the disclosure of information that was submitted by applicants for adjustment of status under the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca , p.l .

99-603 ) .

it would permit the secretary of dhs to disclose , as a matter of discretion , information submitted by special agricultural workers for census or national security purposes , and information submitted by other applicants for legalization for national security purposes ( disclosures for census purposes already being permitted ) .

in addition , section 604 would clarify that an alien's adjustment to lpr status constitutes "admission," even if it occurs while the alien is present in the united states .

this amendment would effectively codify bia decisions which have found that adjustment of status within the united states constitutes "admission" under the ina , and overturn certain federal court decisions which found that aliens who adjust to lpr status within the united states are not subject to certain requirements for waivers of inadmissibility under section 212 ( h ) of the ina .

the safe act includes provisions that seek to facilitate the removal of criminal aliens , and clarify or augment immigration officials' authority to detain aliens during removal proceedings or following a final order of removal .

currently , immigration officials are generally required to detain "arriving aliens," as well as certain other aliens who have not been admitted or paroled into the united states and are subject to expedited removal ; those who are inadmissible or deportable on certain criminal or security grounds ; and aliens engaged in terrorist activity or "any other activity" endangering u.s. security .

they also have authority to detain other aliens , although the general policy is to use detention resources to support enforcement policies , which prioritize the removal of aliens who pose a danger to national security or a risk to public safety ; are recent illegal entrants ; or are fugitives or otherwise obstruct immigration controls .

foreign nationals not already legally residing in the united states who wish to come to the country generally must obtain a visa to be admitted .

under current law , the department of state ( dos ) and the dhs each have roles in visa issuances .

dos's bureau of consular affairs processes visa applications and issues visas .

the secretary of dhs promulgates regulations regarding visa policy .

although there was discussion of assigning all visa issuance responsibilities to dhs when the department was being created , the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa , p.l .

107-296 ) opted not to do so .

rather , the hsa drew on compromise language stating that dhs issues regulations regarding visa issuances , and that dos continues to issue visas .

the safe act reflects some members' continuing interest in visa issuances and security , including whether governing laws need to be strengthened , whether funding should be increased , and which agency should take the lead .

specific provisions in title iv of the bill concerning the tracking of foreign students after they arrive in the united states address a specific and perennial visa security concern .

the ina presently contains substantive requirements that an alien must typically satisfy in order to become a u.s. citizen , including being , for a requisite period prior to naturalization , "a person of good moral character , attached to the principles of the constitution of the united states , and well disposed to the good order and happiness of the united states. .

other generally applicable requirements for naturalization ( some of which may be subject to limited waiver ) include continuous residence for at least five years as an lpr ; literacy in english ; and knowledge of the history , principles , and government of the united states .

although the ina does not affirmatively define "good moral character," it lists certain activities as barring an alien from being found to possess good moral character if committed during the period for which good moral character is required to be established .

the commission of other specified conduct , including subversive activity , may also make an alien ineligible for naturalization .

moreover , the ina authorizes the government to revoke u.s. citizenship for a limited category of naturalized persons , typically on the grounds that the person acquired citizenship through fraud , concealment , or willful misrepresentation of material facts .

there are an estimated 11.1 million unauthorized aliens in the united states .

in 2012 , ice estimated that there were 1.9 million removable criminal aliens in the united states .

according to ice , they have the capacity to remove 400,000 aliens a year , and accordingly , dhs has developed a system to prioritize certain aliens for removal .

as a result , there has been ongoing debate about the amount of resources that should be allotted to removal activities , and how ice should prioritize the removal of removable aliens .

title v of the safe act would attempt to increase the government's capacity to remove aliens by increasing resources for removal , and authorizing a pilot program to reduce and expedite clerical tasks required by ice during the removal process .

in addition , the bill would modify immigration officers' authority to arrest aliens suspected of being removable , and mandate the creation of an advisory council whose purpose would be to advise congress on needed resources and the effectiveness of enforcement priorities .

the role that states and localities play in enforcing federal immigration law has been a topic of significant interest in recent years .

some states and localities , concerned about what they perceive as inadequate federal enforcement of immigration law , have sought to independently enforce federal law , as well as to penalize conduct that may facilitate the presence of unauthorized aliens within their jurisdiction .

other states and localities , in contrast , have proscribed activities ( eg , sharing information , honoring federal requests to hold aliens ) that could assist in federal immigration enforcement because they believe the federal government has been too aggressive in removing aliens who are not criminals and have ties to the community .

at least until 2012 , there had been considerable legal debate concerning the power of state and local police to enforce federal immigration law without express federal statutory authorization , or to criminally sanction persons for activities that may facilitate unauthorized immigration .

in arizona v. united states , the supreme court found that existing federal law contemplates states and localities having a limited role in immigration enforcement .

the court held that states are generally preempted from arresting or detaining aliens on the basis of suspected removability under federal immigration law .

such action may be taken only when there is specific federal statutory authorization , or pursuant to "request , approval , or instruction from the federal government. .

the arizona ruling also suggested that measures which impose criminal penalties under state law for violations of federal immigration law may be vulnerable to facial challenges on preemption grounds , even when these sanctions mirror those found in federal law .

the court did , however , find that state and local officers are not facially preempted from checking the immigration status of persons stopped for state and local offenses , at least so long as the inquiry does not unreasonably prolong the detention of the person in state or local custody .

title i of the safe act includes several provisions which seem intended to override aspects of the supreme court's ruling in arizona , and to provide states and localities with express statutory authorization to engage in immigration enforcement activities .

the safe act also includes other provisions which would more broadly encourage states and localities to play a greater role in immigration enforcement , deter state and local governments from adopting policies that limit cooperation with federal immigration enforcement efforts , and require dhs to exercise existing authorities to facilitate greater cooperation with states and localities in immigration enforcement matters .

section 102 of the safe act would effectively supersede the supreme court's ruling in arizona , and provide express federal authorization for a significantly greater degree of immigration enforcement activities by states and localities than is permitted under current law .

the bill would amend the ina to expressly permit states and localities to enact and enforce measures that make it a separate state or local crime to violate the criminal provisions of the ina , so long as the penalties are not greater than those that may be imposed under the corresponding federal statute .

similar measures imposing civil penalties for civil violations of the ina would also generally be permissible .

states and localities , would , however , continue to be barred from imposing separate criminal or civil sanctions ( other than through licensing or similar requirements ) upon entities that hire or employ unauthorized aliens .

section 102 also does not purport to permit state and local measures that would impose criminal or civil sanctions on conduct that is not already penalized by the ina .

section 102 would also generally permit state and local officers to enforce the ina ( or state and local "immigration laws" ) by investigating , identifying , and apprehending aliens suspected of immigration violations , and thereafter transferring them to federal custody .

such enforcement would not necessarily be limited to inquiries into immigration status made in the course of enforcing state and local laws , as was the case with the immigration status checks upheld by the supreme court in arizona v. united states .

rather , state and local officials would apparently be permitted to investigate , identify , apprehend , and transfer aliens separate and apart from their other duties .

other provisions of title i would promote immigration enforcement by requiring greater information - sharing by federal , state , and local authorities for immigration - related purposes .

such sharing is generally not required under existing federal law , although federal , state , and local governments and officials are generally barred from restricting the sending or receipt of information regarding citizenship or immigration status .

in addition , several forms of information sharing currently operate under cooperative arrangements entered pursuant to ina §287 ( g ) of the ina , as well as through the ice's secure communities and criminal alien programs ( see "federal - state partnerships to identify removable aliens" ) .

section 103 would require that the "immigration violators file" of the national crime information center ( ncic ) contain "all available" information regarding aliens who are subject to final orders of removal , have entered into voluntary departure agreements , overstayed their visas , or had their visas revoked .

section 104 would similarly require that states be given access to federal programs and technology "directed broadly" at identifying removable aliens .

currently , states and localities must generally rely upon federal authorities to supply them with information regarding individuals' citizenship or immigration status .

section 105 , on the other hand , requires states and localities to provide dhs with certain information about aliens apprehended within their jurisdiction who may be removable .

questions could be raised about whether a requirement to supply information impermissibly "commandeers" state and local resources , notwithstanding the fact that section 105 would require dhs to reimburse "all reasonable costs" that states and localities incur .

related provisions of title i , which would condition certain funding for states and localities upon their cooperation in enforcing federal immigration law , would arguably not raise similar concerns , because imposing conditions upon the use of federal funds has been widely recognized as within congress's spending power .

specifically , section 106 would permit funds for the procurement of certain items that facilitate and are "directly related" to immigration enforcement to be given only to jurisdictions whose law enforcement officers are permitted to engage in immigration enforcement activities in the course of their routine duties .

relatedly , section 106 would prohibit such funding to jurisdictions whose policies or practices prevent inquiries into suspects' immigration status .

similarly , section 114 would provide that jurisdictions whose statutes , policies , or practices prohibit state and local officers from assisting or cooperating with federal immigration law enforcement in the course of carrying out their routine duties would be ineligible for certain funds .

it would also amend section 642 ( b ) of iirira to prohibit states and localities from taking specified actions ( in addition to restricting information - sharing with federal immigration authorities , which is currently prohibited ) that may limit assistance with immigration enforcement efforts by the federal government .

among other things , states and localities would generally be barred from establishing restrictions on notifying the federal government of the presence of removable aliens and complying with immigration detainer requests from the federal government .

in addition to authorizing or encouraging greater involvement by states and localities in immigration enforcement , the title i of the safe act also contains provisions that seem intended to ensure that the federal government has adequate resources and authorities to take into custody those aliens who are apprehended by state and local law enforcement .

for more on dhs's authorities to detain aliens , see " detention and removal of aliens . .

section 107 would require dhs to construct or acquire additional detention facilities for aliens in removal proceedings , with each facility required to have "a number of beds necessary to effectuate the purposes of .. .

title [i]. .

section 108 , in turn , would require that dhs consider assuming custody of removable aliens in state or local custody if requested to do so .

specifically , when such a request was made , dhs would be required to ( 1 ) take the alien into custody no later than 48 hours after a detainer has been issued , following the conclusion of the state or local charging or dismissal process ( or within 48 hours after the alien is apprehended , if no such charging or dismissal process is required ) ; and ( 2 ) request that the state or locality temporarily hold the alien for transfer to federal custody .

this provision appears intended to make it more likely that federal immigration authorities will respond to a state or local request to take into custody an alien suspected of being removable .

section 108 would also require that doj and dhs ensure that aliens arrested under title i of the safe act are held in custody , pending examination as to their removability , and would provide that a facility is adequate for such detention so long as it meets certain criteria , including satisfying the u.s .

marshals service's standards for the housing , care , and security of detainees .

congress has created several avenues for states and localities to assist in the enforcement of federal immigration law .

one of the broadest grants of authority for state and local immigration enforcement activity stems from ina section 287 ( g ) , which authorizes the secretary of dhs to enter written agreements ( commonly referred to as "287 ( g ) agreements" ) which enable specially trained state or local officers to perform specific functions relative to the investigation , apprehension , or detention of aliens , during a predetermined time frame and under federal supervision .

in recent years , dhs has decreased its reliance on the 287 ( g ) program to identify and apprehend aliens in state or local custody , while increasing its use of programs like secure communities , which do not involve the delegation of immigration enforcement authority to states or localities .

title i of the safe act contains several provisions which seek to ensure the continuation and expansion of cooperative arrangements with states or localities on immigration enforcement matters .

section 112 seeks to expand the use of 287 ( g ) agreements to assist in the identification and apprehension of removable aliens .

pursuant to the bill , dhs would generally be required to enter a 287 ( g ) agreement whenever requested to do so by a state or local government agency .

dhs would only be permitted to deny a request to enter a 287 ( g ) agreement on the basis of "a compelling reason. .

dhs would also be required to accommodate requesting jurisdictions regarding the types of immigration enforcement functions that will be carried out pursuant to a 287 ( g ) agreement .

dhs would be prohibited from substituting a program or technology "directed broadly" at identifying removable aliens — apparently a references to the secure communities program — in lieu of entering or maintaining a 287 ( g ) agreement .

dhs would also be barred from terminating 287 ( g ) agreements without compelling reason and without complying with certain procedures ( eg , providing written notice at least 180 days in advance ) .

states and localities that believe their agreements have been improperly terminated would be entitled to administrative and judicial review .

currently , such agreements may be terminated "at any time ; " the termination is effective "immediately upon receipt ; " and states and localities appear to have no legal recourse .

section 111 would require that dhs continue to operate a program ( akin to the criminal alien program ) that identifies removable aliens in correctional facilities and arranges for their removal at the completion of their sentences ; and extend the program to all states .

also , in an exercise of congress's spending power , section 111 would require any state which receives funding for the incarceration of "criminal aliens" pursuant to the state criminal alien assistance program ( scaap ) to provide assistance in the identification of criminal aliens within its prisons or jails .

section 111 would further authorize states and localities to hold "criminal aliens" for up to 14 days after they have completed their sentences ( or issue a detainer to hold such aliens ) so that dhs can take custody of them .

however , because such holds would arguably constitute warrantless seizures of the aliens' person , they could potentially be challenged on fourth amendment grounds .

in addition , section 113 would amend section 241 ( i ) of the ina — which underlies the scaap program .

under current law , states may request reimbursement from dhs for costs associated with incarcerating an "undocumented criminal alien" — a term defined to cover unlawfully present aliens who have been convicted of a felony or two or more misdemeanors .

section 113 would modify this definition to also cover unlawfully present aliens who are charged with such offenses .

the bill would further authorize appropriations necessary to carry out the program for fy2014 and each subsequent fiscal year .

further , section 115 , captioned "clarifying the authority of ice detainers," would generally require dhs to execute all lawful writs , processes , and orders issued under the authority of the united states , and command "all necessary assistance to execute the secretary's duties. .

the purpose of this general statement is not immediately apparent .

arguably , it could be construed to mean that dhs is required to employ detainers , when necessary , in order to acquire custody of an alien believed to be removable who is in state or local custody .

in keeping with title i's encouragement of state and local involvement in immigration enforcement , section 109 would require that dhs create materials to assist state and local officers in enforcing immigration law , although immigration - related training would not be a "requirement or prerequisite" for doing so , as it currently is for state and local officers acting pursuant to "287 ( g ) agreements," discussed previously .

section 110 would further provide that state and local officers , acting within the scope of their official duties , are immune "to the same extent as ... federal law enforcement officer[s]," from personal liability arising from the performance of any "duty" described in title i , including investigating , arresting , and detaining aliens .

this provision would apparently clarify that immigration enforcement is within the scope of state and local officers' duties for immunity purposes , and could potentially be construed to grant state and local officers protection under the federal tort claims act for intentional torts .

currently , the ina expressly provides for immunity only for state and local officers acting pursuant to a "287 ( g ) agreement. .

