some members of congress believe the contributions of small businesses to commercial innovation and economic growth could be enhanced through greater access to growing international markets .

according to u.s. census bureau data , small businesses ( i.e. , firms with fewer than 500 employees ) comprised 97.7% of all u.s. exporting firms in 2014 , but these businesses account for 33.4% of the value of exports .

only 1% of small businesses in the united states export .

with roughly three - quarters of world purchasing power and almost 95% of world consumers living outside u.s. borders , more attention is being paid to the potential of small business programs to increase employment in the export sector .

advocates of export promotion programs also argue that helping small businesses to export will lead to more jobs .

a commonly held view is that small businesses are the major source of job creation in the u.s. economy and thus policymakers should try to encourage the growth of small businesses as a means to increase employment .

economists have debated for decades the extent to which small businesses contribute to job creation .

more recent studies indicate that small business owners have different aspirations concerning the growth of their firms and that small , new firms ( i.e. , startups ) are more likely to expand than small businesses generally .

economists generally do not view job creation as a justification for providing federal assistance to small businesses .

they argue that in the long term such assistance will likely reallocate jobs within the economy , not increase them .

in their view , jobs arise primarily from the size of the labor force , which depends largely on population , demographics , and factors that affect the choice of home versus market production .

this report begins with the history , role , and scope of the small business administration's ( sba's ) export promotion activities and the creation of sba's office of international trade ( oit ) .

oit is charged with coordinating sba's export promotion activities , including management and training programs , grants , and loan programs .

next , the report describes the three major forms of sba trade - related assistance: ( 1 ) export - promotion - focused loans , ( 2 ) management and training programs , and ( 3 ) the state trade expansion promotion ( step ) grant program .

it then uses quantitative data from sba and qualitative data from other sources to present performance analysis of sba's international programs .

the report also discusses three policy issues for congress .

first , are there market barriers impeding smaller firms from exporting ? .

second , is there a compelling interest for the government to promote exports in the name of national "competitiveness" ? .

third , are sba's export promotion policies duplicative of other federal programs ? .

these policy issues could arise in future debates over the size and scope of sba's international trade programs .

this debate will likely be framed by the issues of fiscal responsibility and the promotion of economic opportunities for firms and employees .

sba provides export promotion and financing services to small businesses through its business loan programs , management and training programs , and other initiatives .

sba's oit coordinates these activities as it assists with four stages of export promotion: ( 1 ) identifying small businesses interested in export promotion , ( 2 ) preparing small businesses to export , ( 3 ) connecting small businesses to export opportunities , and ( 4 ) supporting small businesses once they find export opportunities .

sba also participates in the regional network of u.s .

export assistance centers , which are managed by the department of commerce's international trade administration .

despite its name , oit primarily encourages export promotion rather than international trade , generally .

none of oit's programs have a specific goal to help small businesses gain access to lower - cost or specialized imports , such as for use as inputs in their production processes .

this export - oriented focus is consistent with other federal agencies .

oit's programs are funded through a combination of the sba's appropriations for business loan programs ( i.e. , subsidy costs ) and for salaries and expenses .

congress does not directly provide an appropriation amount for each of the sba's three export - focused loan programs or for trade - related counseling provided through sba's management and training programs .

table 1 provides oit's total program costs from fy2007 to fy2016 and the president's budget request for fy2017 .

total program costs include obligations covering the full cost for administering oit's major programs and services .

this includes direct costs from the operating budget plus compensation and benefits ; agency - wide costs , such as rent and telecommunications ; and indirect costs , such as agency overhead ( eg , financial management ) .

in terms of scale , oit's total program costs of $9.5 million in fy2016 accounted for approximately 1.4% of sba's total program obligations for the year ( not including disaster assistance ) .

for fy2015 , oit's total program costs were approximately $9.0 million .

for fy2017 , the president requested that $9.5 million be funded toward the total cost of oit's programs ( with an exact increase of $20,000 compared with the enacted amount for fy2016 ) .

before december 2010 , oit was a division within sba's office of capital access .

it was led by the director for international trade , who reported to the associate administrator ( aa ) for capital access .

the small business jobs act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-240 ) required the sba administrator to appoint an aa for international trade no later than december 27 , 2010 .

accordingly , oit's reporting structure was realigned such that the aa for international trade now reports directly to the office of the sba administrator .

on december 23 , 2010 , the sba administrator approved the reorganization that included the formation of the oit and appointed the first aa for international trade in august 2011 .

these administrative changes were intended to raise the profile of sba's export promotion activities within the agency .

sba is one of several federal agencies that assist in the promotion of small business exports and in export promotion more generally .

sba's website provides a table of federal programs that help to finance small business exports .

most of these federal programs are located within other organizations , such as the export - import bank of the united states , the department of commerce , the department of agriculture , the u.s. trade and development agency , and the overseas private investment corporation .

sba is also member of the trade promotion coordinating committee ( tpcc ) , an interagency committee whose objective is to coordinate and set priorities for federal agencies involved in export promotion .

the tpcc then proposes a unified export promotion budget to the president .

the tpcc is composed of 20 member agencies , including the department of commerce , export - import bank , sba , department of state , u.s. trade representative , and department of the treasury .

the secretary of commerce chairs the tpcc .

sba identifies small businesses interested in export promotion through a combination of informational and financial programs .

technically speaking , all of the sba's loan programs can be used by small businesses looking to begin exporting or expand their current exporting operations .

indeed , many of sba's loan programs contribute to this mission ( discussed in the " data analysis of performance " section of this report ) .

sba has three loan programs that specifically focus on export promotion: export express loan program , which provides working capital or fixed asset financing for small businesses that will begin or expand exporting ; export working capital loan program , which provides financing to support export orders or the export transaction cycle , from purchase order to final payment ; and international trade loan program , which provides long - term financing to support small businesses that are expanding because of growing export sales or have been adversely affected by imports and need to modernize to meet foreign competition .

table 2 summarizes the key features of sba's three export promotion - focused loan programs .

to encourage the demand for smaller loans , the sba waived the up - front loan guaranty fee and ongoing servicing fee for 7 ( a ) loans ( including export - focused programs ) of $150,000 or less in fy2014-fy2016 ; waived the up - front loan guaranty fee for 7 ( a ) loans of $150,000 or less in fy2017 ; waived 50% of the up - front loan guaranty fee on all non - sba express ( including export express ) 7 ( a ) loans of $150,001 up to and including $5 million in fy2015 and fy2016 ; and waived 50% of the up - front loan guaranty fee on all non - sba express ( including export express ) 7 ( a ) loans of $150,001 up to and including $500,000 in fy2017 .

in addition , the veterans entrepreneurship act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-38 ) authorized and made permanent the sba's practice of waiving the sbaexpress loan program's one time , up - front guaranty fee for veterans ( and their spouse ) beginning on or after october 1 , 2015 , except during any upcoming fiscal year for which the president's budget , submitted to congress , includes a subsidy cost for the 7 ( a ) program , in its entirety , that is above zero .

in addition to these export promotion - focused programs , sba also supports small business exports through its other business loan programs .

these programs include the 504 certified development company ( 504 / cdc ) program , standard 7 ( a ) program , and specialized 7 ( a ) programs ( see the appendix for a brief summary of these loan programs ) .

the size of the export activity within each of these programs is discussed in the " data analysis of performance " section of this report .

in many ways , sba's export promotion loan programs share similar characteristics to other sba loan programs .

for example , the export express program resembles the sba express program .

the sba express program shares several of the characteristics of the standard 7 ( a ) loan guaranty program except that it has an expedited approval process ( which increases the risk of loan losses ) , a lower maximum loan amount , and a smaller percentage of the loan guaranteed ( both of which reduce sba's exposure to potential losses ) .

similarly , the export express program shares several characteristics with the standard international trade loan program , such as an expedited approval process in exchange for a lower maximum loan amount ( $500,000 compared with $5 million ) and a lower percentage of guaranty .

sba provides trade - related counseling to small business owners through its management and training programs as well as through its participation in interagency counseling programs .

small business development centers ( sbdcs ) are the largest sba source of trade - related counseling .

sba also offers counseling through other programs , such as women's business centers ( wbcs ) and the service corps of retired executives ( score ) .

in addition , sba partners with other agencies to provide small business export counseling .

for example , sba provides a small business counselor training certification program and engages in counseling services to small business in partnership with the department of commerce - led u.s .

export assistance centers ( useacs ) .

in fy2015 , sba counseled 3,387 small business owners and trained 8,120 small business owners on export finance at various useacs .

the small business jobs act of 2010 authorized sba to establish a three - year state trade and export promotion ( step ) pilot grant initiative .

congress initially appropriated funding for the program for two years: $30 million in fy2011 and $30 million in fy2012 .

under the step initiative , the sba awarded grants to states in fy2011 and fy2012 with the goal of assisting eligible "small business concerns" with exporting .

the program's objectives were to ( 1 ) increase the number of eligible small business concerns in the state that export and ( 2 ) increase the export volume of those eligible small businesses that already export .

sba awarded step grants to states to execute export programs that assist eligible small business concerns in participation in a foreign trade mission ; a foreign market sales trip ; a subscription to services provided by the u.s. department of commerce ; the payment of website translation fees ; the design of international marketing media ; a trade show exhibition ; participation in training workshops ; or any other export initiative determined appropriate by the aa for sba's oit .

under the first grant competition in 2011 , sba awarded 51 cooperative agreements , totaling nearly $29 million .

under the second competition in 2012 , the agency awarded 52 cooperative agreements , totaling nearly $30 million .

individual state project award amounts varied based on proposed project plans and budgets .

in the first grant competition , the average award was $568,000 .

in the second grant competition , the average award was $577,000 .

some of the projects that sba prioritized in awarding the grants included assistance to eligible small business concerns that are owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals , women , or veterans or service - disabled veterans ; located in rural areas ; new - to - market export opportunities to the people's republic of china ; or part of a regional , industry - focused , innovation cluster .

sba was authorized to competitively award step grants to the 50 states , district of columbia , commonwealth of puerto rico , virgin islands , guam , american samoa , and the northern mariana islands .

under the step initiative , in most cases sba provided 75% of the funding required for the total project and states provided 25% .

however , for the top three states in value of exports , sba provided 65% of total funding , whereas these states provided 35% .

the sba's office of inspector general ( oig ) audited the step program for overall management and effectiveness during program's initial year of operations ( fy2011 ) .

the small business jobs act of 2010 required the sba to report to congress "the effect of each grant on exports" in the state receiving the grant .

the oig emphasized that the sba did not establish baselines to measure changes in a state's small business exporters or exports and that the program's performance goals were not specific and results - oriented .

the oig also found that some states focused on goals that did not directly increase the number of small business exporters or the export volume of existing small business exporters .

following sba's comments on the study , oig determined that sba management was responsive to nearly all issues raised in the report as sba prepared its fy2012 round of step awards .

at the state level , sba reports the most recent rounds of federal step awards , level of state match , and cumulative step award amounts over the history of the program .

on january 17 , 2014 , the president signed into law the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , which appropriated $8 million for the step program in fy2014 .

on december 16 , 2014 , the president signed into law the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , which appropriated $17.4 million for the step program in fy2015 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) appropriated $18.0 million for the step program in fy2016 .

in the 114 th congress , the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-125 ) renamed the program as the "state trade expansion program," reformed some of the program's procedures , and provided $30 million in annual authorization for step grants from fy2016 through fy2020 .

in terms of program administration , p.l .

114-125 allows the associate administrator ( aa ) for international trade to give priority to step proposals from states that have a relatively small share of small businesses that export or would assist rural , women - owned , and socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses and small business concerns .

p.l .

114-125 requires the aa for international trade to submit to the house and senate small business committees a report detailing the revised step program's structure and procedures , management plan , and merit - based review process .

the 115 th congress could consider a number of modifications to the step program based on the results of an sba office of inspector general report mandated under p.l .

114-125 .

according to statute , the report reviewed "the extent to which recipients of grants under the [step] program are measuring the performance of the activities being conducted and the results of the measurements" and "the overall management and effectiveness of the program. .

additionally , congress could consider whether to permanently reauthorize the step program .

this section analyzes export - related performance data for sba's business loan and management and training programs .

sba provided the loan approval and loan amount data to crs , as they are available only by request .

although qualitative data on sba's trade - related programs are limited , this section presents publicly available survey responses .

these qualitative data include surveys commissioned by sba and small business trade associations on the visibility , utilization , and outcomes of sba's loan , management , and training programs .

this section of the report introduces three policy issues for consideration as congress looks to the future size and scope of sba's export promotion activities: ( 1 ) are there barriers to exporting or market failures impeding smaller firms from international trade ? .

 ( 2 ) is there a compelling interest for the government to promote exports in the name of national trade competitiveness ? .

and ( 3 ) are sba's export promotion policies duplicative of other federal programs ? .

these issues will likely be framed by the rising concerns about fiscal responsibility and sustained economic recovery .

