congress is deeply divided over implementation of the affordable care act ( aca ) , the health reform law enacted in march 2010 during the 111 th congress .

since the aca's enactment , lawmakers opposed to specific provisions in the aca or the entire law have repeatedly debated its implementation and considered bills to repeal , defund , delay , or otherwise amend the law .

this report summarizes legislative actions taken during the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses to repeal , defund , delay , or otherwise amend the aca .

much of this legislative activity took place in the house , which reverted to republican control at the beginning of the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) .

the republican - led house passed numerous aca - related bills , including legislation that would have repealed the entire law .

there was less debate in the senate , which remained under democratic control during the 112 th and 113 th congresses .

most of the house - passed aca legislation was not considered in the senate during that period .

a few bills to amend specific elements of the aca that attracted sufficiently broad and bipartisan support were approved by both the house and the senate and signed into law .

with republicans in control of both chambers in the 114 th congress , opponents of the aca sought new opportunities to pass and send to the president legislation that would change the law .

republican leaders used a special legislative process known as budget reconciliation in an effort to repeal parts of the aca .

pursuant to the congressional budget act ( budget act ) , budget reconciliation allows congress to use expedited procedures when considering legislation that would bring existing spending , revenue , and debt limit laws into compliance with the fiscal priorities set out in the annual budget resolution .

using the reconciliation process to try and dismantle the aca appeals to opponents of the law because reconciliation bills are not subject to filibuster and can be passed with a simple majority vote in the senate .

on october 23 , 2015 , the house passed a reconciliation bill ( h.r .

3762 ) containing provisions submitted by three committees — ways and means , energy and commerce , and education and workforce — pursuant to reconciliation instructions included in the fy2016 budget resolution .

this bill would have repealed several provisions of the aca , among other things .

the house - passed bill was taken up by the senate , which substituted its own more extensive set of aca repeal provisions .

these provisions were submitted by the finance committee and the health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee in accordance with the instructions in the budget resolution .

the senate approved h.r .

3762 , as amended , on december 3 , 2015 .

the house approved the senate - passed bill on january 6 , 2016 , and the measure was sent to president obama .

on january 8 , 2016 , the president vetoed h.r .

3762 .

the house was unable to override the veto in a vote taken on february 2 , 2016 .

the information in this report is presented in three tables .

table 1 summarizes the aca changes that were signed into law during the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses .

table 2 lists all the other aca bills passed by the house during that period .

table 3 summarizes the aca provisions in the reconciliation bill that president obama vetoed .

while a detailed examination of the aca itself is beyond the scope of this report , a brief overview of the aca's core provisions and its impact on federal spending is provided as context for the material presented in the tables .

in addition to considering aca repeal or amendment in authorizing legislation , lawmakers have used the annual appropriations process in an effort to eliminate funding for aca implementation and address other concerns they have with the law .

a companion report , crs report r44100 , use of the annual appropriations process to block implementation of the affordable care act ( fy2011-fy2017 ) , summarizes the aca - related language added to annual appropriations legislation by congressional appropriators since the aca was signed into law .

the aca made significant changes to the way u.s. health care is financed , organized , and delivered .

its primary goal is to increase access to affordable health care for the medically uninsured and underinsured .

to that end , the law included a complex set of interconnected provisions that address the private health insurance market .

first , the aca requires health insurers to comply with a set of federal standards ( "market reforms" ) to ensure that individuals may purchase , keep , and renew coverage that provides a minimum level of benefits and consumer protections , with some limits on costs .

second , the law establishes competitive private health insurance exchanges ( also known as marketplaces ) through which individuals and small employers are able to compare and enroll in qualified health plans .

exchanges operate in every state and the district of columbia .

they are administered by states or by the federal government , or through a partnership between the state and federal governments .

qualified individuals who enroll in exchange plans may receive financial assistance if they meet income and certain other requirements .

refundable tax credits are available to individuals and families with incomes between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) to help pay the insurance premium .

the premium tax credits are available upon enrollment so that eligible individuals and families can choose to receive the subsidy immediately rather than wait until they file taxes the following year .

in addition , certain individuals and families receiving the tax credit may be eligible for cost - sharing subsidies to reduce their out - of - pocket costs ( eg , deductibles , co - payments ) when receiving health services .

small employers with no more than 25 full - time equivalent employees ( ftes ) may also use the exchanges to purchase insurance coverage for their employees and may qualify for a tax credit to help cover the cost of providing that coverage .

in june 2015 , the u.s. supreme court in king v. burwell ruled that the premium tax credits are available to all qualified individuals who enroll in exchange plans and meet the necessary income and other requirements , regardless of whether the exchange is administered by the state or the federal government .

third , the aca's "individual mandate" requires most u.s. citizens and legal residents to obtain coverage .

those who remain uninsured may have to pay a penalty unless they qualify for an exemption .

the individual mandate is intended to encourage healthy individuals to participate in the insurance market and not wait until they get sick to buy coverage .

finally , the law's "employer mandate" requires employers with 50 or more ftes to offer health coverage that meets affordability and adequacy standards for their full - time employees and those workers' dependents .

employers who do not comply with these requirements may be subject to a tax if one or more of their employees purchase coverage through an exchange and receive a subsidy .

the purpose of the aca's employer requirements is to encourage larger firms to maintain affordable and adequate coverage for their employees .

the aca coupled its private insurance provisions with the requirement that states expand their medicaid programs to cover all nonelderly individuals with incomes up to 138% fpl .

those with higher incomes , up to 400% fpl , may be eligible to get subsidized coverage through an exchange .

in june 2012 , the u.s. supreme court in nfib v. sebelius found the medicaid expansion to be unconstitutionally coercive and prohibited the federal government from enforcing it .

the court's decision made medicaid expansion optional for states .

in addition to expanding access to insurance coverage , the aca contains hundreds of other provisions that address health care access , costs , and quality .

they include new programs to test alternative ways of delivering and paying for health care .

the law also includes new taxes and fees as well as adjustments to medicare payments to hospitals and other health care providers .

these provisions are designed to offset the federal spending on exchange subsidies and medicaid expansion .

implementation of the aca is affecting both mandatory and discretionary spending .

mandatory spending — also referred to as direct spending — is controlled through authorizing laws .

it includes spending on entitlement programs such as medicare and social security .

authorizing laws may provide permanent or temporary appropriations or other forms of budget authority for such spending .

when the authorizing law contains no appropriations , mandatory programs may be funded through the annual appropriations process .

this is sometimes referred to as "appropriated mandatory" or "appropriated entitlement" spending .

discretionary spending is both controlled and funded through the annual appropriations process .

it typically covers the routine costs of running federal agencies and offices , including wages and salaries .

federal spending on aca implementation can be grouped into three categories: ( 1 ) mandatory spending on expanding insurance coverage , ( 2 ) mandatory spending on other programs , and ( 3 ) discretionary spending .

each of these categories is briefly discussed below .

in addition to their efforts to repeal or otherwise amend the aca through regular legislative procedures , republican leaders used the reconciliation process to pass legislation that would eliminate several core provisions of the aca .

table 3 summarizes the aca provisions in h.r .

3762 , the restoring americans' healthcare freedom reconciliation act of 2015 , which president obama vetoed on january 8 , 2016 .

h.r .

3762 was reported by the house budget committee on october 16 , 2015 , and passed by the full house on october 23 , 2015 .

the measure contained provisions submitted by three committees — ways and means , energy and commerce , and education and workforce — pursuant to reconciliation instructions included in the fy2016 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

11 ) .

as passed by the house , h.r .

3762 would have repealed the individual and employer mandates , eliminated the medical device tax and the tax on high - value employer - sponsored health plans ( i.e. , "cadillac tax" ) , and defunded the pphf , among other things .

cbo and jct estimated that the bill would reduce the budget deficit over the period fy2016-fy2025 by about $129 billion .

that amount reflects not just the bill's direct impact on federal spending and revenues but also its broader impact on the u.s. economy , the so - called macroeconomic feedback effects .

the senate took up consideration of h.r .

3762 and substituted its own significantly broader set of aca provisions .

those provisions were submitted by the finance and help committees , in accordance with the reconciliation instructions in s.con.res .

11 .

as amended , h.r .

3762 passed the senate on december 3 , 2015 .

the house approved the senate - passed bill on january 6 , 2016 .

the enrolled bill was sent to the president , who vetoed it on january 8 , 2016 .

the house voted to override the veto on february 2 , 2016 , but did not muster the two - thirds vote required .

as summarized in table 3 , the vetoed bill would have repealed the premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies , eliminated the penalties associated with the individual and employer mandates , terminated the requirements and enhanced federal funding for the medicaid expansion , and repealed most of the aca's taxes and fees , among other things .

cbo and jct estimated that the loss of tax and other revenue under the bill would be more than offset by eliminating spending on subsidies and medicaid expansion .

they projected that the bill would reduce the budget deficit over the period fy2016-fy2025 by about $474 billion , including macroeconomic feedback effects .

on july 30 , 2014 , the house approved a simple resolution ( h.res .

676 ) on a party - line vote that authorized speaker john boehner to sue the president or other executive branch officials for actions taken to implement the aca that are inconsistent with their duties under the constitution and laws of the united states .

on november 21 , 2014 , the house filed a lawsuit in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia , which contained two counts against the administration .

first , the lawsuit claimed that the president had exceeded his constitutional duty to faithfully execute federal laws by delaying implementation of the aca's employer mandate .

second , the lawsuit asserted that the cost - sharing subsidies were in violation of the constitution because congress had not appropriated any funds for them .

the administration challenged the lawsuit claiming that the house had no legal standing to sue , and asked for the lawsuit to be dismissed .

on september 9 , 2015 , the judge agreed that the house did not have standing to pursue its claim regarding delay of the employer mandate .

but the judge ruled that the house did have standing to pursue the second claim that the administration was violating the constitution by paying cost - sharing subsidies without an appropriation to cover those outlays .

on may 12 , 2016 , the judge issued a merits decision , holding that congress had not appropriated funds for the payment of cost - sharing subsidies .

that ruling has been stayed while the case is on appeal to the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit .

