the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( wrrda 2014 , p.l .

113-121 ) became law on june 10 , 2014 .

its conference report , h.rept .

113-449 , resolved differences between the house - passed h.r .

3080 , the water resources reform and development act of 2013 ( wrrda 2013 ) , and the senate - passed s. 601 , the water resources development act of 2013 ( wrda 2013 ) .

the conference report adopted water resources reform and development act for the act's title .

both h.r .

3080 and s. 601 represented omnibus authorization legislation focused on water resource activities , principally of the u.s. army corps of engineers , and a few other environmental issues .

the bills addressed many similar issues , but often used different means .

during the house and senate deliberations , some members expressed frustration with how long corps projects take .

some members also expressed interest in authorizing new projects and deauthorizing older unconstructed projects .

some members wanted more prominent nonfederal roles .

others supported more funding for harbor maintenance and improved inland waterway construction .

the earmark debate and concerns about congressional roles also shaped each bill's approach .

the administration provided comments during congressional deliberations .

the two most recent communications consisted of a december 11 , 2013 , letter from the assistant secretary of the army ( civil works ) , hereinafter referred to as the asa , to the conference managers ; and army corps testimony before the u.s. house committee on transportation and infrastructure ( t&i ) , subcommittee on water resources and environment , on april 29 , 2014 .

authorizing projects .

wrrda 2014 authorized a fixed set of 34 new construction projects totaling $25.65 billion ( $15.64 billion in federal costs and $10.01 billion in nonfederal costs ) and increased the authorization of appropriations for eight previously authorized projects .

it established expedited house procedures for the remainder of the 113 th congress and expedited senate procedures through 2018 for bills authorizing construction projects that meet specified criteria .

it requires an "annual report" from the asa to congress identifying proposed new studies ( including studies proposed by nonfederal entities ) and completed feasibility and project modification reports .

when the senate passed s. 601 on may 15 , 2013 , there were an estimated 19 construction projects representing approximately $10.8 billion ( $6.3 billion federal and $4.5 billion nonfederal ) that appeared to meet the new project authorization criteria in s. 601 .

when the house passed h.r .

3080 on october 23 , 2013 , it would have authorized a fixed set of 23 new construction projects at a total cost of $13.0 billion ( $7.7 billion in federal costs and $5.3 billion in nonfederal costs ) .

wrrda 2014 included no comparable title to title iii of s. 601 , project modifications .

expediting studies , environmental reviews , and permits .

p.l .

113-121 , like h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , encouraged completion of corps studies within three years , limited study costs , and established new procedures intended to expedite corps completion of environmental compliance requirements , including the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .

independent peer review was among the "reforms" adopted in wrda 2007 ( p.l .

110-114 ) .

wrrda 2014's conference report raised the standard threshold for performing an independent peer review of a feasibility study from $45 million total project costs to $200 million , and extend applicability of the review requirement to studies initiated through 2019 .

expanding project delivery and financing opportunities .

wrrda 2014 , like h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , encouraged nonfederal opportunities in delivering water resources projects through provisions on crediting for nonfederal work and increasing opportunities for nonfederal contributions and nonfederal study and project management .

it required the asa to establish a five - year pilot program for nonfederal management of studies and a five - year pilot program of 15 projects for nonfederal management of project construction .

it also consolidated various authorities under which nonfederal entities can perform construction on water resources projects and allow the federal share of construction costs to be reimbursed or credited ( and credit transferred to other projects ) .

like s. 601 , wrrda 2014 established a pilot program known as the water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) to finance water infrastructure projects .

the corps and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) are responsible for administering the pilot program .

investing in navigation .

wrrda 2014 , like h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , encouraged increased spending from the harbor maintenance trust fund ( hmtf ) .

as in s. 601 , the enacted legislation eliminated the 50% nonfederal cost sharing requirement for harbor maintenance between 45 and 50 feet deep .

it modified prioritization of hmtf funding among different types of harbors but retained similar provisions contained in h.r .

3080 and s. 601 reserving certain portions of funds to harbors with less cargo .

the final legislation , like h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , did not enact changes to inland waterway revenues in general but increased the threshold for major rehabilitation efforts on inland waterways , authorized changes to waterway project delivery , and altered the cost - share for one project ( olmsted locks and dam ) .

these changes may increase the likelihood of inland waterways trust fund ( iwtf ) monies being available for use on other inland waterway construction projects .

reducing flood risks .

p.l .

113-121 authorized establishment of a levee safety initiative that expanded corps technical assistance and training to promote levee safety , expanded federal emergency management agency ( fema ) assistance in establishing or improving state and tribal levee safety programs , and expanded corps authority to provide levee rehabilitation assistance .

elements of the enacted initiative are similar to provisions in s. 601 , but with either no or lower levels of authorizations of appropriations .

like h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , the enacted legislation required the asa to develop national levee safety guidelines and review and update corps guidelines for vegetation on levees .

similar to s. 601 , the conference report allowed the asa to repair a levee to the design level of protection ( rather than to pre - storm conditions ) or if needed modify the project to address major deficiencies or implement nonstructural measures .

wrrda 2014 directed the asa to ensure that part of its levee inspection program provides adequate information for reaching a levee accreditation decision for purposes of floodplain mapping related to fema's national flood insurance program ( nfip ) mapping .

restoring and protecting aquatic ecosystems .

wrrda 2014 provided congressional direction related to various regional river and coastal restoration efforts ( eg , chesapeake bay , north atlantic coastal restoration ) and authorized the construction of projects which have previously been studied in the everglades and in coastal louisiana , among other places .

similar to a proposal in h.r .

3080 , wrrda 2014 also added to corps authority to undertake activities for the prevention , control , and eradication of invasive species at corps projects .

deauthorizing projects and managing the backlog .

wrrda 2014 created a one - time process aimed at deauthorizing previously authorized projects with federal costs to complete totaling $18 billion ; the asa is responsible for leading the process , and is required to provide opportunity for public input and congressional disapproval .

this one - time process and other backlog provisions included in p.l .

113-121 combined elements of the deauthorization and backlog management provisions of h.r .

3080 and s. 601 .

addressing other issues .

the conference report included provisions , different from those in s. 601 , amending the applicability of the environmental protection agency's oil spill prevention , control , and countermeasure regulations .

the enacted legislation also included certain water infrastructure provisions of the clean water act ( cwa ) that were not included in h.r .

3080 or s. 601 .

these cwa provisions , while representing the first amendments to cwa title vi since 1987 , did not address many of the more longstanding or controversial cwa issues .

most of the cwa provisions included in wrrda 2014 addressed cwa title vi , which authorized grants to states to capitalize state loan programs ( state revolving funds , or srfs ) for wastewater treatment facility projects .

p.l .

113-121 did not include the ocean - related provisions of the house and senate bills .

h.r .

3080 would have prohibited programs or actions authorized by h.r .

3080 to be used for furthering implementation of executive order 13547 on coastal and marine spatial planning .

s. 601 would have created a national endowment for the oceans .

instead , wrrda 2014 authorized the asa to undertake studies of corps projects in coastal zones to enhance ocean and coastal ecosystem resiliency ; it also authorized the construction of smaller projects or inclusion of recommendations for congressional authorization in the annual report .

the remainder of this report provides a side - by - side analysis of selected provisions of h.r .

3080 , s. 601 , and the conference report which became wrrda 2014 .

the selection of provisions addressed herein was based on attention during congressional deliberations , significance for the corps and its activities , or policy differences between the bills .

many of the project - specific or geographically specific provisions ( eg , provisions of titles iii and v of s. 601 , title iv of the conference report ) generally are not discussed .

the appendix identifies the comparable titles of the two bills and conference report .

the report is divided into the sections shown in table 1 .

like both the house and senate bills , the conference report for wrrda 2014 included provisions aimed at expediting water project delivery and permit processing .

most of these provisions intended to expedite — corps studies by establishing deadlines , schedules , or funding limits for feasibility studies and eliminating certain study requirements ; environmental compliance requirements , including primarily provisions intended to expedite corps compliance with the national environmental policy act and outside agency issuance of any permit , review , or other approval required under any applicable federal law ; and corps permitting .

during the house and senate deliberations , some members expressed frustration with the cost and duration of corps studies .

most corps feasibility studies are cost - shared 50% federal and 50% nonfederal .

the degree to which various factors and requirements contribute to the time it takes to complete a corps study is difficult to parse out and attribute to a single environmental requirement .

for example , activities performed to demonstrate compliance with applicable environmental requirements may occur concurrently to the corps completing actions required by other laws ( eg , preparing analyses necessary to determine a project's economic costs and benefits ) .

the larger , more complex , and costly the project being studied , often the longer each step in the study process may take to complete .

anecdotal evidence indicates that individual studies may take longer due to disagreements with federal resource agencies or state permitting agencies , but there are limited data available to determine whether such delays are systemic or project - specific .

the role that congress plays in authorizing studies and project construction and the timing of appropriations have been identified as factors having significant effect on the duration of studies and ultimately project delivery .

for example , in terms of the project development process , years may pass between the following steps shown in each bullet: approval to initiate a study , to appropriation of federal funds for the study , complete reconnaissance study , to initiation of feasibility study , and asa transmission to congress of the feasibility report , to congressional construction authorization .

at an april 29 , 2014 , house t&i subcommittee on water resources and environment hearing , the corps witness testified that , while the agency is committed to expediting the corps planning process: certain elements of provisions in the proposed legislation regarding the elimination of reconnaissance studies , fixed lengths for feasibility studies , project permitting and environmental streamlining , study authority resolutions , and the application of independent external peer review , could actually become counterproductive .

by constraining the corps from exercising the same initiative that led to civil works transformation and planning modernization , certain requirements could lead to a less flexible , overly restrictive program that reduces efficiency , hinders project approval , and increases the probability of a project being terminated .

frustrations with the pace of corps studies and construction , in part shaped by the pace of congressional authorization and limitations on available federal appropriations , has fostered interest in nonfederal entities , including private interests , having greater roles in project development , construction , and financing .

the challenge is whether nonfederal resources can be leveraged while focusing current and future federal funds on those activities most in the national interest .

h.r .

3080 and s. 601 would have taken significantly different approaches to the corps' flood risk management activities ; the house approach would have been limited , while the senate approach would have been more expansive .

while the conference report included many levee safety provisions similar to s. 601 , the conference report was scaled back from s. 601 in terms of both scope of new authorities and programs and the level of annual authorization of appropriations , as shown in table 10 .

wrrda 2014 established a levee safety initiative ( §3016 ) that included authorizations for: corps technical assistance and training to promote levee safety , corps levee rehabilitation assistance at 65% federal cost share and maximum federal project cost of $10 million per project ( activities under the authority have an authorization of appropriations of $30 million for fy2015 through 2019 ) , and fema to assist in establishing or improving state and tribal levee safety programs .

elements of the initiative are similar to many provisions in s. 601 , but with either no or lower levels of authorizations of appropriations .

like both h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , wrrda 2014 required the corps develop national levee safety guidelines .

the conference report provided a more limited extension of federally cost - shared beach nourishment ( i.e. , 3 years for certain projects ) than the 15 years that s. 601 would have authorized .

the asa's december 2013 letter to conference managers included an objection to this nourishment provision and recommended that projects be reevaluated rather than simply extended .

the conference report also provided for the asa to review a 15-year extension request and make a recommendation to congress regarding authorization .

the asa's letter to conference managers also identified specific sections of s. 601 ( §2022 and §2040 ) related to the repair and rehabilitation of levees that the administration did not support .

wrrda 2014 included various related but altered authorizations for levee repair and rehabilitation ; it: allowed corps levee repair to be completed to the design level of protection ( rather than to pre - storm conditions ) or if needed to modify the project to address major deficiencies or implement nonstructural measures ; and required reporting every two years on repair spending and a review the corps emergency response authorities to be completed within eighteen months of enactment .

 ( §3029 ) authorized corps rehabilitation of existing hurricane and storm damage levees that meet specific criteria if they are providing reduced protection due to consolidation , settlement , subsidence , sea level rise , or new datum ; the asa is limited to using this authority for projects with project partnerships agreements that state that the nonfederal entity is not required to perform restoration for subsidence and sea level rise as part of its operation and maintenance responsibilities .

 ( §3017 ) wrrda 2014 ( §3014 ) directed the asa to ensure that an activity under the corps inspection of completed works program provides adequate information to reach a levee accreditation decision for purposes of floodplain mapping related to fema's national flood insurance program ( nfip ) mapping .

as part of its mission , the corps undertakes projects and activities intended to restore the structures , function and natural processes of aquatic ecosystems to a more natural condition .

it also has authorities related to control of invasive species at its projects .

congress directs and facilitates these actions through project - specific provisions and programmatic provisions that direct broader corps authorities and efforts , among other things .

the corps has a "backlog" of $62 billion in authorized construction on more than 1,000 projects ; its annual construction appropriations , however , have been less than $2 billion in recent years and have been declining as more resources shift to operations and maintenance and as supplemental appropriations are used for construction in disaster affected areas .

no publicly available list or database of these project authorizations , their status , and their cost to complete is available .

there is an existing process in place to deauthorize corps projects ; in the recent past , the process has not resulted in significant deauthorizations or in reducing the size and growth of the backlog .

under 33 u.s.c .

579a ( b ) ( 2 ) , the asa is directed to annually transmit to congress a list of authorized projects and project elements with no obligations of funding during the last full five fiscal years .

this list is published in the federal register .

without an asa transmittal of a list , the deauthorization process is not initiated .

if funds are not obligated for a project's planning , design , or construction during the fiscal year following publication in the federal register , the project or element is deauthorized .

the secretary last transmitted a new list in 2007 ; those deauthorizations became final in 2009 .

wrrda 2014 , as shown in table 12 , required that the asa: ( 1 ) develop an interim deauthorization list of projects authorized prior to wrda 2007 ( including environmental infrastructure projects ) that have either not initiated construction or not received funding for six fiscal years , ( 2 ) provide opportunity for public comment on this list , and ( 3 ) develop a final deauthorization list , within 120 days after the public comment period , representing at least a federal cost to complete equal of $18 billion .

the projects on the final list will be automatically deauthorized after 180 days unless congress passes a joint resolution disapproving the final deauthorization list .

the conference report did not alter the existing requirement under 33 u.s.c .

579a for the asa to transmit annually to congress a list of authorized projects and project elements with no obligations of funding during the last full five fiscal years , thus maintaining the existing annual deauthorization process after enactment .

the asa letter to the conference managers stated the administration's support creating an annual process for identifying projects for deauthorization .

s. 601 included a provision to amend the environmental protection agency's oil spill prevention , control and countermeasure ( spcc ) regulations ; h.r .

3080 included no comparable provision .

s. 601 would have amended the scope and applicability of the program .

one provision stated that certain farms would not have required a "certification of a statement of compliance with the rule. .

according to communications with epa , this provision would not have eliminated the requirement to create an spcc plan .

in contrast , wrrda 2014 , as shown in table 13 , exempted the following farms from the spcc regulations: ( 1 ) farms with no reportable discharge history and an aggregate aboveground storage of less than 6,000 gallons ( or a to - be - determined lower threshold ) and ( 2 ) farms with an aggregate aboveground storage of less than 2,500 gallons .

wrrda 2014 included amendments to a number of the water infrastructure provisions of the clean water act ( cwa ) .

the cwa amendments , which were not included in either s. 601 or h.r .

3080 , were drawn from several provisions of h.r .

1877 , the water quality protection and job creation act of 2013 .

most addressed cwa title vi , which authorizes grants to states to capitalize state loan programs ( state revolving funds , or srfs ) for wastewater treatment facility projects ; the conference report ( §5006 ) provided that the effective date of these provisions is october 1 , 2014 .

some of the provisions included in the conference report have been included in other legislative proposals in recent congresses that have not advanced ( such as extending loan repayment from 20 years to 30 years , including land acquisition in the definition of "treatment works," and explicitly allowing srf monies to be used for security projects ) .

several of them have been included in enacted appropriations bills and through wrrda 2014 are now codified in the cwa ( such as expanding the list of srf - eligible projects to include energy - and water - efficiency , increasing assistance to indian tribes , and imposing "buy american" requirements , which were included in epa's fy2014 appropriation , p.l .

113-76 ) .

the cwa provisions included in the conference report are the first amendments to cwa title vi since 1987 .

however , the amendments did not address other long - standing or controversial title vi issues , such as: authorization of appropriations for capitalization grants , which expired in fy1994 ; state - by - state allocation of capitalization grants ; and applicability of prevailing wage requirements under the davis - bacon act , which currently apply to use of srf monies .

wrrda 2014 included neither ocean related provisions of h.r .

3080 and s. 601 , as shown in table 13 .

instead , it ( §4014 ) authorized the corps to study projects in coastal zones to enhance ocean and coastal ecosystem resiliency ; it authorized the corps to perform identified projects consistent with criteria in other related corps cap programs , or include a recommendation for congressional authorization of a project in the annual report .

during house floor consideration of h.r .

3080 , a provision ( §146 ) was added that would have prohibited programs or actions authorized by h.r .

3080 to be used for furthering implementation of executive order 13547 , related to coastal and marine spatial planning .

the house floor debate largely focused on implementation of recommendations from a report by the interagency ocean policy task force ; the recommendations support a national ocean policy , a coordination framework , and implementation strategy for the stewardship of the ocean , coasts , and the great lakes , and a framework for effective coastal and marine spatial planning .

the asa's december 2013 letter to the conference managers states that "the administration strongly opposes sec .

146 of h.r .

3080 . .

s. 601 contained a different ocean policy provision .

s. 601 would have established a national endowment for the oceans .

deposits would have included amounts appropriated and dividends and interest accruing from investment of the fund's monies .

the endowment would have disbursed funds to coastal states , other coastal authorities , and federal agencies to support ocean and coastal management .

the s. 601 provision was similar to a previous proposal made by the u.s. commission on ocean policy .

the commission recommended establishment of an ocean policy trust fund in the u.s. treasury .

in contrast to s. 601 , the commission recommended funding from outer continental shelf oil and gas activities and from new activities in federal waters .

since the release of the commission's final report in 2004 at least a dozen bills have been introduced to establish an ocean trust fund or ocean endowment .

concerns related to the endowment include potential reductions in current program appropriations and potential tax increases to raise funds for the endowment .

crs report r43306 , spill prevention , control , and countermeasure ( spcc ) regulations: background and legislation in the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42883 , water quality issues in the 113 th congress: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

