u.s. "water resources" include streams , rivers , wetlands , estuaries , lakes , and coasts .

those resources support billions of dollars in commerce , provide drinking water , supply habitat for fish and wildlife , and provide recreational opportunities .

the u.s. army corps of engineers ( the corps ) is one of several federal agencies that undertake water resource projects .

the majority of corps civil works projects involve commercial navigation , flood risk management , and ecosystem restoration .

congress generally authorizes corps activities and provides policy direction in water resources development acts ( wrdas ) .

many studies of civil works projects prepared by the corps are prepared in response to a project - specific authorization from congress to study a water resources problem .

generally , the outcome of the corps' study process is a corps chief of engineers report to congress ( a chief's report ) that supports the recommendation for congress to authorize project construction .

project development involves multiple stages , from study initiation to planning and design and ultimately to construction and operation .

years or even decades may pass from the time the corps is authorized to study a water resources - related problem and the corps constructs a project to address that problem .

in recent decades , few projects authorized for study have led to constructed projects .

of the projects that do proceed , various factors affect the time it takes to move from project planning to the completion of construction .

generally , the most significant factors in some way relate to the availability of federal funding and the time it takes to obtain necessary congressional authorizations .

recently , to expedite project development , congressional attention has focused on activities that must be completed before a chief's report can be submitted to congress recommending project construction .

these activities generally comprise the planning stage of project development .

pursuant to various statutory requirements , during project planning , the corps is obligated to complete a potentially complex array of studies , reports , and evaluations .

in an effort to expedite that project delivery , some groups have focused particular attention on the time it takes the corps to comply with federal environmental requirements that must be addressed during planning .

given the congressional interest in this topic , this report assesses certain elements of the project planning process in an effort to identify whether or the degree to which meeting environmental requirements is a significant cause of delay in project delivery .

to do so , the report provides background information on the potentially wide array of environmental requirements that may apply to a given civil works project ( including why congress established such requirements ) , how the corps integrates compliance with those requirements into the project planning process , and how required elements of the planning process may affect project delivery .

to provide necessary background , this report identifies selected issues that have arisen in the past 50 years that resulted in congress enacting numerous environmental requirements that ( 1 ) directly affect the corps' project planning process and ( 2 ) are intended to minimize adverse project - specific impacts .

it also provides an overview of the corps' environmental evaluation and compliance requirements , including how those requirements are integrated into the project planning process .

more specifically , the report provides an overview of the federal requirements that obligate the corps to evaluate the impacts of a given civil works project and the compliance requirements that generally must be addressed before the corps will submit a chief's report to congress .

the corps project development process is complex .

by focusing on environmental requirements that must be addressed during planning , this report does not identify every element of project development that may affect project delivery .

more specifically , it does not provide detail regarding other factors that have been identified as particularly relevant to the timing of project delivery — federal funding availability and the timing of necessary congressional approvals .

as they affect the project planning process , selected issues associated with congressional funding and approvals may be discussed , but are generally beyond the scope of this report .

for information about those issues , see crs report r41243 , army corps of engineers water resource projects: authorization and appropriations , and crs report r41961 , army corps fiscal challenges: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the majority of civil works projects undertaken by the corps fall within its navigation , flood risk management , and ecosystem restoration and environmental protection missions .

historically , navigation and flood risk projects involved a potentially wide range of activities such as the construction of levees , floodgates , or dams ; channel deepening ( i.e. , dredging ) or widening ; or changing floodplain uses .

some of those projects resulted in adverse impacts such as unanticipated flood damage after alterations to wetlands or floodplains , the destruction of aquatic plant or animal habitat , or impaired or altered water quality after dredging or channelizing waterways or building locks and dams .

the corps' civil works mission was expanded to include ecosystem restoration projects , in part , to authorize the agency to address adverse effects from past civil works projects .

addressing those impacts involves actions such as restoring natural channel conditions , modifying obstructions to fish passage , or removing levees to restore wetland hydrology .

many of the environmental requirements that apply to corps civil works projects today were put in place at the direction of congress to ensure that project planning reduces the potential for unanticipated adverse impacts and / or identifies measures to minimize or mitigate unavoidable impacts .

in reviewing the range of federal environmental requirements potentially applicable to civil works projects , the requirements may fall into the one of the following categories: requirements to address certain environmental aspects of a proposed project during planning .

these include requirements , established by congress , that apply explicitly to federal investment in water resources development .

for example , the corps is obligated to conduct specific studies , reports , and evaluations to ensure that the environmental impacts of a project are identified and considered ; evaluate a project's economic and public safety benefits compared to its adverse environmental impacts ; and identify opportunities to protect , preserve , and / or enhance the quality of the environment .

requirements intended to protect human health or minimize harm to a protected resource .

these include requirements that arise from federal laws , regulations , executive orders , or corps policy that may apply as a result of project - specific impacts .

compliance requirements will be identified during planning and will generally depend on the degree to which project impacts adversely affect air or water quality , or natural or cultural resources specifically protected by congress ( eg , historic sites , native american graves , endangered species or their habitat ) .

they may also include any requirements that direct the corps to enhance the quality of the environment .

both sets of requirements are largely implemented by the corps , but may require the corps to consult with or obtain some level of review by an outside federal agency or a state or tribal agency authorized to implement a specific federal law ( see table 1 in the section " impact - specific environmental requirements " ) .

as required by congress , the corps cannot recommend a project to congress for construction authorization until it has evaluated and can describe "economic , environmental , and social benefits and detriments" of a recommended plan and possible alternative plans .

a key element of its evaluation of environmental detriments and benefits involves identifying a project's impacts and environmental compliance requirements associated with those impacts .

when there is debate over the degree to which environmental requirements affect project delivery , that debate often centers around the time it takes the corps to demonstrate compliance with specific requirements .

most recently , that debate has centered around the time that it takes the corps to complete some level of coordination with or obtain necessary approvals from other federal agencies ( eg , the department of the interior's u.s .

fish and wildlife service ) .

the process required to obtain necessary federal reviews of civil works projects may be highly complex , among other reasons , in order to ensure compliance with protections established by congress .

as a result , they may require a high degree of resources agency involvement ( eg , in developing ecosystem restoration projects ) .

to understand why a potentially complex array of environmental requirements may apply to water resource projects , it is useful to understand the social and environmental concerns that led congress to enact the various laws that may apply to both the project development process and projects themselves .

during planning , the corps is obligated to determine a project's potential economic , social , and environmental benefits and detriments .

processes and procedures that the corps uses to ensure compliance with that directive and any other applicable planning requirements are implemented in accordance with the corps' planning guidance notebook .

the notebook provides the overall internal agency direction by which civil works projects are formulated , evaluated , and selected for recommendation to congress .

as the corps implements the project development process , environmental requirements are integrated into the planning process in accordance with the "environmental evaluation and compliance" requirements provided in the notebook .

processes and procedures necessary to meet the environmental evaluation and compliance requirements are intended to ensure corps compliance with nepa , the water resources planning act ( as reflected previously in planning requirements established in the p&g and now in the p&r ) , and other applicable federal environmental laws , regulations , and executive orders , and other applicable federal planning requirements .

as noted previously , this report looks at two separate but related groups of environmental requirements: ( 1 ) those explicitly applicable to water resources development that must be addressed by the corps during planning , and ( 2 ) those applicable as a result of project - specific impacts that are intended to protect human health or minimize harm to certain aquatic and other resources .

activities necessary to ensure compliance with the second group of requirements may take place during project design , construction , and operation .

however , it is largely within the planning phase of development that the corps completes required studies , reports , evaluations , and analyses , and conducts necessary outside agency consultations to determine how compliance with those requirements is to be met .

integrating the corps' environmental evaluation and compliance requirements into the planning process is intended to ensure that actions necessary to demonstrate corps compliance with any applicable requirements will be identified and largely addressed before congress authorizes project construction .

for any given project , environmental compliance does not end with project planning .

it continues through final project design , construction , and operation .

a discussion of activities that may occur during those additional phases of project development and operation is beyond the scope of this report .

for each of the 21 steps of project development identified by the corps ( see figure 1 above ) , the chart below lists activities that occur during those steps .

the chart is not an exhaustive list of all studies , reviews , decisions , approvals , or activities required to be completed in each step of civil works project development .

instead , it illustrates key processes , procedures , and corps decision points associated with completion of the corps' environmental evaluation and compliance requirements that occur during planning , particularly as they are integrated into overall project development .

the timeliness of corps delivery has been the subject of scrutiny and oversight by congress .

as reflected in legislative proposals intended to streamline certain elements of the project development process , focus has been almost entirely on the time it takes to complete certain environmental requirements , particularly elements of the nepa process .

however , it is difficult to determine the degree to which the nepa process delays projects .

that difficulty stems largely from the unique issues that must be considered by the corps during the development of water resource projects .

further , the nepa evaluation is embedded in the feasibility process , which requires compliance with other congressional directives .

these factors result in a nepa implementation process that is unique to water resources development .

as the corps implements its environmental evaluation and compliance process , it is difficult to extract and measure the degree to which certain activities may be attributable to a single environmental requirement .

for example , actions necessary to comply with the endangered species act may overlap with corps - specific requirements to mitigate project - specific impacts ( i.e. , mitigation measures the corps may be obligated to consider or implement apart from any explicit requirement to do so pursuant to the endangered species act ) .

further , activities that may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable environmental requirements may take place while the corps is completing actions required by other laws or requirements ( eg , preparing analyses necessary to determine the project's economic benefits ) .

as a result , it may be difficult to identify a specific time frame or step in project development in which only environmental compliance activities are taking place , as illustrated in the chart above .

one issue that has been the subject of particular scrutiny has been the time it takes to complete consultation or obtain approvals from other federal and state agencies .

as discussed above , an agency with jurisdiction over that resource may be required to provide some level of analysis , consultation , or approval before a project can proceed .

according to corps procedures , shown in the chart above , such activities would take place largely within the overall planning process .

anecdotal evidence indicates that individual projects may take longer than anticipated due to disagreements with federal resource agencies or state permitting agencies , but there are limited data available to determine whether such delays are systemic .

instead , issues that may lead to such delays are likely project - specific .

the time it takes the corps to move from one step in the project delivery process to another depends on a complex array of factors .

when comparing individual corps projects to each other , the larger , more complex , and costly the project , often the longer each step will take to complete .

however , the role that congress plays in authorizing studies and project construction and the timing of appropriations have been identified as factors that have the most significant effect on the timing of project delivery .

for example , in terms of the project development process , years may pass between the following: approval to initiate a study to the appropriation of federal funds .

funds to initiate new studies have been limited in recent years .

as a result , many authorized studies never receive appropriations or take several years before initial funding .

transition from the reconnaissance phase to the feasibility phase .

authorized studies are subject to annual funding during the budget process .

overall study funding has been limited in recent years .

also , feasibility phase funding has received more scrutiny during the budget process in recent years .

as a result , moving from the reconnaissance to the feasibility phase may take years or may never occur .

transmission of the feasibility report to congress to construction authorization .

congress chooses to authorize most corps projects in water resources development acts .

while consideration of wrda bills has been fairly regular , enactment has not been .

only two wrdas have been enacted in the past 13 years ( in 2000 and 2007 ) .

while waiting for authorization , the corps can continue with preconstruction engineering and design ( ped ) activities , if it is funded to do so , but cannot move forward until the project is approved by congress .

construction authorization to the appropriation of construction funds .

once the project receives congressional authorization , federal funds for construction may be sought in the annual energy and water development appropriations act .

competition for inclusion in annual appropriations has curtailed the initiation of new construction projects .

for example , many new civil works projects authorized in wrda 2007 have not received construction funding as of fy2013 .

instead , funding priorities have generally been on existing projects ( eg , ongoing construction or maintenance activities ) .

given the range of environmental issues and impacts that congress requires the corps to evaluate for civil works projects , there is little debate that the body of requirements that may be deemed "environmental" that apply to corps projects often represents a significant element of the project development process .

what is unclear is whether or which specific environmental requirements routinely delay project delivery .

for example , the issuance of permits by a state water quality agency pursuant to the clean water act or consultations with the u.s .

fish and wildlife service required pursuant to the endangered species act may take longer than anticipated for a given project .

that does not necessarily mean that compliance with those requirements will delay project delivery , especially if compliance is demonstrated concurrently with other required elements of project development .

further , issues that may result in the compliance process taking longer than anticipated for a given project will likely be related to that project .

it may not necessarily be related to an issue that could be avoided in the future by changing procedures or requirements applicable to all projects .

even so , the length of time it takes to plan for and initiate construction of water resource projects has been of increasing concern to some stakeholders and a subject of congressional oversight .

because of the complex body of planning requirements , some believe reexamination of the existing requirements and processes to implement these requirements is in order .

some observers believe such examination and reform of the status quo could lead to a more streamlined and ultimately a faster review process .

the challenge , however , may lie in deciding whether or which existing steps in the project planning process can be eliminated , combined , or otherwise streamlined .

background information included in this report is provided for the consideration of these issues .

