the family and medical leave act ( fmla , p.l .

103-3 ) requires covered employers to provide job - protected leave to eligible employees .

the act allows employees to take up to 12 weeks of leave during any 12-month period to care for a newborn , adopted , or foster child ; to care for a family member with a serious health condition ; or because of the employee's own serious health condition .

the act allows employees to take up to 12 weeks of leave for reasons called "qualifying exigencies" when a family member who is in the armed forces or national guard is deployed overseas .

an employee may also take up to 26 weeks of leave during a single 12-month period to care for a military servicemember who has been seriously injured while on active duty .

this report begins with a brief description of the fmla .

proposals have been made to expand or limit the fmla .

to help identify some of the potential effects of these proposals , the report analyzes data on changes over time in the percentage of employees ages 18 and over who meet some of the main employee eligibility criteria for fmla leave .

the report then compares selected characteristics of employees who may be eligible for fmla leave with employees who are likely ineligible for leave .

the report also compares the use of leave for fmla - related reasons by employees who may be eligible for leave and employees who are likely ineligible for leave .

the report ends with a discussion of several fmla policy issues .

in recent congresses , legislation has been introduced that would amend the fmla to expand employee eligibility or employer coverage , allow eligible employees to take leave to care for additional family or household members , and expand the types of fmla leave .

other proposals would limit access to fmla leave .

the fmla was enacted in 1993 .

as amended , the act requires covered employers to provide eligible employees with two types of job - protected leave: regular leave and military family leave .

military family leave consists of qualifying exigency leave and military caregiver leave .

proposals have been made to expand or restrict employee eligibility for fmla leave .

one proposal would eliminate the requirement that employees must work 1,250 hours or more during the preceding 12 months for the same employer .

other proposals would expand employer coverage to include more employers or allow leave to care for additional members of an employee's family or household .

a proposal aimed at restricting employee eligibility would narrow the definition of a serious health condition .

to assist congress in evaluating how these proposals may affect the availability of fmla leave , this section analyzes data from two household surveys: the annual social and economic ( asec ) supplement to the monthly current population survey ( cps ) and a survey of employees conducted in 2012 by abt associates for the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) .

data from the asec supplement are used to estimate the number of employees who may or may not be eligible for fmla leave , while data from the 2012 dol employee survey are used to examine the use of leave for fmla - related reasons by employees who may or may not be eligible for leave .

the u.s. workforce and american family were changing in the years before the fmla was enacted in 1993 .

the labor force participation rate of women had been rising steadily , more married women with children were working , and more families were headed by single parents .

for employees who did not have job - protected family or medical leave , the fmla was a response to these changes .

other policymakers may question whether the leave employers are required to allow under the fmla is a proper role for the federal government .

some may believe that this is an issue that should be left to the states , a matter between individual employees and their employer , or a subject for collective bargaining .

instead of mandated leave , some policymakers may favor government incentives to encourage employers to provide family and medical leave .

supporters of the fmla have proposed amendments to the act that would expand employee coverage .

some of these suggestions would make it easier for employees to qualify for leave , allow employees to take leave to care for more members of their family or household , expand the types of leave , or expand employer coverage to include employees of smaller employers .

on the other hand , others have proposed changes in the law that would narrow the definition of a serious health condition or curtail the use of intermittent leave for a chronic health condition .

this section examines some of these proposals .

the discussion in this section uses data from different sources .

these include responses from the 2012 dol employee survey discussed in the previous section , a 2012 survey of 1,812 employers conducted by abt associates for dol , and information collected by the society for human resource management ( shrm ) .

the fmla is intended to help employees balance work and family life .

proponents of the objectives of the fmla have suggested ways to expand employee eligibility .

these proposals would ( 1 ) eliminate the requirement that employees must work 1,250 hours or more during the preceding 12 months for the same employer , ( 2 ) prorate the 12 weeks of leave based on the number of hours worked , ( 3 ) eliminate or reduce the requirement that employees must work for the same employer for at least 12 months , and ( 4 ) lower employee eligibility from the current threshold of 50 employees who work within 75 miles of an employee's worksite .

other proposals would allow eligible employees to take leave to care for additional members of the family or household .

these additional persons may include grandparents , grandchildren , nondisabled children ages 18 or older , domestic partners , or same - sex spouses .

some employers may oppose an expansion of employee eligibility for fmla leave .

such an expansion could increase employer administrative and operating costs .

employers may need to make additional adjustments to work schedules if more employees become eligible for , and take , fmla leave .

to maintain the same level of output of goods and services , some employers may need to hire more workers or pay more workers for overtime .

employers must continue health insurance coverage while employees are on fmla leave , which could increase employer costs if more employees take fmla leave .

an expansion of fmla coverage could create an incentive for employers to hire more part - time workers , who may not be eligible for fmla leave .

some proposals to amend the fmlsa would expand the reasons for which employees could take fmla leave .

one proposal would allow employees to take "parental leave," where employees could take limited amounts of leave to attend parent - teacher conferences , participate in their children's educational and extracurricular activities , or take children ( or other family members ) to routine medical or dental appointments .

other proposals would allow employees to take leave to participate in activities that result from domestic violence or because of a death in the family .

using data from the 2012 dol employer survey , table 3 shows the percentage of employers that offer parental leave to their employees .

an employer is defined as a unique worksite .

a firm may have one or more worksites .

column 1 shows the percentage of all worksites that offered parental leave .

column 2 shows the percentage of worksites with fmla - eligible employees , which are worksites with at least 50 employees within 75 miles of the worksite .

table 3 shows that , compared to all worksites , employers with fmla - eligible employees are more likely to offer parental leave .

again , for the reasons discussed above , some employers may oppose an expansion of the fmla to cover additional types of leave .

fmla leave is generally unpaid leave .

some policymakers favor legislation to provide employees with paid leave .

these proposals may not involve amendments to the fmla , however .

at least three approaches have been suggested to provide employees with paid time off while taking leave for reasons covered by the fmla .

one approach would require employers to provide leave with pay to employees to care for their own health or the health of other eligible individuals .

two different methods have been proposed: one would require employers to offer their employees a paid sick leave benefit .

the other would use a payroll tax to fund a wage - replacement program for eligible employees while on leave .

a second approach would create a grant program to assist states interested in supplementing the income of individuals who take leave for family - related reasons .

a final approach would amend the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) .

private sector employers would be required to pay an overtime premium to hourly employees who work more than 40 hours in a week .

instead of paying employees in cash for overtime , employers would be allowed to offer them compensatory time , which employees could use as they choose .

requiring employers to provide paid leave may raise a number of concerns .

first , many employers already provide their employees with paid leave .

these paid leave programs may not be subject , however , to minimum federal standards .

table 4 shows the percentage of employers who offer different types of paid leave .

compared to all worksites , employers with fmla - eligible employees are more likely to offer paid leave .

those employers that do not offer paid sick leave may oppose a federal mandate that would require them to provide it .

some employees may oppose a payroll tax to fund a program for paid leave .

some employers and employees may not favor a federal program to provide employees with paid leave , even if the cost is offset by a reduction in taxes or spending elsewhere .

for instance , as may be the case if employee eligibility for fmla leave were expanded , legislation to require employers to offer paid leave may raise concerns about the potential effects on employer administrative and operating costs .

some may argue that government - required paid leave is not a federal , but a state , issue or that it is an issue that should be left to negotiations during collective bargaining .

instead of mandated paid leave , some policymakers may prefer government incentives to encourage employers to provide such leave .

for their part , some employees may prefer to choose the types of benefits they receive .

requiring employers to offer paid leave may result in the substitution of paid leave for some other type of compensation ( whether other benefits or wages ) that some workers may prefer .

to make fmla leave available to more employees , some have suggested an expansion of employer coverage .

currently , the fmla covers private sector employers who employed at least 50 employees for at least 20 weeks in the preceding or current calendar year .

proposals have been made to expand employer coverage to include employers with , perhaps , 25 or 15 employees .

according to the report on the 2012 dol employee survey , an estimated 59.2% of employees may be eligible for fmla leave .

according to the report , if the threshold for employer coverage were lowered from 50 to 30 employees , approximately 63.2% of employees could be eligible for leave .

if the threshold were lowered to 20 employees , approximately 66.6% of employees could be eligible for leave .

in addition to the questions that could be raised about expanding employee eligibility or the types of fmla leave , expanding fmla coverage to smaller employers may raise other concerns .

in particular , smaller employers may have less flexibility than larger employers in adjusting to employee absences ( of up to 12 weeks , or up to 26 weeks for military caregiver leave ) .

the absence of one or more employees may impose a greater burden on smaller than larger employers .

concerns have been raised about the administration of fmla leave .

in particular , some have argued that dol regulations have expanded the meaning of a serious health condition beyond the intent of congress and that the application of intermittent leave imposes undue administrative burdens on employers .

the 2012 dol survey of employers asked covered employers how easy or difficult it is to comply with the fmla .

these findings are shown in table 5 .

the data in column 1 are for covered worksites , which are employers that reported that they were covered by the fmla .

because some of these employers did not have 50 workers employed within 75 miles , column 2 is a subset of covered worksites .

these are employers who reported that they were covered by the fmla and had at least 50 employees employed within 75 miles .

among all covered employers , 65.5% reported that it was "very" or "somewhat" easy to comply with the fmla .

a larger percentage , 75.3% , of employers with fmla - eligible employees reported that it was very or somewhat easy to comply with the fmla .

conversely , among all employers , 6.1% said that it was "very" or "somewhat" difficult to comply with the fmla , compared to 14.6% of employers with fmla - eligible employees .

currently , regulations define a serious health condition as an illness , impairment , injury , or mental or physical condition that involves: inpatient care , which means an overnight stay in a hospital , hospice , or residential mental facility ; or continuing treatment by a health care provider , which includes ( 1 ) a period of incapacity of more than three consecutive days and any subsequent treatment or period of incapacity due to the same condition ; ( 2 ) any period of incapacity due to pregnancy or for prenatal care ; ( 3 ) any period of incapacity or treatment due to a chronic serious health condition that requires visits at least twice a year for treatment by ( or under the supervision of ) a health care provider , continues over an extended period , and may cause episodic ( rather than continuing ) periods of incapacity ( eg , asthma or diabetes ) ; ( 4 ) a period of incapacity that is permanent or long - term due to a condition for which treatment may not be effective ( eg , alzheimer's disease or terminal stages of a disease ) ; and ( 5 ) any period of absence to receive multiple treatments ( including any period of recovery there from ) by a health care provider for a condition that likely would result in incapacity of more than three consecutive days absent medical intervention ( eg , chemotherapy , physical therapy for severe arthritis , or dialysis for kidney disease ) .

some have argued that dol regulations expanded the meaning of a serious health condition beyond the kinds of health problems envisioned by lawmakers .

for example , the u.s. chamber of commerce has said that it supports reforms of the fmla , including "restoring the original definition of 'serious health condition' to clarify that the fmla does not cover minor ailments such as the common cold.... " at a february 2008 hearing before the subcommittee on children and families of the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , katheryn elliott , assistant director of employee relations at central michigan university , stated: although congress intended medical leave under the fmla to be taken only for serious health conditions , shrm [society for human resource management] members regularly report that individuals use this leave to avoid coming to work even when they are not experiencing a serious health condition .

changes in the fmla have been proposed to remedy this possible problem .

one suggestion is that the law should be amended to explicitly state that an illness , injury , impairment , or condition for which treatment and recovery are brief ( eg , fewer than 7 or 14 days ) does not constitute a serious health condition .

it has also been suggested that the fmla should be amended to provide specific examples of serious health conditions .

but , others contend that an overnight stay in a hospital is an indicator of a serious health condition .

for instance , at a 1999 hearing before the subcommittee on children and families of the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , the deputy administrator of the dol's wage and hour division expressed concern that , under a narrower definition of serious health condition , some illnesses that "everyone would agree are normally not serious conditions" could never warrant fmla leave .

he argued that the flu — an often - used example of a nonserious condition for which fmla leave can be taken — kills tens of thousands of people each year .

according to the 2012 dol survey of employers , 17.4% of those with fmla - eligible employees said it was "very" or "somewhat" difficult to determine if a health condition was a serious health condition .

by contrast , 70.0% of employers with fmla - eligible employees said it was "very" or "somewhat" easy to determine if a health condition was a serious health condition .

among employers with fmla - eligible employees , employers suspected that 2.9% of leave involved the misuse of the fmla .

according to dol's 2012 employee survey , among employees who took leave , 85.7% of the most recent leave taken required a doctor's care , and 46.9% of that leave required an overnight stay in a hospital .

some have argued that the use of intermittent leave under the fmla is both difficult to administer and disruptive to both employers and other employees .

one argument against intermittent leave is that it can be difficult for employers to respond to employee absences , especially when employees provide little advance notice .

others maintain that intermittent leave may lead to the misuse of fmla leave .

according to fmla regulations , employers must account for intermittent or part - time leave in the smallest increment that the employer uses to account for other types of leave .

but , an employer must account for fmla leave in increments of no more than an hour .

the 2012 dol employee survey defined intermittent leave as two or more episodes of fmla - related leave for the same condition in the previous year .

among fmla - eligible employees , 35.3% said they had taken leave five or more times for the same condition .

by contrast , 26.6% of ineligible employees said they had taken leave at least five times in the past year .

fmla - eligible employees took leave an average of 4.8 times , compared to an average of 5.0 times among ineligible employees .

most intermittent leave was for six days or more .

among fmla - eligible employees , 75.9% of the most recent absences were for six days or more , compared to 73.1% among ineligible employees .

among fmla - eligible employees , an estimated 2.5% of the most recent absences were for a day or less , compared to an estimated 0.0% for ineligible employees .

according to a 2007 shrm report , 80% of human resources ( hr ) professionals reported that tracking intermittent leave was the most difficult part of the fmla to administer .

according to the 2012 dol survey of employers , 31.3% of all employers said it was "very" or "somewhat" difficult to deal with planned intermittent leave , but 50.9% said it was very or somewhat difficult to deal with unplanned intermittent leave .

among employers with fmla - eligible employees , 35.8% said it was very or somewhat difficult to deal with planned intermittent leave .

but , 59.3% of employers said it was very or somewhat difficult to deal with unplanned intermittent leave .

in order to lessen the record - keeping burden for employers , some have suggested that the minimum increment of leave be increased .

others have countered that expanding the increment would substantially penalize leave - takers by withholding , for example , half a day's pay when the employee only needs to be absent for an hour or less .

the size of the penalty could potentially discourage some employees from taking intermittent leave .

concerns have been raised about effect of the fmla on employees who must fill in for employees who are on leave .

these effects may differ if fmla leave is intermittent or for a longer period .

the burden on co - workers could also change if fmla leave is expanded .

in the above - mentioned 2007 report , shrm reported that 66% of hr professionals said that there are morale problems when employees are asked to cover for employees who take fmla leave .

the hr professionals also reported that employees may be more likely to have a negative view of fmla leave when it is taken intermittently as opposed to leave taken to care for a newborn or newly placed adopted or foster child or for a catastrophic health condition .

according to the 2012 dol survey of employers , the most common response when an employee is taking leave for a week or more is to assign work temporarily to other employees .

among all employers , 64.5% said that they assigned work to other employees , while 17.8% said that they put work on hold until the employee returned to work .

among employers with fmla - eligible employees , 83.3% said that they assigned work to other employees , but 6.3% said that they hired a temporary worker .

the 2012 dol employee survey asked employees how their work changed when their coworkers took leave .

the responses were virtually the same among all employees and fmla - eligible employees .

among all employees 51.0% said there was no change in their work , 34.1% said they took on more duties , 26.0% said they worked more hours , and 25.7% said they took on different job responsibilities .

among fmla - eligible employees , 53.3% said there was no change , 34.3% said they took on more duties , 24.5% said they worked more hours , and an identical 25.7% said they took on different responsibilities .

this appendix provides additional information on the data and methodology used in this report .

annual social and economic supplement to the monthly current population survey this report uses data from the annual social and economic ( asec ) supplement to the monthly current population survey ( cps ) .

the cps is a household survey conducted by the u.s. census bureau for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

the sample for the asec supplement is representative of the civilian , noninstitutional population of the united states .

the sample for the supplement includes members of the armed forces living in civilian housing units on a military base or in a household not on a military base .

the sample does not include persons living in institutions ( such as psychiatric hospitals , nursing homes , or correctional facilities ) .

approximately 76,000 households are interviewed for the supplement .

in this report , data from the asec supplement are for employees ages 18 and over .

for 2011 , the survey includes 91,349 wage and salary workers ages 18 and over .

when weighted to represent the noninstitutional u.s. population , the sample represents 143.2 million wage and salary workers .

the asec supplement collects information on the longest job a person held during the previous calendar year .

in this report , data by sector , occupation , and industry are for the longest job a person held in the previous year .

from 1993 to 2011 , job growth in health services accounted for over three - fifths of the increase in jobs in the major industry of educational and health services .

therefore , in this report , the educational and health services industry is separated into three industries: health services , educational services , and social assistance .

the asec supplement asks respondents how many persons worked for their employer at their longest job .

data on the number of weeks worked and usual hours worked are for all jobs held during the previous year .

in the asec supplement , wages and salary are defined as money earnings received by persons who are employees ( i.e. , wage and salary workers ) .

money earnings include wages , salary , commissions , tips , piece - rate pay , and bonuses .

earnings are before taxes or other deductions .

employees with children under the age of 18 in the household include employees who have a child under the age 18 who has a child of his or her own .

otherwise , employees under the age of 18 with children are not included in the analysis .

u.s. department of labor 2012 surveys of employers and employees in 2012 , abt associates of cambridge associates , under contract with the u.s. department of labor , conducted surveys of employers and employees to determine employee eligibility and use of fmla - related leave .

according to the final report , the definition of leave used in the surveys "aligns" with the types of leave covered by the fmla .

the dol employee survey consisted of 2,852 completed interviews and includes employees 18 and over who were employed for pay in the previous 12 months .

the worksite survey consisted of 1,812 completed interviews and included employers who had at least 50 employees on the payroll at the time of the survey .

the employee survey included both private and public sector employees , while the employer survey included only private sector worksites .

the interviews were conducted between february and june 2012 .

