advertising has been — and continues to be — transformed as consumers spend more of their time using electronic devices , such as smartphones and tablet computers , to access digital content of many varieties .

this shift has given rise to difficult and novel public policy issues .

this report examines some of these issues in the context of the structural shifts that have reshaped the advertising industry over the past decade .

thirty years ago , consumers viewed an average of 560 ads per day .

as advertising has spread from newspapers and television shows to gasoline pumps , cell phones , and bus stops , the exposure to advertising is almost certainly higher today .

by one count , the average american consumer may be exposed to 3,000 commercial messages every day .

advertising pays for much of the content on traditional media and online platforms .

it provides 84% of television networks' revenue , and until recently furnished 60% - 80% of most daily newspapers' revenue .

advertising generates more than 80% of total revenue at internet companies such as google , yahoo , and facebook , and covers the cost of many of the free "apps" consumers download to increase the functionality of their smartphones and tablet computers .

compared with traditional advertising , digital advertising seems to have some significant advantages for advertisers .

for instance , small businesses can now reach millions of potential customers at low cost .

smartphones , tablets , and other mobile devices give advertisers greater access to more consumers for more hours of the day .

companies can now directly tout their products online and better tailor their ads to consumer behavior using the wealth of information consumers generate online .

nevertheless , digital advertising is causing industry - wide disruptions .

the proliferation of ad - supported websites , online video , and blogs has pushed down advertising rates for both online and conventional media markets .

media traditionally dependent on advertising are being forced to find new business models as advertising revenue streams decline .

the most recent structural changes affecting advertising began around 1995 , as consumers started to migrate from traditional media sources to online platforms .

online and mobile activities have accounted for steadily growing shares of consumers' media use at the expense of all other types of media ( see appendix ) , and advertisers have been forced to rethink their marketing efforts in recognition of that trend .

in 2012 , internet advertising revenues in the united states totaled $37 billion , a rise of 500% from $6 billion 10 years earlier ( see figure 2 ) , according to the interactive advertising bureau ( iab ) .

emarketer , a market research firm , projects that online ad spending may total $61 billion by 2017 .

trillions of digital ads are served up annually .

these ads are linked to many types of content and may be viewed on a wide variety of devices .

according to nielsen data , more than 209 million americans were active online in january 2013 .

facebook reported nearly 230 million daily desktop and mobile device views in the united states at the end of june 2013 .

although television remains the dominant advertising choice , in 2011 spending on online advertising exceeded spending on print advertising for the first time .

due to the expanding online market , many print publications face increased financial stress .

they have responded by attempting to increase their own online advertising revenues , although few print publications have managed to charge enough for online ads to make up for the loss of print revenue .

in 2012 , online ad revenue made up 15% of total newspaper advertising revenues , compared with 7% in 2007 .

although online and traditional advertising are similar in many ways , there are important differences .

a print newspaper may be the dominant source of information in its local market and therefore be able to charge advertisers a premium price , but on the internet that same newspaper competes against hundreds or thousands of websites , bloggers , and twitter users , and has less pricing power .

the supply of online advertising opportunities is almost unlimited , and very few of the estimated 670 million websites on the internet are essential buys for advertisers .

the abundance of ad inventory means that online advertising rates can be substantially lower than ad rates in other media .

a 2011 federal communications commission report found that in may 2010 a typical online ad cost about $2.52 per 1,000 viewers , whereas the average cost per thousand viewers on primetime broadcast television networks was $19.74 .

digital advertising can also be sold in other ways , including cost - per - click or by keyword purchase .

despite the multitude of websites and social media outlets , the online advertising market is a concentrated market .

in 2012 , the top 10 sellers of advertising space on websites accounted for more than 70% of online ad revenue , and the top 50 for nearly 90% , according to iab .

real - time bidding systems ( rtbs ) like google's doubleclick or facebook's exchange let marketers buy and publishers sell advertising inventory through automated exchanges .

rtbs account for a relatively small part of total online ad spending , at 13% , or $1.9 billion , in 2012 , but market research firm idc predicts that they may handle 27% of all u.s. online display advertising by 2016 .

over time , automated ad exchanges may be used to sell other forms of advertising , such as digital radio and electronic screens on billboards and bus shelters .

some ad companies have started to build automated ad buying systems for television and radio .

the regulatory and legal implications of rtbs are getting increased attention from lawmakers and regulators because these new systems raise issues about companies' data and consumer privacy disclosure practices in online and mobile environments .

concerns about anticompetitive business practices have also come into play , with attention to whether algorithms and restrictions on the use of certain data by advertisers could threaten competition and innovation .

by browsing the web , blogging , joining social networks , and playing online games , consumers produce a large quantity of personal data .

one way in which advertisers and marketing firms may use this information is to deliver higher - value ads targeted at consumers with identifiable interests .

the ever - growing trails of personal data being collected by commercial enterprises have raised concern among privacy advocates , who have urged legislation to give consumers greater control over what information websites collect and how that information is used .

website owners and the advertising industry , on the other hand , worry that tougher privacy standards could make it more difficult to serve up targeted ads , harming one of the more lucrative aspects of online advertising .

congress has been involved in regulating advertising since at least 1914 , when the federal trade commission act made unlawful "the dissemination or the causing to be disseminated of any false advertisement" that might affect commerce. .

among the motivations for federal legislation regarding advertising over the years have been ensuring fair competition ; shielding consumers from unfair or misleading messages ; limiting exposure of children to certain types of advertisements ; and restricting promotion of products deemed morally or physically harmful .

more recently , congress , regulators , and the courts have turned their attention to digital advertising .

several federal agencies are involved: the ftc , the principal federal agency responsible for regulating public advertisements in all media , is charged with protecting consumers from claims that are false , deceptive , or unfair .

its authority covers both online and traditional advertising .

the ftc bureau of consumer protection enforces rules regarding online consumer privacy .

in recent years , the ftc has investigated several companies , including sears , myspace , and google , for their online behavioral advertising practices .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) enforces the federal food drug and cosmetic act ( p.l .

75-717 ) , which regulates food package labeling and health claims and consumer prescription drug advertising .

its recent efforts include formulating policy on the marketing of prescription drugs and restricted medical devices through social media tools .

the federal communications commission ( fcc ) regulates various issues affecting advertising on radio , television , telephone , satellite and cable television , and the internet .

the fcc is taking a fresh look at children and digital media .

the fcc also adopted a rule in 2012 that for the first time requires affiliates of the four major networks in the top 50 tv markets to post political ad buying information online .

all other stations will have to comply by july 1 , 2014 .

the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , an independent agency created in 2011 , oversees advertising of financial products to consumers .

its mortgage acts and practices advertising rule , which took effect in august 2011 , prohibits mortgage lenders and brokers from making misleading claims about mortgage products .

the cfpb has launched formal investigations into six companies that it believes have violated the map rule .

the federal election commission ( fec ) oversees political ads .

a patchwork of state regulations also affects online advertising .

every state has consumer protection laws applying to ads running in that state , most often governed through state regulatory authorities and overseen by the state attorney general .

an increasing number of states have passed laws affecting digital advertising .

at least nine states , including california , maryland , and new york , have introduced legislation on consumer or child online privacy .

for instance , california requires commercial websites to post a privacy policy to any website accessible by california residents .

california also enacted the so - called "eraser law" that , beginning on january 1 , 2015 , allows minors to remove publicly posted content on social media sites such as facebook and twitter and prohibits online advertising of harmful products directed at minors , including the sale of firearms , alcohol , and tobacco .

the advertising industry has its own self - regulatory system organized through the advertising self - regulatory council ( asrc ) , formerly the national advertising review council .

the asrc aims to develop standards of "truth and accuracy" for national advertisers through a compliance system that includes recommendations for corrective actions and an internal appeals process .

the asrc also sets policies for the national advertising division of the council of better business bureaus and the children's advertising review union .

these self - regulatory bodies look into specific complaints regarding possibly inaccurate product claims and more general questions about whether certain advertising is appropriate , particularly for children .

other initiatives promote healthier food and beverage choices in advertising targeted at children ; aim to improve consumer confidence in electronic advertising ; establish principles for online behavioral advertising ; and provide guidance for the mobile environment .

the iab , founded in 1996 , develops voluntary standards for online businesses and advertisers .

the iab is a coalition of more than 500 media and technology companies that sell nearly 90% of all u.s. online advertising .

one of the iab's self - described goals is to fend off intrusive legislation .

in that vein , it worked with other advertising organizations to craft voluntary guidelines for behavioral advertising , which were released in 2009 .

the iab also has set guidelines for advertising in social media and on mobile platforms .

it has tried to standardize online advertising , issuing definitions for terms like "click" and "impression" as well as ad sizes and use of techniques such as pop - up ads .

even though many u.s. consumers are concerned about online privacy and many actively avoid companies they do not trust , only 38% of consumers claim to know how to limit information collected on them by a website , according to pew research .

increasingly , regulators in the united states and europe are scrutinizing the use and power of tracking technology .

the european union's approach to protecting privacy includes comprehensive national laws , prohibitions against collection of data without a consumer's consent ( the cookie directive ) , and requirements that companies that process data register the activities with government authorities .

so far , the u.s. approach has been more ad hoc and industry - based .

these differences may raise significant compliance challenges for u.s. companies doing business in europe — including those transacting with european nationals solely through the internet without a physical presence in europe .

the ftc recommended a do not track framework in 2012 and provided recommendations on privacy protections for mobile services in 2013 .

to keep up with changing technology , the ftc amended its children's online privacy protection ( coppa ) rule in 2012 , strengthening its privacy protections to give greater control to parents over what information is collected online from children under 13 .

among the more significant changes , which took effect on july 1 , 2013 , the revised coppa rule expanded the definition of the term "personal information" that operators of commercial websites and online services , including mobile apps , can collect from children and revised how companies obtain parental consent .

a 2012 ftc report discussed how mobile apps affect the privacy of children , which some observers believe could be a prelude to proposed regulation .

besides privacy , the ftc updated its dot.com disclosures for online advertising to give businesses examples and direction on how to avoid unfair or deceptive business practices in their online ads .

in december 2010 , the department of commerce internet policy task force released a green paper on commercial data privacy issues that recommended , for instance , the establishment of a privacy policy office and a commercial data privacy framework for businesses .

that report did not endorse any privacy initiatives .

building on the department of commerce's work , the white house released its consumer data privacy framework in 2012 , which also considers the issue of third - party personal data collection and how companies deliver targeted ads to consumers .

in the 113 th congress , do not track legislation was reintroduced by senators jay rockefeller and richard blumenthal .

the do - not - track online act of 2013 ( s. 418 ) was first introduced in 2011 .

if the bill is passed in its present form , companies would be required to honor user requests not to have online activities tracked , much the same as provided by the original 2011 bill .

in april 2013 , the senate commerce committee held a hearing on the progress of industry self - regulation of online behavioral advertising .

senators ron wyden and mark kirk reintroduced geolocation privacy legislation ( s. 639 ) .

that measure would prohibit the interception , disclosure , and use of geolocation information ( information concerning the location of a wireless device ) pertaining to another person .

in the house of representatives , the online communications and geolocation protection act ( h.r .

983 ) , reintroduced by representatives zoe lofgren , ted poe , and suzan delbene , contains many of the same provisions .

representative joe barton , who sponsored the do not track kids act of 2011 ( h.r .

1895 ) in the 112 th congress with then representative edward markey , has said he plans to reintroduce the bill in the 113 th congress .

that act would prohibit the collection and use of minors' information for targeted marketing and strengthen privacy protection for children through , for instance , creating an eraser button for parents to delete information that companies gather about their children .

