late on september 30 , 2013 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) gave notice to federal agencies that an emergency shutdown furlough would be put in place as a result of the impending lapse in annual appropriations for fy2014 .

federal agencies had been directed to develop contingency plans in preparation for this eventuality .

on the previous friday , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) released its "procedures relating to a federal funding hiatus. .

this document included details on how dhs planned to determine who was required to report to work , cease unexempted government operations , recall certain workers in the event of an emergency , and restart operations once an accord was reached on funding issues .

on october 17 , 2013 , the president signed into law legislation which carries a short - term continuing resolution ( cr ) funding government operations at a rate generally equivalent to fy2013 post - sequestration levels through january 15 , 2014 .

this act resolves the lapse in funding that began october 1 , 2013 , returns federal employees to work , and retroactively authorizes pay for both furloughed and exempted employees for the duration of the funding lapse .

this report discusses the dhs contingency plan and the potential impacts of a lapse in annual appropriations on dhs operations , and then it discusses several legislative vehicles that mitigated or had the potential to mitigate those impacts .

for a broader discussion of a federal government shutdown , please see crs report rl34680 , shutdown of the federal government: causes , processes , and effects , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

lapses in annual appropriations result in a partial shutdown of government operations and emergency furlough of employees — however , they do not result in the complete shutdown of operations .

dhs personnel who continue to work without passage of annual appropriations or a continuing resolution generally fall into two categories: those whose activities are not funded through one - year appropriations and those whose work is necessary for the preservation of the safety of human life or the protection of property .

the former generally continue to be paid as scheduled , contingent on the availability of funds , whereas the latter are not paid while the lapse in annual appropriations continues .

of dhs's estimated 231,117 civilian and military employees , nearly 200,000 were projected to be exempted from the emergency furlough , according to the department .

most of these employees relied on annual appropriations for their salaries , and therefore were not paid during the funding lapse .

further information about exemptions from operational shutdown and emergency furlough due to a lapse in annual appropriations is outlined below .

several pieces of legislation were introduced that would have impacted the funding status of the department , allowing it to either pay employees or restore operations to varying degrees during the october 1 , 2013 , lapse in appropriations .

this section of the report focuses on the status and general impact of eight such pieces of legislation on dhs and dhs components alone .

annual appropriations h.r .

2217 — the homeland security appropriations act , 2014 automatic continuing resolution h.r .

3210 ( p.l .

113-39 ) — the pay our military act continuing resolutions h.j.res .

59 — the continuing appropriations resolution , 2014 h.j.res .

79 — the border security and enforcement continuing appropriations resolution , 2014 h.j.res .

85 — the federal emergency management agency continuing appropriations resolution , 2014 h.j.res .

89 — the excepted employees' pay continuing appropriations resolution , 2014 p.l .

113-46 — the continuing appropriations act , 2014 authorizing legislation h.r .

3223 — the federal employee retroactive pay fairness ac .

this is the annual appropriations bill for the department of homeland security .

the administration requested $39.0 billion in adjusted net discretionary budget authority for dhs for fy2014 .

h.r .

2217 as passed by the house would provide $39.0 billion in adjusted net discretionary budget authority .

the senate appropriations committee amendment to the bill would provide $39.1 billion in adjusted net discretionary budget authority .

both bills would also provide the $5.6 billion in disaster relief requested by the administration .

the house passed h.r .

2217 on june 6 , 2013 .

the senate appropriations committee reported its proposal for h.r .

2217 on july 18 , 2013 , but it has not received floor consideration in the senate .

enactment of this measure would have ended the emergency furlough for the department by providing full - year funding by account for dhs , as well as providing the potential additional detailed direction and context for the department's actions through a conference report joint explanatory statement , such as a conference report .

this automatic continuing resolution was introduced on september 28 , 2013 , and enacted two days later as p.l .

113-39 .

it provides "such sums as are necessary" to provide pay and allowances for fy2014 to members of the armed forces on active duty , and to the civilians and contractors employed by dod and dhs in support of them .

it appears that it is intended to provide such funds during any period in fy2014 when full - year or part - year appropriations are not in effect , hence the term "automatic. .

as noted above , although this legislation could have been interpreted to provide relief to coast guard military and civilian personnel and partially end the funding hiatus for part of the government , dod and dhs did not end furloughs for any of its employees under the provisions of the act until the week of october 7 , 2013 .

the department of justice had cautioned that the law did not allow the departments to end furlough for all civilian employees , or allow all contractors to be paid .

as noted above , after implementing p.l .

113-39 , 475 coast guard personnel remained furloughed until the enactment of p.l .

113-46 , which became the operative appropriations measure for the department of defense and dhs .

for a more detailed discussion , see " restoration of coast guard employee pay under p.l .

113-39 ," above .

the next five pieces of legislation are continuing resolutions with differing scopes .

the fifth measure is the continuing resolution enacted as a part of p.l .

113-46 , which ended the lapse in annual appropriations .

with its enactment , further action on the other measures in this section in their current form is unlikely .

this short - term continuing resolution was introduced september 10 , 2013 .

as introduced , this measure would have provided temporary appropriations for dhs , funding the department at same rate it was for fy2013 ( post - sequester ) through december 15 , 2013 , or until it was replaced by another appropriations law .

there are four sections in h.j.res .

59 that contain legislative language that applies to dhs .

generally speaking , the sections carry authority and direction given to dhs and its components in both annual appropriations legislation and crs covering the department in recent years .

section 122 extends the authority for chemical facility anti - terrorism standards .

section 123 extends the ability of the secret service to expend resources gained in the process of their investigations .

section 124 maintains the ability of dhs science and technology to use other transaction authority to get r&d services and prototypes without being constrained by federal acquisition regulations .

section 125 allows customs and border protection to apportion its funding to maintain 21,370 border patrol agents and sustain border operations , including the new tethered aerostat program , and allows immigration and customs enforcement to apportion funds to keep 34,000 detention beds .

according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the annualized cost of the dhs - related provisions in the continuing resolution as introduced in the house would be $37.7 billion , not including $236 million for overseas contingency operations funding for the coast guard , or $6.1 billion for disaster relief funding .

none of the proposed amendments to this measure altered provisions directly impacting dhs , except for a senate change shortening the maximum duration of the bill to november 15 , 2013 .

on october 1 , 2013 , the house requested a conference with the senate .

the senate voted to table that request later that same day , and thereby returned h.j.res .

59 to the house .

enactment of this measure would have ended the emergency furlough for the entire government , at least until its date of expiration .

as the measure currently stands , as is usually the case with crs , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists .

figure 2 , at the end of this section , shows a graphical representation of the relative size of dhs annualized appropriations that would be restored under a continuing resolution for the entire department at a rate equivalent to post - sequester resources provided under p.l .

113-6 — the same rate and coverage provided in h.j.res .

59 and p.l .

113-46 .

it compares that annualized appropriation to the resources that would be provided through h.j.res .

79 , h.j.res .

85 , and the actions taken in p.l .

113-39 .

this continuing resolution was introduced on october 3 , 2013 .

it is a temporary appropriations measure that would provide funding for several dhs components , including u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services , and part of the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) — the office of biometric identity management .

these entities would be funded at the same rate as was provided in p.l .

113-6 , taking into account sequestration , through december 15 , 2013 , or until it was replaced by another applicable appropriations law .

h.j.res .

79 passed the house on october 10 , 2013 , by a vote of 249-175 .

according to cbo , the annualized cost of the measure would be $18.8 billion , not including $236 million for overseas contingency operations funding for the coast guard .

cbo's scoring assumes that $5 billion in costs for the coast guard would have been paid already under h.r .

3210 .

enactment of this measure would have ended the emergency furlough for the five dhs entities listed in the bill , at least until its date of expiration .

as the measure currently stands , as is usually the case with continuing resolutions , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists .

it would also not provide the four legislative extensions of authority for dhs as envisioned under h.j.res .

59 .

the components included in this measure include three of the five largest discretionary budgets at dhs — cbp , ice , and uscg .

these components also represent three of the four largest groups of employees furloughed at dhs , totaling 16,866 employees — 54% of dhs's total initial projected furlough .

figure 2 , at the end of this section , shows a graphical representation of the relative size of the dhs appropriations that would be restored under the bill , relative to the resources that would be provided through h.j.res .

85 and the actions taken in p.l .

113-39 and p.l .

113-46 .

as figure 1 and figure 2 show , removing the funding hiatus impact on cbp , ice , coast guard , and uscis would have represented a significant restoration of funding to the department .

as noted below , a separate piece of legislation had been passed in the house to fund fema over a similar time period .

had these two pieces of legislation been enacted , many other complementary components of dhs would have remained affected by the funding hiatus: the management and intelligence functions of the department , the office of the inspector general , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the secret service , the office of health affairs , the science and technology directorate of the department , the domestic nuclear detection office , and most of the national protection and programs directorate would have remained unfunded .

with the exception of the tsa and the secret service , all of these functions were projected to furlough more than 40% of their employees , with most of them projected to furlough over 90% .

this cr was introduced october 3 , 2013 .

it would provide temporary funding for the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) at the same rate as was provided in p.l .

113-6 , taking into account sequestration , through december 15 , 2013 , or until other appropriations legislation replaces the direction in the bill .

h.j.res .

85 passed the house on october 4 , 2013 , by a vote of 247-164 .

according to cbo , the annualized cost of the bill would be $4.1 billion in discretionary budget authority for the department , plus $6.1 billion in disaster relief funding — a total of $10.2 billion .

enactment of this legislation would have ended the emergency furlough for fema , at least until its date of expiration .

as the measure currently stands , as is usually the case with continuing resolutions , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists .

it would also not provide the four legislative extensions of authority for dhs as envisioned under h.j.res .

59 .

this bill provides temporary funding to fema , leaving the coordinating , managing and oversight functions of the overall department unfunded .

it is unclear whether passage of this legislation would provide for a transfer of funds to the dhs oig to pay for oversight of disaster relief operations , as has occurred in recent years , and whether such a transfer would allow the oig to conduct those activities .

figure 2 , below , shows a graphical representation of the relative size of the dhs appropriations that would be restored under the bill , relative to the resources that would be provided through h.j.res .

85 and the actions taken in p.l .

113-39 and p.l .

113-46 .

figure 2 compares the cbo - estimated impact of the two enacted and two proposed temporary appropriations measures affecting dhs .

the underlying circle of the pie chart reflects the annualized discretionary budget authority that is provided for dhs through p.l .

113-46 — essentially , the equivalent of the post - sequester appropriated budget for dhs for fy2013 .

this is the same as the annualized discretionary budget authority that would have been provided to dhs through h.j.res .

59 .

the sections in blue are regular discretionary appropriations , while the tan sections are covered by adjustments for disaster relief and costs of overseas military operations that are provided for under the budget control act .

the crosshatched section of the pie represents the annualized budget authority provided under p.l .

113-39 — appropriations that will not lapse for fy2014 .

the two pieces "lifted" from the circle reflect what continuing appropriations would have been provided under h.j.res .

79 and h.j.res .

85 .

all of these continuing resolutions , proposed and enacted , had the same rate — the fy2013 post - sequester level of funding provided under p.l .

113-6 .

their coverage differed , however , with only h.j.res .

59 and p.l .

113-46 covering the entire department ( in fact , the entire government ) , and h.j.res .

79 , h.j.res .

85 , and p.l .

113-39 covering appropriations for portions of dhs .

as the figure shows , roughly 22% of the dhs budget would not have been covered by the three measures that addressed dhs in part , but not the entire federal government .

this continuing resolution was introduced and passed the house on october 8 , 2013 .

it would provide temporary funding to pay the salaries of all federal employees working during the lapse in appropriations who are not paid by other means , through december 15 , 2013 , or until other appropriations legislation replaces the direction in the bill .

h.j.res .

89 passed the house on october 8 , 2013 , by a vote of 420-0 .

at the time the bill passed the house , there was no cbo estimate of the annualized cost of the bill .

enactment of this legislation would not end the emergency furlough for any government component , although it would reduce the economic impact of the shutdown by maintaining the flow of compensation to "excepted" or "exempted" federal workers , including many at dhs .

the resolution is drafted to pay "salaries and related expenses" only , so the limitations noted in the analysis of p.l .

113-39 would apply in the case of enactment of this measure as well .

as the measure currently stands , as is usually the case with continuing resolutions , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists .

h.r .

2775 was amended by the senate on october 16 , 2013 , to include the continuing appropriations act , 2014 as division a .

the amended measure provides temporary appropriations for the federal government , including dhs , funding the department at same rate it was for fy2013 ( post - sequester ) through january 15 , 2013 , or until it is replaced by another appropriations law .

h.r .

2775 , as amended , passed the senate by a vote of 81-18 on october 16 , 2013 , and several hours later , passed the house of representatives by a vote of 285-144 .

the bill was signed into law shortly after midnight on october 17 , 2013 , and the federal government resumed operations that same day .

there are five sections in p.l .

113-46 that contain legislative language that specifically apply to dhs .

four of these sections have the same essential impact as those that were highlighted above as part of h.j.res .

59 .

the fifth , section 157 , mirrors a general provision from p.l .

113-6 , requiring dhs to share reports it provides to the appropriations committees to the house committee on homeland security and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

generally speaking , the sections carry authority and direction given to dhs and its components in both annual appropriations legislation and crs covering the department in recent years .

division a also includes legislative language similar to that of h.r .

3223 ( discussed below ) , which authorizes back pay for all furloughed and exempted federal employees for the period of the october 1 , 2013 , funding lapse .

as with h.j.res .

59 , according to cbo , the annualized cost of the dhs - related provisions in the act as introduced in the senate would be $37.7 billion , not including $236 million for overseas contingency operations funding for the coast guard , and $6.1 billion for disaster relief funding .

these numbers are a projection of what could be spent if the resolution were extended to the end of the fiscal year — the act is currently set to expire on january 15 , or when it is replaced by relevant appropriations legislation .

enactment of this measure ended the emergency furlough resulting from the lapse in appropriations on october 1 , 2013 .

as is usually the case with continuing resolutions , account - level direction for funding is not provided , and no explanatory statement of congressional intent ( such as a committee report ) exists .

this is authorizing legislation that states that all employees furloughed as a result of the funding lapse at the beginning of fy2014 shall be paid for that time after the lapse in appropriations ends .

the house passed h.r .

3223 by a vote of 407-0 on october 5 , 2013 .

its stated intent was accomplished through section 115 of p.l .

113-46 .

this would apply to all furloughed employees of dhs , but it would not end the funding lapse or change the operations of dhs directly .

establishment of this obligation could have significant implications for departments' budgeting and performance metrics .

resources budgeted in the expectation of performance of regular departmental duties would instead be expended to compensate staff for conforming to shutdown procedures .

