the authority for congressional review and approval of the district of columbia's budget is derived from the constitution and the district of columbia self - government and government reorganization act of 1973 ( home rule act ) .

the constitution gives congress the power to "exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever" pertaining to the district of columbia .

in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule authority and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council .

however , congress retained the authority to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget .

as required by the home rule act , the city council must approve a budget within 56 days after receiving a budget proposal from the mayor .

the approved budget must then be transmitted to the president , who forwards it to congress for its review , modification , and approval through the annual appropriations process .

the district of columbia's budget is included in the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill .

congress not only appropriates federal payments to the district to fund certain activities , but also reviews , and may modify , the district's entire budget , including the expenditure of local funds as outlined in the district's home rule act .

since fy2006 , the district's appropriations act has been included in a multi - agency appropriations bill ; before fy2006 the district budget was considered by the house and the senate as a stand - alone bill .

it is currently included in the proposed financial services and general government appropriations acts ( fsgg ) ( s. 1371 and h.r .

2786 ) .

district of columbia appropriations acts typically include the following three components: 1 .

special federal payments appropriated by congress to be used to fund particular initiatives or activities of interest to congress or the administration .

2 .

the district's operating budget , which includes funds to cover the day - to - day functions , activities , and responsibilities of the government ; enterprise funds that provide for the operation and maintenance of government facilities or services that are entirely or primarily supported by user - based fees ; and long - term capital outlays such as road improvements .

district operating budget expenditures are paid for by revenues generated through local taxes ( sales and income ) , federal funds for which the district qualifies , and fees and other sources of funds .

3 .

general provisions are typically the third component of the district's budget reviewed and approved by congress .

these provisions can be grouped into several distinct but overlapping categories , with the most predominant being provisions relating to fiscal and budgetary directives and controls .

other provisions include administrative directives and controls , limitations on lobbying for statehood or congressional voting representation , congressional oversight , and congressionally imposed restrictions and prohibitions related to social policy .

it should be noted that congress has , from time to time , included language authorizing new programmatic initiatives or amendments to the district of columbia home rule charter in the district's appropriations bill .

for example , in 1995 , congress included language authorizing the creation of public charter schools in the district of columbia as part of p.l .

104-134 , a consolidated appropriation measure .

in 2004 , congress included statutory provisions creating a school voucher program as part of the district of columbia appropriations , which was a component of a consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

108-199 .

addressing the spread of hiv and aids among intravenous drug abusers is one of several key policy issues that congress has faced in reviewing the district's appropriations for fy2014 .

the controversy surrounding funding a needle exchange program touches on issues of home rule , public health policy , and government sanctioning and facilitating the use of illegal drugs .

proponents of a needle exchange program contend that such programs reduce the spread of hiv among illegal drug users by reducing the incidence of shared needles .

opponents of these efforts contend that such programs amount to the government sanctioning illegal drugs by supplying drug - addicted persons with the tools to use them .

in addition , opponents contend that public health concerns raised about the spread of hiv and aids through shared contaminated needles should be addressed through drug treatment and rehabilitation programs .

another view in the debate focuses on the issue of home rule and the city's ability to use local funds to institute such programs free from congressional restrictions .

congress also faces the decision of whether or not to use federal funds to address this issue .

the prohibition on the use of federal and district funds for a needle exchange program was first approved by congress as section 170 of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 .

the 1999 act did allow private funding of needle exchange programs .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 , p.l .

106-522 , continued the prohibition on the use of federal and district funds for a needle exchange program ; it also restricted the location of privately funded needle exchange activities .

section 150 of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 made it unlawful to distribute any needle or syringe for the hypodermic injection of any illegal drug in any area in the city that is within 1,000 feet of a public elementary or secondary school , including any public charter school .

the provision was deleted during congressional consideration and thus from the district of columbia appropriations act of fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 .

the act also included a provision that allowed the use of private funds for a needle exchange program , but it prohibited the use of both district and federal funds for such activities .

at present , one entity , prevention works , a private nonprofit aids awareness and education program , operates a needle exchange program in the district .

the fy2002 district of columbia appropriations act required such entities to track and account for the use of public and private funds .

during consideration of the fy2004 district of columbia appropriations act , district officials unsuccessfully sought to lift the prohibition on the use of district funds for needle exchange programs .

a senate provision , which was not adopted , had proposed prohibiting only the use of federal funds for a needle exchange program and allowing the use of district funds .

the house and final conference versions of the fy2004 bill allowed the use of private funds for needle exchange programs and required private and public entities that receive federal or district funds in support of other activities or programs to account for the needle exchange funds separately .

the financial services and general government appropriations act for fy2008 , p.l .

110-161 , contained language that modified the needle exchange provision included in previous appropriations acts .

the act allowed the use of district funds for a needle exchange program aimed at reducing the spread of hiv and aids among users of illegal drugs .

the provision was a departure from previous appropriations acts that prohibited the use of both district and federal funds in support of a needle exchange program .

in addition , the explanatory statement accompanying the act encouraged the george w. bush administration to include federal funding to help the city address its hiv / aids health crisis .

the president's budget proposal for fy2014 and related house and senate committee bills included language that would have retained language included in the fy2013 appropriations act that allowed the use of district funds , but prohibited the use of federal funds , in support of a needle exchange program .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2014 , p.l .

113-76 , continues to prohibit the use of federal funds to administer a needle exchange program .

the city's medical marijuana initiative is another issue that has engendered controversy .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1999 , p.l .

105-277 ( 112 stat .

2681-150 ) , included a provision that prohibited the city from counting ballots of a 1998 voter - approved initiative that would have allowed the medical use of marijuana to assist persons suffering from debilitating health conditions and diseases , including cancer and hiv infection .

congress's power to prohibit the counting of a medical marijuana ballot initiative was challenged in a suit filed by the dc chapter of the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) .

on september 17 , 1999 , district court judge richard roberts ruled that congress , despite its legislative responsibility for the district under article i , section 8 , of the constitution , did not possess the power to stifle or prevent political speech , which included the ballot initiative .

this ruling allowed the city to tally the votes from the november 1998 ballot initiative .

to prevent the implementation of the initiative , congress had 30 days to pass a resolution of disapproval from the date the medical marijuana ballot initiative ( initiative 59 ) was certified by the board of elections and ethics .

language prohibiting the implementation of the initiative was included in p.l .

106-113 ( 113 stat .

1530 ) , the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2000 .

opponents of the provision contended that such congressional actions undercut the concept of home rule .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2002 , p.l .

107-96 ( 115 stat .

953 ) , included a provision that continued to prohibit the district government from implementing the initiative .

congress's power to block the implementation of the initiative was again challenged in the courts .

on december 18 , 2001 , two groups , the marijuana policy project and the medical marijuana initiative committee , filed suit in u.s. district court , seeking injunctive relief in an effort to put another medical marijuana initiative on the november 2002 ballot .

the district's board of elections and ethics ruled that a congressional rider that had been included in the general provisions of each district appropriations act since 1998 prohibited it from using public funds to do preliminary work that would have put the initiative on the ballot .

on march 28 , 2002 , a u.s. district court judge ruled that the congressional ban on the use of public funds to put such a ballot initiative before the voters was unconstitutional .

the judge stated that the effect of the amendment was to restrict the plaintiff's first amendment right to engage in political speech .

the decision was appealed by the justice department , and on september 19 , 2002 , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit reversed the ruling of the lower court without comment .

the appeals court issued its ruling on september 19 , 2002 , which was the deadline for printing ballots for the november 2002 general election .

on june 6 , 2005 , the supreme court , in a six - to - three decision , ruled that congress possessed the constitutional authority under the commerce clause to regulate or prohibit the interstate marketing of both legal and illegal drugs .

this includes banning the possession of drugs in states and the district of columbia that have decriminalized or permitted the use of marijuana for medical or therapeutic purposes .

since the passage of district of columbia appropriations act for fy2010 , subsequent appropriations acts have not included language prohibiting the use of district funds to regulate the medical use of marijuana .

in 2010 , the district of columbia council approved legislation ( a18-0429 ) regulating the medical use of marijuana .

although the legislation was subject to 30-day congressional review period , which would have allowed congress to pass a resolution of disapproval , congress took no action to block its implementation .

the legislation directed the city's health department to license up to five facilities to dispense medical marijuana to authorized patients .

the first of those dispensaries began operations on july 30 , 2013 .

both the house and senate committee bills ( h.r .

2786 and s. 1371 ) would have continued to prohibit the use of federal funds to carry out any law or regulation that would legalize or reduce federal penalties associated with the use or distribution of any controlled substance , including the medical use of marijuana .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2014 , p.l .

113-76 , prohibits the use of federal funds to decriminalize or regulate the medical use of marijuana .

the public funding of abortion services for district of columbia residents is a perennial issue debated by congress during its annual deliberations on district of columbia appropriations .

district officials have cited the prohibition on the use of district funds as another example of congressional intrusion into local matters .

since 1979 , with the passage of the district of columbia appropriations act of 1980 , p.l .

96-93 ( 93 stat .

719 ) , congress has placed some limitation or prohibition on the use of public funds for abortion services for district residents .

from 1979 to 1988 , congress restricted the use of federal funds for abortion services to cases where the woman's life was endangered or the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest .

the district was free to use district funds for abortion services .

when congress passed the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1989 , p.l .

100-462 ( 102 stat .

2269-9 ) , it restricted the use of district and federal funds for abortion services to cases where the woman's life would be endangered if the pregnancy were taken to term .

the inclusion of district funds and the elimination of rape or incest as qualifying conditions for public funding of abortion services were endorsed by president reagan , who threatened to veto the district's appropriations act if the abortion provision was not modified .

in 1989 , president george h.w .

bush twice vetoed the district's fy1990 appropriations act over the abortion issue .

he signed p.l .

101-168 ( 103 stat .

1278 ) after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenues to pay for abortion services except in cases where the woman's life was endangered .

the district successfully sought the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services when congress considered and passed the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l .

103-127 ( 107 stat .

1350 ) .

the fy1994 act also reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the public funding of abortion services .

the district's success was short - lived , however .

the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l .

104-134 ( 110 stat .

1321-91 ) , and subsequent district of columbia appropriations acts , limited the use of district and federal funds for abortion services to cases where the woman's life was endangered or cases where the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest .

in fy2010 , with the passage of p.l .

111-117 , congress lifted the prohibition on the use of district funds for abortion services , but maintained the restriction on the use of federal funds for such services except in cases of rape , incest , or a threat to the life of the woman .

the position was reversed with the passage of the appropriations acts for fy2011 ( p.l .

112-10 ) and fy2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) .

those acts included provisions restricting the use of both federal and district funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape , incest , or the woman's life was endangered if the pregnancy was carried to term .

during the 112 th congress , two bills were considered in the house that would have banned or restricted the provision of abortion services in the district of columbia .

on may 4 , 2012 , the house passed h.r .

3 , the no taxpayer funding for abortions act .

the measure included a provision ( section 309 ) that would have permanently prohibited the use of federal and district funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape , incest , or a threat to the life of the woman .

on june 17 , 2012 , the house judiciary committee ordered reported h.r .

3803 , the district of columbia pain - capable unborn child protection act .

the bill would have permanently banned doctors and health facilities from performing abortions in the district after the 20 th week of pregnancy , except when the pregnancy would result in the woman suffering from a physical disorder , injury , or illness that endangers her life .

it would have imposed fines and imprisonment on doctors who violated the act and would have allowed the pregnant woman , the father of the unborn child , or maternal grandparents of a pregnant minor to bring a civil action against any person who performed an abortion after the 20 th week of pregnancy .

the act would have required any physician that performs an abortion to report specific information to the relevant health agency in the district , including post - fertilization age of the fetus and the abortion method used .

the district health agency would have been required to compile such information and issue an annual report to the public .

the district's delegate to congress , eleanor holmes norton , though not allowed to testify before the committee , spoke out against the measures as infringements on home rule .

the obama administration's fy2014 budget request included a provision that would have prohibited the use of federal funds for abortion services except in cases of rape , incest , or when the woman's life would be endangered if the pregnancy were carried to term , but did not include language that would restrict the use of district funds for abortion services .

s. 1371 , as reported , supported the administration position restricting the use of federal funds .

h.r .

2786 , as reported , included language that would have restricted the use of both federal and district funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape , incest , or when the woman's life is endangered .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2014 , p.l .

113-76 , includes a provision consistent with the language included in the house committee bill prohibiting the use of both district and federal funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape , incest , or when the woman's life is endangered .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2004 , p.l .

108-199 , which combined six appropriations bills — including the fy2004 district of columbia appropriations act — authorized and appropriated funding for the opportunity scholarship program , a federally funded school voucher program for the district of columbia .

the program provides scholarships ( also known as vouchers ) to students in the district of columbia to attend participating private elementary and secondary schools , including religiously affiliated private schools .

p.l .

108-199 also provided funding for the district of columbia public schools ( dcps ) for the improvement of public education and for the state education office for public charter schools .

the provision of federal funds for dcps , public charter schools , and vouchers is commonly referred to as the "three - prong approach" to supporting elementary and secondary education in the district of columbia .

the opportunity scholarship program was subsequently reauthorized through the scholarship for opportunity and results act ( division c of the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ; p.l .

112-10 ) .

appropriations for the program were authorized for fy2012 through fy2016 at $60 million each year .

p.l .

112-10 requires that appropriations provided for the program to be divided evenly among dcps for the improvement of public education , public charter schools to improve and expand quality public charter schools , and the opportunity scholarship program , regardless of the actual amount appropriated .

thus , the reauthorized opportunity scholarship program continues to be included in a broader approach to supporting elementary and secondary education in the district of columbia .

the obama administration's proposed budget for fy2014 includes $30 million for dcps , $20 million for public charter schools , and $2.2 million to carry out evaluation and administrative activities of the program support the opportunity scholarship program .

s. 1371 , as reported , would have provided a total of $52.2 million for a federal payment for school improvement .

rather than dividing these funds equally between the aforementioned three prongs , funds would have been allocated as follows: $30 million for dcps , $20 million for public charter schools , and $2.2 million for the opportunity scholarship program .

h.r .

2786 , as reported , would have provided $54 million for a federal payment for school improvement , with $18 million provided to each of the three prongs .

p.l .

113-76 appropriates $48 million divided evenly ( $16 million each ) among public schools , charter schools , and scholarships to private schools .

in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule powers and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council .

at the same time , however , congress retained the power to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget .

under the district's home rule charter , the mayor must submit operating and capital budgets to the city council for review and adoption by a date specified by the council .

the council must act on the budget within 56 calendar days of receiving the budget from the mayor .

the mayor then forwards the approved budget to the president , who transmits it to congress .

once forwarded to congress , the district's budget moves through the congressional appropriations process .

this typically includes subcommittee hearings , which may take place before the actual budget submission to congress ; subcommittee and committee markups in the house and the senate ; committee reports and votes ; floor action ; conference report consideration ; and final passage .

all of this is supposed to happen within approximately 120 calendar days before the beginning of the district's fiscal year on october 1 .

district of columbia political leaders have consistently expressed concern that congress has repeatedly delayed passage of the appropriations act for the district ( in which congress approves the city's budget ) well after the start of the district's fiscal year .

the city's elected leaders contend that delay in congress's approval of its budget hinders their ability to manage the district's financial affairs and negatively affects the delivery of public services .

during the past 18 years , approval of the district's annual budget has been delayed by complications in the congressional appropriations process .

rather than being enacted on its own , the district of columbia appropriations act has often been folded into omnibus or consolidated appropriations acts , and continuing resolutions .

as documented in table 4 , fy1997 was the only year out of the past 18 years for which the d.c. appropriations act was enacted before the start of the fiscal year ( on october 1 of the prior - numbered year ) .

the senate committee version of the financial services and general government appropriations act for fy2014 , s. 1371 , consistent with language in the administration's fy2014 budget documents , included provisions that would have provided the district with some level of autonomy over locally raised revenues .

specifically , the bill would have allowed the district to decouple its fiscal year from the federal fiscal year allowing the district to establish when its local fiscal year would start ; permitted district officials to obligate and expend local funds upon enactment by the district of its local annual budget ; and granted the district the authority to spend local funds if congress did not enacted a federal appropriation authorizing the expenditure of local funds before the start of the district's fiscal year .

the house committee bill , h.r .

2786 , did not include similar language .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2014 , p.l .

113-76 , included a provision allowing the district to spend local funds if congress does not enacted a continuing resolution or federal appropriation authorizing the expenditure of local funds before the start of the district's 2015 fiscal year .

to mitigate the impact of congressional delays in the approval of the district's appropriation before the beginning of a fiscal year , congress has routinely included language in continuing budget resolutions allowing the district to expend local funds on programs and activities included in its general fund budget .

before the beginning of fy2014 fiscal year , congress did not approve the district of columbia appropriation for fy2014 .

as a stopgap measure , on october 2 , 2013 , the house considered and passed h.j.res .

71 , the district of columbia continuing appropriations resolution , 2014 , which would allow the district to use locally raised revenues to fund district operations through december 15 , 2013 .

the senate did not take up consideration of the bill .

during the 16-day shutdown city officials continued to press the senate to consider the bill passed by the house , contending that a $144 million contingency fund used to keep the city operating would soon be exhausted , forcing the furloughing of all but essential city personnel .

mayor vincent gray asserted that the absence of a congressionally approved budget had forced the city to delay payments to metro and threatened to delay payments to the district's 60 charter schools .

on october 16 , 2013 , congress passed an amended version of h.r .

2775 , a bill providing continuing appropriations through january 15 , 2014 .

the bill , which was approved by both houses of congress on october 16 , 2013 and signed into law as p.l .

113-46 on october 17 , 2013 , included a provision — section 127 — releasing the district of columbia general fund budget ( operating budget ) for fy2014 from further congressional review and approval and allowing the district of columbia to expend locally raised revenues as outlined in the its fiscal year 2014 budget request act of 2013 ( d.c. act 20-0127 ) .

although p.l .

113-46 allowed the district access to its locally generated revenues it did not fund any of the special federal payment accounts .

instead , congress took action on these accounts when it considered and approved the consolidated appropriations act of fy2014 , p.l .

113-76 .

the act appropriated funds for the remainder of the 2014 fiscal year , including the district's general fund budget and special federal payments to the district .

