the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) and the reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) impose a fee on certain for - profit health insurers , starting in 2014 .

the aggregate aca fee , to be collected by the internal revenue service ( irs ) across all affected insurers operating in the united states , is set at $8.0 billion in 2014 .

the fee will gradually rise to $14.3 billion in 2018 , and will be indexed to the annual rate of u.s. premium growth thereafter ( table 1 ) .

while the federal aca premium fee is new , states for many years have imposed premium taxes on insurance products .

in 2012 , states collected $16.7 billion in premium taxes on a broad range of insurance ( including property and casualty , life , and health products ) .

insurers' ability to pass on the new aca tax , in the form of higher premiums to consumers , will vary based on factors such as the degree of market competition or a firm's specific business strategy .

government programs such as medicare and medicaid that contract with private insurers to deliver health benefits consider an insurer's tax payments , along with other costs , when setting annual program reimbursement levels .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has estimated that insurers may pass on the aca insurer fee to consumers in the form of "slightly" higher premiums for coverage .

according to cbo , prior to the aca's passage , because self - insured plans would largely be exempt from the fee , and because large firms are more likely to self - insure than small firms , the net result would be a smaller percentage increase in average premiums for large firms than for small firms and for nongroup coverage .

the joint committee on taxation has estimated that legislation to repeal section 9010 of the aca would result in a 2% to 2.5% reduction in the premium prices of insurance plans offered by the covered entities .

the joint committee said it expected a very large portion of the fee to be passed on to purchasers of insurance in the form of higher premiums .

the analysis found that eliminating the fee could reduce annual premiums for a family of four in 2016 by $350-$400 .

some insurance companies have released estimates regarding the impact of the fee .

for example , blue shield of california has forecast the impact of the 2014 insurer fee will equal about 2.3% of premium .

kaiser permanente has told business clients the insurer fee will amount to roughly 0.65% of premium in 2014 .

some insurance companies plan to increase premiums or have asked state regulators to include the impact of aca costs , including the premium tax , in their annual rate requests .

horizon blue cross blue shield of new jersey , for example , estimates that the tax will increase its costs by $125 million in 2014 , spurring an increase in premiums .

the company had $9.4 billion in revenues in 2012 , with net income of $200 million .

in addition , an april 2013 study by the actuary / consulting firm milliman estimated that the fee would result in premium increases of 1.7% to 2.4% in 2014 , rising to 2.0% to 2.9% in following years .

the firm said that the fee gives nonprofit insurers a competitive advantage , because many nonprofits are exempted or are subject to a lower fee than the for - profit insurers' fees .

estimating exactly how the federal premium fee will affect the insurance industry , and existing government programs such as medicare and medicaid , is complicated by a number of factors , including a lack of detailed data on net premiums .

the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) has developed a system for uniform financial reporting by insurance companies .

currently , the naic collects premium data on direct premiums earned and written , rather than on net premiums written .

as noted earlier , the aca defines net premiums written as gross premiums from insurance sales , minus aca mlr rebates , certain commissions , and premiums ceded to reinsurers .

the difference between direct and net premium written is largely reinsurance activity .

any estimate of the distribution of the aca fee based on direct premiums earned will most likely overestimate the size of the market subject to the aca insurer tax .

the naic will begin collecting data on net premiums written via future insurer financial statements .

in addition , companies are to provide information to the irs as part of their annual reporting requirements under the aca .

existing naic data provide some general guidance regarding the possible , proportional breakdown of the insurance fees .

in general , for - profit health insurers in the united states ( excluding california ) wrote about $295 billion in direct premiums in 2012 .

comprehensive group and health policies accounted for more than half the total , with medicare ( ma and part d ) accounting for about 24% and medicaid accounting for up to about 19% .

legislation has been introduced in congress to repeal the aca fee on health insurance providers , and to require fuller consumer reporting regarding the fee .

the bills are in addition to other legislation to repeal the aca .

among the bills that have been introduced are: h.r .

763 , to repeal the annual fee on health insurance providers enacted by the patient protection and affordable care act by striking section 9010 .

s. 603 , to repeal the annual fee on health insurance providers enacted by the patient protection and affordable care act .

h.r .

1558 , section 104 of the bill would repeal section 9010 of the aca .

s. 24 , section 104 of the bill would repeal section 9010 of the aca .

related: h.r .

1205 , to require health plans to disclose in their annual summary of benefits aca - imposed taxes and fees .

s. 764 , to require health plans to disclose in their annual summary of benefits aca - imposed taxes and fees .

in addition to formal legislation , there has been debate regarding other , possible changes to the aca insurer premium fee .

a number of state governors caution that the premium fee will result in higher costs to states that offer fully capitated medicaid managed care plans under contract with insurers .

federal regulations require that premiums paid to medicaid managed care plans be "actuarially sound. .

to make that determination , state licensing entities consider insurers' costs , including health benefits , marketing and administrative expenses , and taxes .

because of cost - sharing limitations in medicaid , the fees may not be passed on to enrollees .

instead , if premium rates go up , states and the federal government , which jointly fund medicaid , could pay more to operate the program .

the federal government will collect the insurer premium fee , but states will not have new , offsetting revenues to defray any new costs .

the republican governors association has asked congress to exempt medicaid and chip managed care plans from the insurance tax .

some analysts say that states will be able to negotiate with insurers to control premium costs , meaning that the full impact of the fee is unlikely to be passed along .

the association of american medical colleges has proposed using a portion of the premium tax to help fund u.s. graduate medical education .

health policy experts are concerned about the current size , specialty mix , and geographic distribution of the healthcare workforce .

some experts forecast a shortage of physicians , a situation that will be made more acute when millions of previously uninsured consumers obtain coverage under the aca .

another outstanding issue involves tax treatment of aca fees "recovered" by affected insurers .

some large health care providers have indicated that they plan to recoup the cost of these excise taxes by levying fees or raising insurance premiums on those enrolled in their plans .

in other words , although the excise tax is levied on health insurance providers , the economic impact of the excise tax might be borne by consumers .

under current law , increased insurer fees and premiums that are imposed to compensate , at least in part , for the imposition of the excise tax will contribute to the health insurers' calculations of their gross income for tax purposes .

therefore , these fees will be subject to corporate income tax ( just like ordinary revenues earned through the sales of products and services ) .

a coalition of insurers has submitted comments to the irs requesting that extra fees and higher premium costs be excluded from calculations of gross income .

the insurers argue that they are effectively being "double - taxed": once through the aca's fees / excise taxes , and next based on income earned from new fees and higher premiums instituted to offset any reduction in profits due to the tax .

in the insurers' view , the fees should be interpreted by the irs as a "recovery" for past excise taxes paid .

opponents could argue that such an exclusion would amount to a tax preference for health insurers , and would also reduce the amount of revenue expected to be raised through the aca fee .

the irs in its proposed regulation asked for comments on the issue .

