minority - serving institutions ( msis ) are institutions of higher education that serve high concentrations of minority students who , historically , have been underrepresented in higher education .

msis tend to have relatively low educational and general expenditures and high enrollments of needy students .

generally , many such institutions have faced challenges in obtaining access to financial support , thus affecting their ability to enhance their academic offerings and institutional capabilities and ultimately serve their students .

federal higher education policy recognizes th e importance of such institutions in improving access for and increasing completion of underrepresented minorities and targets financial resources to them .

funding for msis is channeled through numerous federal agencies , and several of these funding sources are available to msis through grant programs authorized under the higher education act of 1965 , as amended ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) .

over the years , hea support of msi programs has expanded to include a wider variety of underrepresented groups , and in fy2016 , msi programs under the hea were appropriated approximately $817 million , which helped fund more than 929 grants .

for purposes of this report , msis include , but are not limited to , american indian tribally controlled colleges and universities ( tccus ) ; alaska native and native hawaiian - serving institutions ( annhs ) ; predominantly black institutions ( pbis ) ; native american - serving , nontribal institutions ( nasntis ) ; asian american and native american pacific islander - serving institutions ( annapisis ) , historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , and hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) .

this report describes the several programs devoted to financially assisting msis under the hea .

this report does not attempt to describe all hea programs for which an msi may be eligible ; rather , it aims to describe those programs that are directed specifically toward one or more types of msis .

msis are eligible for other federal programs for which ihes and nonprofit organizations are eligible if they meet the program eligibility criteria .

this report first discusses how the various hea msi programs are funded .

it then provides a description of each program , organized by the type of msi to which the program is available .

included in each program description is a discussion of eligibility criteria for program participation ; a description of authorized uses of financial awards ; and administrative procedures , including a description of how funds are allocated among multiple institutions either via a competitive award process or a formula - based grant .

appendix a provides a list of acronyms used in this report .

appendix b details mandatory and discretionary appropriations for selected msi programs authorized under the hea .

all programs discussed in this report are administered by the u.s. department of education .

typically , many of the msi programs authorized under the hea are funded through annual discretionary appropriations .

however , in recent years , mandatory appropriations have been provided to many of the programs , which were in addition to discretionary appropriations , in some cases .

in 2007 , with the college cost reduction and access act ( p.l .

110-84 ) , congress established the strengthening historically black colleges and universities and other minority - serving institutions programs .

the act created some new msi programs and provided mandatory appropriations for both the newly authorized and the preexisting title iii - a and iii - b msis programs for fy2008 and fy2009 .

the programs receiving the mandatory appropriations were strengthening tccus ; strengthening annhs ; strengthening pbis ; strengthening nasntis ; strengthening annapisis ; strengthening hbcus ; and hsi stem .

the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) redesignated the strengthening historically black colleges and universities and other minority - serving institutions programs under title iii , part f of the hea .

the heoa also authorized additional annual mandatory appropriations for masters degree programs at hbcus and pbis and the promoting postbaccalaureate opportunities for hispanic american programs for each of fiscal years fy2009 through fy2014 , programs that typically receive discretionary appropriations .

finally , the student aid and fiscal responsibility act ( safra ) , as part of the health care and education reconciliation act ( p.l .

111-152 ) extended the title iii - f mandatory appropriations for title iii - a , iii - b , and hsi stem programs through fy2019 .

appendix b details mandatory and discretionary appropriations for each of these programs from fy2013 to fy2017 .

the strengthening institutions program ( sip ) provides grants to institutions of higher education that serve a high percentage of low - income students and that have low educational and general expenditures .

it is the foundational program upon which many other hea programs designed to aid minority - serving institutions ( msis ) are based .

section 316 establishes the strengthening american indian tribally controlled colleges and universities ( tccus ) program , which was first authorized under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) .

it is the only hea program specifically available to tccus and provides sip - type grants to them .

the program is intended to assist tccus in improving and expanding their capacity to serving american indian students .

typically , strengthening tccu program grants are funded through discretionary appropriations under title iii - a .

additional mandatory appropriations are provided annually through fy2019 in title iii - f and are treated "as part of the amount appropriated ... to carry out section [316]" ; therefore , in this report , the title iii - a and iii - f tccu programs are collectively referred to as the strengthening tccu program and are discussed in conjunction with one another , unless otherwise noted .

section 317 of the hea establishes the strengthening alaska native and native hawaiian - serving institutions ( annhs ) program , which was first authorized under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) .

it is the only hea program specifically available to annhs and provides sip - type grants to them .

the program is intended to enable such institutions to improve and expand their ability to serve alaska natives or native hawaiians .

typically , strengthening annh grants are funded through discretionary appropriations under title iii - a .

additional mandatory appropriations are provided annually through fy2019 in title iii - f and "shall be made available as grants under [section 317annh program]. .

therefore , in this report , the title iii - a and iii - f annh programs are collectively referred to as the strengthening annh program and are discussed in conjunction with one another , unless otherwise noted .

section 319 establishes the strengthening native american - serving , nontribal institutions ( nasntis ) program , which was first authorized in 2007 under the college cost reduction and access act ( ccraa ; p.l .

110-385 ) .

it is the only hea program specifically available to nasntis and provides sip - type grants to them .

the program is intended to enable such institutions to improve and expand their ability to serve native american and low - income students .

since 2010 , strengthening nasnti program grants have been funded through discretionary appropriations under title iii - a .

mandatory appropriations are provided annually through fy2019 in title iii - f .

in general , title iii - a and title iii - f nasnti program grants are subject to the same eligibility criteria , authorized uses , and administrative procedures ; therefore , in this report , the title iii - a and iii - f nastnti programs are collectively referred to as the strengthening nasntis program and are discussed in conjunction with one another , unless otherwise noted .

section 320 establishes the strengthening asian american and native american pacific islander - serving institutions ( aanapisis ) program , which was first authorized in 2007 under the college cost reduction and access act ( ccraa ; p.l .

110-85 ) .

it is the only hea program specifically available to aanapisis and provides sip - type grants to them .

the purpose of the program is to enable such institutions to improve and expand their ability to serve asian americans and native american pacific islanders and low - income individuals .

section 320 strengthening aanapisi grants have been funded through discretionary appropriations since fy2009 under title iii - a .

additional mandatory appropriations are provided annually through fy2019 under title iii - f .

in general , eligibility requirements , authorized uses , and administrative processes for title iii - a and title iii - f aanapisi grants are the same ; therefore , in this report , the title iii - a and title iii - f aanapisi programs are referred to collectively as the strengthening aanapisi program and are discussed in conjunction with one another , unless otherwise stated .

most historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) were established between 1867 and 1900 with the purpose of serving the educational needs of black americans .

before hbcus were established , and to a certain extent afterwards , black americans were generally denied admission to traditionally white institutions .

as a result of these practices , hbcus became a primary means for providing postsecondary education to black americans .

as of 2015 , there were 97 hbcus located in 19 states , predominantly in the southeast ; the district of columbia ; and the u.s. virgin islands .

they include private and public , two - year and four - year institutions .

hbcus are funded under title iii - b of the hea .

at various points in time , hbcus were provided funding under hea title iii , but it was not until the higher education amendments of 1986 ( p.l .

99-498 ) that a separate hbcu program was established under title iii - b .

in establishing the title iii - b hbcu program , congress found that many hbcus were struggling to survive because of financial limitations and that "the current state of black colleges and universities [was] partly attributable to the discriminatory actions of the states and the federal government. .

the hbcu program was meant to address these issues and to ensure hbcus' participation in providing equality in education .

hea title iii - b authorizes programs for both undergraduate and graduate and professional programs at eligible hbcus .

section 323 , the strengthening hbcus program , authorizes the secretary to award formula - based grants to eligible hbcus for activities to strengthen academic , administrative , and fiscal capabilities ; these grants are typically available through discretionary appropriations .

the historically black graduate institutions ( hbgis ) program , section 326 , provides funds for formula - based grants to specifically listed graduate and professional programs at hbcus for authorized activities similar to those under section 323 , typically with discretionary funds .

title iii - f authorizes additional appropriations for the section 323 eligible institutions .

in addition to the title iii - b and title iii - f programs , title vii , part a , subpart 4 of the hea authorizes masters degree programs at hbcus , which provides grants to specifically listed institutions that make a substantial contribution to the graduate education of black americans at the master's degree level .

finally , the historically black college and university capital financing ( hbcu cap fin ) program assists hbcus in obtaining low - cost capital financing for campus maintenance and construction projects .

this section of the report discusses both of the strengthening hbcu program , the hbgi , masters degree programs at hbcus , and the hbcu cap fin program , including eligibility criteria , authorized uses , and program administration .

predominantly black institutions ( pbis ) are ihes that enroll a high concentration of black american students and that also enroll a high concentration of low - income or first - generation college students .

unlike hbcus , pbis were not necessarily established to serve the educational needs of black americans ; additionally , their date of establishment need not fall within a certain timeframe .

two hea programs are authorized specifically to assist pbis ; they are the strengthening pbis program and masters degree programs at pbis .

this section discusses each of these programs , including their eligibility criteria , authorized uses of grant monies , and program administration .

under the higher education amendments of 1992 ( p.l .

102-325 ) , congress created the developing hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) program under hea title iii - a .

under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) , the developing hsi program was moved to its own title , hea title v. in moving the hsi program to title v , congress stated , "[i]n recognition of the importance of finding new ways of serving our nation's rapidly growing hispanic community , [congress] has created a new part within title v dedicated solely to supporting the needs of hispanic - serving institutions. .

the purpose of the program was and is to expand educational opportunities for and improve the academic attainment of hispanic students and to enhance the institutional stability of institutions that are educating the majority of hispanic college students .

currently , title v is divided into two parts .

part a contains the hsi program , which provides grants to hsis to support and expand educational opportunities for hispanic students and is similar to the various hea title iii - a and iii - b msi programs .

part b contains the promoting postbaccalaureate opportunities for hispanic americans program , which assists in expanding postbaccalaureate education opportunities for hispanic students .

title iii - f contains the hsi science , technology , engineering , and mathematics and articulation program ( hsi stem ) , which assists in increasing the number of hispanic and low - income students attaining degrees in stem fields and in the development of transfer and articulation agreements between two - year and four - year institutions in stem fields .

although hsi stem is not part of title v , grants made under hsi stem are generally subject to the same requirements as grants made under the title v - a hsi program ; therefore , title v - a and title iii - f hsi stem will be addressed in the same section of this report .

this section of the report will discuss each of the three hsi programs ; for each program , this report will discuss eligibility criteria , authorized uses , and program administration .

additional programs are available specifically to msis under the hea .

these programs are not targeted to a specific type of msi but , rather , are available to most ihes with a high concentration of minority students .

two such programs are the endowment challenge grant and the minority science and engineering improvement program .

the endowment challenge grant program under hea title iii - c provides matching grants to eligible institutions to either establish or increase endowments and to increase self - sufficiency at such institutions .

eligible institutions are those that are eligible under hea title iii - a and title iii - b and institutions of higher education that make substantial contributions to postgraduate medical educational opportunities for minority and economically disadvantaged students .

grants under this program may not exceed $1 million , and recipients must provide nonfederal matching funds equal to the amount of federal funds provided .

this program has not been funded since fy1995 .

the minority science and engineering improvement program ( mseip ) was first authorized in the national science foundation act of 1950 ( p.l .

81-507 ) , and its administration was transferred to the department of education under hea title iii - e by the department of education organization act of 1979 ( p.l .

96-88 ) .

in creating the program , congress had found that minority - serving institutions provide important educational opportunities for minority students , particularly in science and engineering fields , but that such institutions often face significant limitations in resources and , therefore , lag behind in program offerings and student enrollment .

to counter this , mseip was established to provide grant - based assistance to predominantly minority institutions to effect long - term improvements in science and engineering education .

additionally , mseip is intended to increase the number of underrepresented ethnic minorities , particularly minority women , in science and engineering careers .

this section of the report first discusses general mseip eligibility criteria and then details the four types of mseip grants .

included in the discussion of each grant type are specific eligibility criteria , and authorized uses .

finally , this section of the report then discusses how mseip as a whole is administered .

mseip grants , generally , are available to a variety of entities , not just institutions of higher education .

however , mseip is divided into four categories of grants , each of which is used to address specific issues in science and engineering educational opportunities for minority students .

only certain entities that are eligible for mseip grants generally are eligible for each specific type of mseip grant , as determined by ed , through regulations .

in general , section 361 lists the following entities as eligible for mseip grants: public and private nonprofit minority - serving institutions of higher education that either ( 1 ) award bachelor's degrees or ( 2 ) award associate's degrees and have a curriculum that includes science or engineering subjects and that enter into partnerships with public or private nonprofit ihes that award bachelor's degrees in science and engineering .

nonprofit science - oriented organizations , professional scientific societies , and bachelor's degree awarding ihes , all of which must provide a needed service to a group of minority - serving institutions or provide in - service training for project directors , scientists , and engineers from minority - serving institutions .

consortia of organizations that provide needed services to one or more minority - serving institution .

consortia membership may include ( 1 ) public and private nonprofit ihes that have a science or engineering curriculum ; ( 2 ) ihes that have a graduate or professional program in science or engineering ; ( 3 ) research laboratories of or under contract with the department of energy , the department of defense , or the national institutes of health ; ( 4 ) relevant offices of the national aeronautics and space administration , national oceanic and atmospheric administration , national science foundation , and national institute of standards and technology ; ( 5 ) quasi - governmental entities that have a significant scientific or engineering mission ; or ( 6 ) ihes with state - sponsored centers of research in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics fields .

for purposes of mseip grants , hea section 365 defines a minority - serving institution as an ihe with an enrollment of a single minority , or a combination of minorities , that exceeds 50% of the total enrollment .

the definition of minority includes american indian , alaskan native , black ( not of hispanic origin ) , hispanic ( including persons of mexican , puerto rican , cuban , and central or south american origin ) , pacific islander , or another ethnic group that is underrepresented in science and engineering .

although each of the above types of entities is eligible for mseip grants generally , ed has set regulations that direct which entities are eligible for specific types of mseip grants .

mseip is broken into four different grant types , each of which is intended to serve specific objectives .

the four grant types are institutional grants , cooperative grants , design project grants , and special project grants .

institutional grants are awarded for projects that support the implementation of a comprehensive science improvement plan .

such plans may include any combination of activities for improving the preparation of minority students for careers in sciences .

specifically authorized uses for institutional grants include , but are not limited to , faculty development programs and the development of curriculum materials .

ed has determined that eligibility for institutional grants is limited to public and private nonprofit minority - serving institutions of higher education and consortia of such institutions .

cooperative grants are awarded for projects that assist groups of public and private nonprofit accredited ihes to work together to conduct a science improvement project .

specifically authorized uses for cooperative grants include , but are not limited to assisting institutions in sharing facilities and personnel ; disseminating information about established programs in science and engineering ; supporting cooperative efforts to strengthen the institution's science and engineering programs ; and carrying out a combination of the above listed activities .

ed regulations limit cooperative grant eligibility to groups of nonprofit accredited colleges and universities .

the primary fiscal agent of each group must be an eligible minority - serving institution , as defined in section 365 .

design project grants are awarded for projects that "assist minority institutions that do not have their own appropriate resources or personnel to plan and develop long - range science improvement programs. .

specifically authorized uses for design project grants include , but are not limited to , developing planning , management , and evaluation systems or developing plans for initiating scientific research and for improving an institution's capacity for scientific research .

funds for design project grants may be used to pay the salaries of faculty involved in a project ; however , not more than 50% of the funds can be used during any academic year for such purposes .

ed regulations do not limit eligibility for design project grants beyond statute ; therefore , unless otherwise determined by ed , design project grants are available to all mseip - eligible entities listed under hea section 361 .

there are two types of special project grants .

the first is available only to minority - serving institutions .

grants must support activities that either improve the quality of training in science and engineering or enhance research capabilities at minority - serving institutions .

the second type of special project grant is available to any mseip - eligible entity .

these grants must either provide a needed service to a group of minority - serving institutions or provide training for project directors , scientists , and engineers from minority - serving institutions .

authorized uses for either type of special project grant include , but are not limited to advanced science seminars ; science faculty workshops and conferences ; faculty training to develop science research or education skills ; science education research ; programs for visiting scientists ; preparation of films or audio - visual materials in science ; development of learning experiences in science beyond those normally available to minority institutions ; development of pre - college enrichment activities in sciences ; or other activities that address barriers to the entry of minorities into science .

like many of the hea title iii - a and iii - b grant programs , all types of mseip grants are competitively awarded .

mseip funding is provided through annual discretionary appropriations .

unlike many other hea title iii grant programs , the mseip award process consists of a single step .

to apply , applicants must submit a proposed project plan for the relevant mseip grant .

applications are selected based on the score of a review panel , and the applications with the highest score are selected for funding .

in awarding grants , ed is required to give priority to applicants who have not previously received funding under mseip and to previous grantees with a proven record of success .

ed can also give priority to applicants that contribute to achieving balance across geographic regions , academic disciplines , and project types among all projects that are funded .

appendix a .

list of acronyms the following is a list of acronyms that have been used throughout this report .

appendix b. appropriations for selected hea - authorized msi programs table b - 1 of this appendix lists the authorizations and discretionary and mandatory appropriations for selected hea - authorized msi programs , from fy2013 to fy2017 .

