the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) is the primary federal program that supports workforce development .

wia includes four main titles: title i — workforce investment systems — authorizes programs that provide job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals .

title i programs , which are primarily administered through the employment and training administration ( eta ) of the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , include three state formula grant programs , multiple national programs , job corps , and demonstration programs .

in addition , title i authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated .

title ii — adult education and literacy — authorizes education services to assist adults in improving their literacy , completing secondary education , and developing english language proficiency .

title iii — workforce investment - related activities — amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 to integrate the u.s. employment service ( es ) , which provides job search and job matching assistance to unemployed individuals , into the one - stop system established by wia .

title iv — rehabilitation act amendments of 1998 — amends the rehabilitation act of 1973 , which provides employment - related services to individuals with disabilities .

the authorizations for appropriations for most programs under the workforce investment act ( wia ) of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) expired at the end of fy2003 .

since that time , wia programs have been funded through the annual appropriations process .

in the 108 th and 109 th congresses , bills to reauthorize wia were passed in both the house and the senate ; however , no further action was taken .

in the 113 th congress , the house committee on education and the workforce ordered reported h.r .

803 — the supporting knowledge and investing in lifelong skills act ( skills act ) , which was introduced on february 25 , 2013 , by representative virginia foxx of north carolina .

on march 6 , 2013 , the committee , after considering four amendments to h.r .

803 , ordered the bill reported by a vote of 23 to 0 .

no democrats on the committee cast a vote on the measure , maintaining that they were not provided adequate input in the process .

h.r .

803 was debated in the house of representatives on march 15 , 2013 , and passed by a vote of 215-202 .

in the senate , senators patty murray , lamar alexander , tom harkin , and johnny isakson introduced s. 1356 , the workforce investment act of 2013 , on july 24 , 2013 .

the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) held a markup of s. 1356 on july 31 , 2013 , and ordered the bill reported by a vote of 18 to 3 .

this report summarizes each of the wia titles and highlights the major features of s. 1356 , as ordered reported , pertaining to each title .

the report also compares the proposed provisions of s. 1356 to current law in the following tables: table 1 .

major provisions of title i of wia and titles i and ii of s. 1356 .

this table covers provisions governing the "workforce investment systems" that provide for , among other things , state formula grants , state and local planning procedures , and the establishment of the one - stop delivery system .

wia established the one - stop delivery system as a way to co - locate and coordinate the activities of multiple employment programs for adults , youth , and various targeted subpopulations .

the delivery of these services occurs primarily through more than 3,000 career centers nationwide .

table 2 .

major provisions of title ii of wia and title iii of s. 1356 .

this table covers provisions for adult education and literacy activities .

table 3 .

major provisions of title iii of wia and title iv of s. 1356 .

this table covers changes to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which was also amended in title iii of wia .

wagner - peyser provides authorization for the employment service , which provides job matching and job search assistance for unemployed individuals .

table 4 .

major provisions of title iv of wia and title v of s. 1356 .

this table addresses amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 , in particular to the vocational rehabilitation and other employment - related provisions of that act , which authorizes various employment services for individuals with disabilities .

title i of the workforce investment act — workforce investment systems — authorizes the establishment of a one - stop delivery system through which state and local wia training and employment activities are provided and through which certain partner programs must be coordinated .

title i also authorizes appropriations for the three major state formula grant programs ( adult , youth , and dislocated worker ) , job corps ( a dol - administered program for low - income youth ) , and several other national programs that are directed toward subpopulations with barriers to employment ( eg , native americans ) .

s. 1356 would maintain the existing one - stop delivery system as the delivery mechanism for employment and training services but would change the governing structure , performance accountability , and some programs .

s. 1356 would split the current title i into a new title i ( system alignment and governance ) and a new title ii ( programs ) .

below is a brief summary of the major provisions of s. 1356 .

this list is followed by a thematic comparison in table 1 of current law and s. 1356 .

the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) is the primary federal legislation that supports basic education for out - of - school adults .

commonly called "adult education," the programs funded by aefla typically support educational services at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training .

approximately 95% of aefla funding is allotted to the states via formula grants .

states are required to subgrant the large majority of these grants to local providers that deliver educational services .

title iii of the workforce investment act — workforce investment - related activities — makes amendments to the wagner - peyser act of 1933 ( 29 u.s.c .

49 et seq .

 ) , which authorizes the employment service ( es ) .

the es is the central component of most states' one - stop delivery systems , as es services are universally accessible to job seekers and employers and es offices may not exist outside of the one - stop delivery system .

es is one of the required partners in the one - stop delivery system .

its central mission is to facilitate the match between individuals seeking work and employers seeking workers .

it has been a central component of the workforce development system through wia .

title iii adds section 15 ( "employment statistics" ) to wagner - peyser , which requires the secretary of labor to develop , provide , and improve various types of labor market information .

s. 1356 would maintain the es system , while making some changes and additions .

these would include required colocation of es offices with one - stop centers ; creation of a competitive grant pilot program for es agencies to enhance professional development of es staff ; and establishment of a workforce information advisory council to meet with the secretary of labor at least two times a year for the purpose of evaluating and improving the national labor market information system .

the rehabilitation act of 1973 , as amended , authorizes programs that support the employment of individuals with disabilities .

the largest of these programs is vocational rehabilitation ( vr ) grants to states , which provides formula funding to state agencies that provide customized employment services to eligible individuals .

other programs support grants or independent agencies that relate to the employment or independent living of individuals with disabilities .

title v of s. 1356 would authorize such sums as necessary from fy2014 through fy2018 for programs authorized under the rehabilitation act .

in fy2013 , approximately $3.4 billion was appropriated under the rehabilitation act , of which about $3.1 billion was allotted to vr grants to states .

s. 1356 would insert three new purposes into section 2 of the rehabilitation act .

programmatic changes that would reflect these added themes are included throughout the legislation: emphasis on competitive integrated employment for individuals with disabilities .

the bill would insert a new definition of "competitive integrated employment" into the general provisions of the rehabilitation act .

language would be revised throughout the act to emphasize competitive integrated employment rather than simply employment for program participants .

the bill would also add conditions to the subminimum wage provisions of the fair labor standards act that would increase the regulation of employers certified to pay subminimum wages and encourage the transition of workers employed under the subminimum wage provisions to competitive integrated employment .

increasing employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities by encouraging involvement and input from employers .

s. 1356 would amend the rehabilitation act to allow states to spend vr funds on outreach , technical assistance , and other services to employers that provide opportunities for vr clients .

state plans would be required to describe how agencies will collaborate with employers to develop community - based competitive integrated employment .

the bill would reauthorize projects with industry competitive grants that provide funding for projects that involve private businesses in developing employment for individuals with disabilities .

s. 1356 would also create a public education campaign about hiring individuals with disabilities .

emphasis on services to youth with disabilities and students with disabilities to assist these populations in transitioning from secondary school to postsecondary education or competitive integrated employment .

s. 1356 would require each state to reserve 15% of state vr grants for pre - employment transition services for this population .

it would also reserve 50% of supported employment state grant funding for services to youth with disabilities .

the bill would create pre - employment transition coordinators at the national and local levels to coordinate services for youth with disabilities transitioning to the workforce or postsecondary education .

under current law , most programs authorized by the rehabilitation act are administered by the rehabilitation services administration ( rsa ) of the department of education ( ed ) .

s. 1356 would move the act's administration to newly created entities in other departments: activities under titles i , iii , and vi of the rehabilitation act would move to the department of labor , while activities under title vii would move to the department of health and human services .

this section discusses title v of the workforce investment act of 2013 .

this one title of s. 1356 would amend each of the seven titles of the rehabilitation act and would add an eighth .

unless specified otherwise , when the accompanying table refers to titles of law , it is referring to the titles of the rehabilitation act , not titles of wia .

