the power of congress and the executive branch to legislate and implement the conditions for admitting aliens into the united states and permitting them to remain is so broad as to be virtually immune from judicial control .

however , this power is still subject to constitutional limitations , including substantive and procedural due process protections .

in immigration cases , the degree of judicial review of administrative decisions and actions that may be constitutionally required depends on the relative interests involved .

in deciding what degree of judicial review is appropriate in immigration matters , congress has sought to balance judicial review between fairness to desired immigrants ( workers , family , refugees / asylees ) and facilitation of the removal of detrimental aliens ( national security risks / terrorists , criminals , public charges ) .

initially , a habeas corpus proceeding provided the primary avenue of judicial review of various immigration determinations .

however , in the wake of u.s. supreme court decisions construing the administrative procedure act ( apa ) as applying to and providing an avenue for judicial review of immigration adjudications , congress amended the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 by adding a judicial review provision in 1961 that provided for review of deportation orders by federal courts of appeals , but only for habeas corpus review of exclusion orders by federal district courts .

concerns about the growing population of undocumented aliens , fraudulent asylum claims , terrorism threats , and crimes of drug , human , and arms trafficking , led to legislation in 1996 and 2005 that limited judicial review , including the availability of habeas corpus proceedings .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

2278 would generally continue the trend of limiting judicial review ; s. 744 would more narrowly limit judicial review in certain instances of employer noncompliance with foreign worker visa programs .

on the other hand , s. 744 also provides for judicial review for legalization programs .

an "unadmitted and nonresident alien" has no constitutional right to be admitted into the united states .

accordingly , consular officers within the u.s. department of state ( dos ) generally have nonreviewable authority to deny visas .

therefore , the dos regulations only provide for administrative , supervisory review of visa denials .

this doctrine of consular non - reviewability has long been recognized by the courts and has rarely been challenged .

however , there is some case law supporting limited judicial review of a visa denial with regard to the first amendment rights of u.s. citizens to hear and debate the religious and political views of aliens .

in kleindienst v. mandel , the u.s. supreme court held that , when an executive branch officer / agency exercised discretion to not waive the exclusion of an alien as an anarchist and communist advocate for a facially legitimate and bona fide reason , the courts will not look behind the exercise of discretion nor test it by balancing the reason against the first amendment interests of u.s. citizens who desire to hear the political views of and debate the alien .

some later federal appellate decisions have followed mandel and extended its holding to visa denials by consular officers or to the assertion of other constitutional rights by u.s. citizens .

although they cannot order a consular officer to grant or deny a visa , courts have differed about whether they have jurisdiction to review consular failure to perform the nondiscretionary duty of deciding to grant or deny a visa and to require a consular officer to make a decision .

for a visa revocation , there is no judicial review ( including review pursuant to 28 u.s.c .

§2241 , or any other habeas corpus provision , and 28 u.s.c .

§§1361 and 1651 ) , except in the context of a removal proceeding if such revocation provides the sole ground for removal .

it appears that courts have generally held that the doctrine of consular nonreviewability applies to revocation of visas issued to aliens who are outside the united states , but that revocation of a visa issued to an alien who is already in the united states is subject to judicial review .

furthermore , federal courts have differed about whether the doctrine of nonreviewability extends to nonconsular officials , including officers of the former immigration and naturalization service and the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the judicial review provisions and related litigation for the legalization program under the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) remain relevant in light of the legalization provisions of s. 744 , the senate - passed bill known as the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act .

under ina §245a ( f ) ( 3 ) and pertinent regulations , there is a single level of administrative appellate review via the administrative appeals unit of the uscis .

pursuant to ina §245a ( f ) ( 4 ) , judicial review of irca legalization denials is only available as review of a deportation order under former ina §106 , since denial of legalization would generally lead to the initiation of deportation proceedings against the unauthorized alien .

the statutory standard of review requires that judicial review can only be based on the administrative record established by the administrative appellate review and that the determinations and fact findings of this administrative record are conclusive unless the legalization applicant can show that there was abuse of discretion or that the administrative findings were directly contrary to clear and convincing facts in the record as a whole .

in 1996 , the iirira amended the irca judicial review provision to limit judicial review to cases where a person had actually filed a legalization application within the period defined by irca or had attempted to file a complete application and fee with a legalization officer but the officer refused to accept them .

aside from such cases , there is no judicial or administrative review of a denial of legalization based on the late filing of an application .

it is worth noting that the irca legalization program had led to a spate of litigation challenging different aspects of the program's implementation .

the u.s. supreme court interpreted the statute and implementing regulations for the irca legalization program as not precluding judicial review of the legalization process , given the strong presumption that congress intends judicial review .

h.r .

2278 , as reported by the senate judiciary committee , would further limit judicial review of visa denial or revocation by the dhs , as opposed to the dos ; voluntary departure , a form of removal relief ; reinstatement of previously issued removal orders for aliens who illegally reenter the united states after being removed or having departed pursuant to a removal order ; and naturalization delays or denials .

section 405 of the bill would bar judicial review of a visa denial or revocation by dhs for security purposes and apply to denials and revocations before , on , and after the effective date of the bill's enactment .

although the ina already bars judicial review of post - removal denials of voluntary departure and court - ordered stays of removal pending consideration of a voluntary removal claim , §601 of the bill would further restrict courts from tolling the period permitted for voluntary departure .

section 603 of the bill would increase limits on judicial review of removal order reinstatements , already barred in general , by explicitly barring review of reinstated orders because of constitutional claims or questions of law raised in an appeal .

section 203 of the bill would revise judicial review of naturalization delays by restricting courts to reviewing the reason for the delay and eliminating current jurisdiction to take and decide a naturalization case on its merits .

this provision would also eliminate the current de novo standard for judicial review of naturalization denials and limit judicial review of the dhs determination regarding certain naturalization requirements , including good moral character , understanding of and attachment to the constitution , and disposition to the good order and happiness of the united states .

section 204 of the bill would authorize administrative denaturalization by the attorney general of persons engaged in certain terrorism - related activities .

although the bill does not bar judicial review of such denaturalization , currently and historically , denaturalization has solely been a function of the federal courts .

in contrast , s. 744 , as passed by the senate , provides for judicial review of the various legalization avenues that the bill would establish ; it does not include new restrictions on judicial review regarding removal / detention or visa denial or revocation , although it does include limits on judicial review in other contexts , such as penalties for employer noncompliance with various requirements for employing foreign workers .

during the senate judiciary mark - up of the bill , some amendments to limit judicial review of legalization denials were rejected , as well as one to limit judicial review of dhs visa denial or revocation for security purposes .

in the senate report accompanying the bill , the committee noted that a number of advocacy groups warned that restricting judicial review of legalization programs would eliminate "the important backstop of the federal court system to determine whether the executive branch properly implemented the bill. .

during the mark - up , some senators "voiced concern that the amendment would undermine the constitutional system of checks and balances by eliminating independent oversight of a significant administrative program that will affect millions of people .

they also emphasized the risk of error in the program , and the resulting need for judicial review. .

minority views in the bill's report expressed concern about the "unnecessarily broad judicial review of the denial of any application , which would necessarily create a litany of litigation and undermine the enforcement of our immigration laws," and the "unlimited judicial review the bill creates for the new legalization and other visa programs. .

s. 744 contains some provisions restricting judicial review in the contexts other than the removal / detention and immigration benefits such as visa issuance and naturalization .

for example , §4306 of the bill would bar judicial review of the finding of a violation of the l - visa nonimmigrant program for intracompany transferee executives or managers by l - visa employers .

although it does not bar judicial review , §3101 of the bill would revise the judicial review provision of ina §274a , concerning the unlawful employment of aliens , by specifying certain deadlines and standards for judicial review of determinations of violations and penalties against non - compliant employers .

finally , §4506 of the bill would bar judicial review of determinations related to the visa waiver program , including visa refusals , a decision to designate or not designate a country as a visa waiver program country , and dos computation of visa refusal rates or dhs computation of visa overstay rates on which a designation is based .

