the executive branch of the u.s. federal government has mandated for decades that developers of border crossing energy facilities must first obtain a presidential permit .

until recently , this administrative oversight was undertaken with little fanfare .

however , controversy over the proposed keystone xl oil pipeline — a project that would transport oil sands crude from alberta , canada , into the united states — has focused attention on federal permitting of energy infrastructure border crossings .

generally , the construction , operation , and maintenance of facilities that cross the u.s. - mexico or u.s. - canada border must be authorized by the federal government through the issuance of a presidential permit in accordance with requirements set forth in a series of executive orders .

this report discusses these executive orders , including the source of the executive branch authority to issue the orders , the standards set forth in the orders , and the projects approved pursuant to the orders .

the report also discusses proposed changes to the presidential permitting framework in the promoting cross - border energy infrastructure act ( h.r .

2883 ) , which passed in the house on july 19 , 2017 .

the source of the executive branch's permitting authorities in the executive orders described above is not explicitly stated in all cases .

powers exercised by the executive branch are authorized by legislation or are inherent presidential powers based in the constitution .

executive order 11423 does not reference any statute or constitutional provision as the source of its authority , although it does state that "the proper conduct of foreign relations of the united states requires that executive permission be obtained for the construction and maintenance" of border crossing facilities .

executive order 13337 refers only to the "constitution and the laws of the united states of america , including section 301 of title 3 , united states code. .

27 3 u.s.c .

§ 301 simply provides that the president is empowered to delegate authority to the head of any department or agency of the executive branch .

executive order 10485 cites section 202 ( e ) of the federal power act as a source of executive branch authority to permit cross - border electricity transmission facilities and section 3 of the natural gas act as a source of the executive branch authority to permit cross - border natural gas pipelines .

it also states that "the proper conduct of the foreign relations of the united states requires that executive permission be obtained for the construction and maintenance at the borders of the united states of facilities for the exportation or importation of electric energy and natural gas. .

federal courts have addressed the legitimacy of cross - border permitting authority not explicitly granted by statute .

in sisseton - wahpeton oyate v. u.s. department of state , the plaintiff tribes asked the court to suspend or revoke a presidential permit issued under executive order 13337 for the transcanada keystone pipeline .

the plaintiffs claimed that the issuance of the national interest determination and the border crossing permit for the project violated nepa and the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

the u.s. district court for the district of south dakota determined that even if the plaintiffs' injury could be redressed , "the president would be free to disregard the court's judgment," as the case concerned the president's "inherent constitutional authority to conduct foreign policy," as opposed to statutory authority granted to the president by congress .

the court further found that even if the tribes had standing , the issuance of the presidential permit was a presidential action , not an agency action subject to judicial review under apa .

the court stated that the authority to regulate the cross - border pipeline lies with either congress or the president .

the court found that "congress has failed to create a federal regulatory scheme for the construction of oil pipelines , and has delegated this authority to the states .

therefore , the president has the sole authority to allow oil pipeline border crossings under his inherent constitutional authority to conduct foreign affairs. .

in sierra club v. clinton , the plaintiff sierra club challenged the secretary of state's 2009 decision to issue a permit authorizing the alberta clipper .

the plaintiff claimed that issuance of the permit was unconstitutional because the president had no authority to issue the permits referenced in executive order 13337 .

the defendant responded that the authority to issue permits for these border crossing facilities "does not derive from a delegation of congressional authority ... but rather from the president's constitutional authority over foreign affairs and his authority as commander in chief. .

the u.s. district court for the district of minnesota agreed , noting that the defendant's assertion regarding the source of the president's authority has been "well recognized" in a series of attorney general opinions , as well as a 2009 judicial opinion .

the court also noted that these permits had been issued many times before and that "congress has not attempted to exercise any exclusive authority over the permitting process .

congress's inaction suggests that congress has accepted the authority of the president to issue cross - border permits. .

based on the historical recognition of the president's authority to issue those permits and congress's implied approval through inaction , the court found the permit requirement for border facilities constitutional .

as the aforementioned cases show , courts have analyzed the president's exercise of cross - border infrastructure permitting authority and have held that it is a legitimate exercise of the president's constitutional authority , and that it does not require legislative authorization .

however , they have indicated that congressional inaction plays a role in validating this exercise of executive branch authority , suggesting that these roles could be amended through legislation should congress choose to do so .

during the obama presidency , congress considered various bills to amend the presidential permitting process generally , or to authorize construction and operation of the keystone xl border crossing facility .

the january 24 , 2017 , executive memorandum issued by president trump and the subsequent permitting of the keystone xl pipeline border crossing facility by the state department in accordance with that memorandum appear to have obviated the need for the latter in this case .

however , many in congress still seek to overhaul the existing permitting framework , which was created entirely by the executive branch , in favor of a framework established by statute .

accordingly , on july 19 , 2017 , the house passed the promoting cross - border energy infrastructure act ( h.r .

2883 ) .

among other provisions , the act would eliminate the presidential permit requirement for cross - border crude oil , petroleum products , natural gas , and electric transmission infrastructure ( § 2 ( d ) ) .

instead , developers would require "certificates of crossing" from ferc for cross - border oil , petroleum products , and gas pipelines , or from doe for cross - border electric transmission ( § 2 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) .

however , the statute does not appear to apply to other hazardous liquids infrastructure — notably natural gas liquids ( eg , propane ) pipelines — so the state department would retain its traditional presidential permit authority for these facilities .

