federal preemption of state tort law actions brought against drug and medical device manufacturers , which has the legal effect of immunizing manufacturers from tort liability , has been a source of great controversy in recent years .

these cases arise when individuals are allegedly harmed by a defective product and sue the manufacturer .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( fdca ) does not expressly allow these injured individuals to bring such a claim , and , accordingly , someone injured by a medical device or drug may be limited to bringing a suit under state tort law in order to obtain compensation for the resulting injuries .

for example , an injured plaintiff may allege that a manufacturer was negligent with respect to the design of the drug or device and seek monetary relief for the injuries suffered .

however , because of the doctrine of constitutional preemption , a court may dismiss such a claim because the claim is superseded by federal law .

the supreme court has evaluated medical device and drug preemption cases on a number of occasions over the past two decades , and the results have been mixed: in some instances a person injured by an allegedly dangerous drug or device is barred from suing a manufacturer , whereas in other cases , the court has allowed a suit to go forward .

in order to explain the major supreme court cases in this area of law , this report begins by providing background on three general subject matters .

first , the report examines the doctrine of constitutional preemption , the legal basis for determining when a state law must yield to a federal law .

from there , the report discusses both the state law and federal laws at issue in the recent supreme court fdca preemption cases .

specifically , the report addresses the types of state - law tort claims that are commonly brought against drug and medical device manufacturers .

after discussing preemption and tort liability , the report examines federal law regulating prescription drugs and medical devices .

with the background on the general subjects of preemption , tort law , and federal regulation of drugs and devices in mind , the report concludes by examining the major supreme court fdca preemption cases and analyzing possible judicial and legislative developments that may affect this complicated and ever - changing area of law .

because of the supremacy clause found in article vi of the constitution , the "laws of the united states" made in pursuance of the constitution are by definition "the supreme law of the land" "notwithstanding" "the constitution or the laws of any state to the contrary. .

under the doctrine of federal preemption , state laws are invalid if they "interfere with , or are contrary to federal law. .

accordingly , preemption is a necessary product of a specific federal law's reach , and , in that vein , the court has repeatedly recognized that the intent of congress is the "'ultimate touch - stone' in every pre - emption case. .

another principle that sometimes guides the supreme court's jurisprudence in preemption cases is the so - called "presumption against preemption. .

specifically , the court in the past has held that in "all pre - emption cases" an assumption exists that "the historic police powers of the states were not to be superseded by [a] federal act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of congress. .

notwithstanding the court's previous pronouncements regarding the presumption against preemption , in recent terms , the court arguably appears to be moving away from embracing the presumption .

following wyeth v. levine , the presumption has largely been ignored or distinguished away by a majority of the court over the past four terms .

in pliva v. mensing , three justices joined a portion of justice thomas's opinion that argued that the original meaning of the supremacy clause "suggests that federal law should be understood to impliedly repeal conflicting state law," a theory that would conflict with the presumption against preemption .

two years later , in mutual pharmaceutical v. bartlett , a majority of the court , while acknowledging that the preemptive scope of the federal law in question had posed "difficult ... questions" and "repeatedly vexed the court," still found a state law unconstitutional without discussing the presumption against preemption .

as a consequence , the presumption against preemption , formerly called one of the "cornerstones of ... pre - emption jurisprudence," appears to be no longer consistently applied , if not rejected , by the court .

with these principles in mind , there are two general categories of preemption: express preemption and implied preemption .

having discussed the doctrine of constitutional preemption and the different ways a federal law can negate the effect of a state law , in order to properly understand the supreme court's fdca preemption case law and how state tort law can be negated by federal law , it is important to also examine both the state and federal laws at issue in the high court's cases .

an individual harmed by a product , including a drug or a medical device , can potentially utilize tort law as a means to recover any losses caused by such product .

tort law in the united states is "built on the bedrock of state common law," or judge - created legal norms .

while the objectives of tort law are manifold , there are four central principles that underlie the american tort system .

first , tort law aims to compensate people for injuries brought about by the wrongdoing of others .

second , beyond compensation , tort law attempts to incentivize safety such that people are deterred from engaging in behaviors that are either intended to harm others or unreasonable enough that they are likely to harm others .

third , tort law rests on the assumption that the payment of monetary damages is the most effective and most efficient way of accomplishing the dual goals of compensation and deterrence .

finally , in cases where an individual's behavior is especially egregious , tort law , through punitive or exemplary damages , allows a person to be punished beyond what is required to compensate a victim .

with these basic principles in mind , when suing a drug manufacturer for an injury caused by its product , plaintiffs typically raise products liability claims sounding in negligence , warranty , fraud , and strict liability .

each theory and its application to medical device and prescription drug litigation will be briefly discussed .

having discussed how state tort law attempts to ensure that medical devices and prescription drugs are safe , to understand how these laws can be displaced by federal law it is essential to delve into the underlying federal laws governing the safety of devices and drugs .

the fdca contains a comprehensive statutory scheme designed to ensure that medical devices are safe and effective .

as part of this scheme , medical devices must meet certain minimum requirements in order to be marketed in the united states .

for example , like other medical products , a device cannot be adulterated or misbranded , and there are registration , good manufacturing practices , and labeling requirements .

there are also more specific requirements that a device manufacturer must follow based on the level of risk that a device poses to patients from its use or misuse .

although the fdca has always expressly required drugs to be reviewed by the fda in some manner before going on the market , this was not the case with medical devices .

historically , the regulation of devices was primarily left up to the states .

but concerns about the safety of these products spurred congress to enact the medical device amendments of 1976 ( mda ) , which amended the fdca to create a detailed regime for the oversight of medical devices .

the mda established three classes of devices based the degree of control needed to provide assurance of the device's safety and effectiveness .

class i devices are subject to the least amount of oversight .

these devices "present no unreasonable risk of illness or injury" and are subject to minimal regulation by "general controls. .

class ii devices pose a moderate risk to patients , and are subject to general controls as well as certain "special controls" to reduce or mitigate risk .

finally , class iii devices are generally considered the devices with the highest risk and are typically at issue in medical device preemption litigation .

these devices are used to support or sustain human life , for a use which is of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health , or which present a potential , unreasonable risk of illness or injury .

class iii devices receive the greatest amount of federal oversight and are generally subject to premarket approval by the fda .

having discussed the various ways the fdca has been interpreted to preempt state tort claims with respect to medical devices , the report turns to the issue of fdca preemption and prescription drugs .

in contrast to its provisions on medical devices , the fdca does not contain an express preemption clause with respect to its prescription drug mandates .

nonetheless , the elaborate premarket approval scheme for drugs created by the fdca has the potential to clash with state tort law , raising questions as to whether federal drug law preempts state tort law .

on one hand , as discussed above , state tort law , depending on the specific theory pursued , could result in a manufacturer paying damages for marketing a prescription drug that has been approved by the fda on the theory that the underlying product is unreasonably dangerous or has an insufficient warning or was fraudulently marketed .

after all , common law tort doctrines typically do not treat compliance with a regulation as a bar to liability .

moreover , the supreme court , in both lohr and riegel , has acknowledged that a jury's verdict in a tort lawsuit can function just like a law passed by a state legislature or an administrative order issued by a governor in creating obligations that a manufacturer must obey .

on the other hand , the fdca with its premarket approval process generally requires the fda to approve a drug's chemical makeup and warnings before the product can be marketed to the public , and presumably a drug that has been approved by the fda is both safe and effective within the meaning of the fdca and has the appropriate warnings to ensure the product is not misbranded in violation of the fdca .

accordingly , state tort law has the potential to second guess the determinations made by the fda , by allowing a jury to impose liability for manufacturing a drug whose composition and warnings have been approved by the federal agency .

despite the potential for conflict between the fdca's premarket approval process for drugs and state tort law , for much of the fda's history the issue of federal drug law's preemptive effect on state tort claims was unresolved , and more exacting state tort law standards of care were generally seen by the courts as operating concurrently with federal requirements .

however , beginning in 2004 , the fda began arguing that its prescription drug labeling regulations preempted injured plaintiffs' common law tort claims .

in 2006 , the fda , in a lengthy preamble to regulations on drug labeling , stated its belief that under "existing preemption principles" product liability claims challenging the safety and efficacy of a fda - approved label "would be preempted. .

specifically , the fda argued while the fdca "contains no express preemption provision for drugs," the act , in giving the agency "comprehensive authority over drug safety , effectiveness , and labeling," implicitly preempted tort claims that functionally regulated the field of drug labeling .

moreover , the fda , in the 2006 preamble , argued that the state tort laws challenging the adequacy of a drug label that had been approved by the agency both stood as "an obstacle to the achievement of the full objectives and purposes" of federal law and made it impossible for manufacturers to simultaneously comply with the fdca's rules against mislabeling and adjusting a product's label and the duty imposed by state tort law to make the label safer .

with the fda asserting the position that the agency's labeling requirements for drugs established optimal , as opposed to minimal , standards from which state law could not deviate , the position was ripe for a challenge to the supreme court .

the court , beginning in 2009 , handed down three landmark rulings that clarified when the fdca's drug requirements preempt state tort law .

in 2009 , wyeth v. levine became the first supreme court case to explore whether the fdca's drug requirements preempted state tort law , ultimately finding the state tort claim at issue not preempted .

the underlying facts of levine were these: diana levine — a bass , guitar and piano player and author of children's music — visited a clinic to receive treatment for severe headache - related nausea and was given the brand name drug phenergan .

according to the federally approved label for phenergan , the drug could be administered in one of three ways: ( 1 )  intra - muscularly ; ( 2 ) through an intravenous ( iv ) drip , where it is mixed with saline and descends slowly through a catheter into the patient's vein ; or ( 3 ) through what is called an iv push , where the drug is injected directly into the patient's vein .

the latter method of administration poses significant risks in that if the drug is injected into an artery , the corrosive nature of the drug can cause severe chemical irritation and damage to the tissue , risking irreversible gangrene .

the fda was aware of the risks posed by the iv push method of administering phenergan , but instead of prohibiting the iv push method , the fda opted to require that the drug's label merely warn of the danger of gangrene and amputation following an inadvertent intra - arterial injection .

the iv push method was used to administer phenergan to ms. levine , and an error in administration resulted in the musician developing gangrene , ultimately forcing doctors to amputate her hand and forearm .

ms. levine , after suing the clinic and the physician's assistant who administered phenergan , received a $700,000 settlement .

ms. levine also sued the maker of phenergan , wyeth pharmaceuticals , in a vermont state court , arguing that the warning labels on the product were insufficient under common law negligence and strict - liability theories .

wyeth defended the suit by arguing that the state tort claims were preempted by federal law .

the state courts rejected wyeth's preemption argument , and after ms. levine won a jury verdict of $6.7 million against wyeth , the pharmaceutical giant appealed .

the supreme court granted certiorari to hear the case in 2008 and issued its ruling in march 2009 .

in a 6-3 ruling , the supreme court , with justice stevens the author , held that none of ms. levine's state tort claims were preempted by federal law .

at the supreme court , wyeth focused on a conflict preemption argument — that is , that the state tort duty was both ( 1 ) impossible to comply with simultaneously with the federal law and ( 2 ) an obstacle to the objects and purposes of federal drug law .

with respect to wyeth's first argument , the supreme court found that the fda's cbe regulation precluded any preemption based on impossibility .

according to justice stevens's opinion , the cbe regulation allowed a brand name drug manufacturer when presented with "newly acquired information" about a drug , including "new analyses of previously submitted data," to make "changes to its label before receiving the agency's approval," including adding to or strengthening a warning .

the levine opinion noted that wyeth had received evidence of 20 incidents resulting from iv push administration of phenergan before ms. levine's injury , giving them the basis to unilaterally strengthen the warning and making it possible for the drug manufacturer to both comply with the duty imposed by state tort law to strengthen phenergan's warning and to comply with federal drug law .

the court noted that while the fda retains the authority to reject any labeling changes made pursuant to the cbe regulation , barring any "clear evidence that the fda would not have approved a change to phenergan's label," the court could not conclude that it was impossible for wyeth to comply with both federal and state requirements .

the court likewise rejected wyeth's argument that requiring compliance with a state - law duty to provide a stronger warning about iv push administration would obstruct the "purposes and objectives of federal drug labeling regulation. .

for wyeth , congress's purpose in crafting the federal pre - market approval process for drugs was to "entrust an expert agency to make drug labeling decisions that strike the balance between competing objectives," making the fdca both the floor and ceiling for drug regulation .

relying on geier , wyeth contended that a state tort claim based on the inadequacy of a label served as an obstacle to a federal regime trying to account for various competing interests .

the court rejected this argument , however , concluding that congress , in crafting the fdca , recognized that state tort law remedies "further consumer protection by motivating manufacturers to produce safe and effective drugs and to give adequate warnings. .

additionally , the majority opinion reasoned that if congress wanted to preempt state tort claims with the fdca's drug provisions , it could have done so with an express preemption clause , as congress had done in the medical device context .

congress's silence on the issue was "powerful evidence" to the court that congress did not intend fda oversight to be "the exclusive means of ensuring drug safety and effectiveness. .

moreover , the court distinguished geier .

unlike in geier , where the regulation in question went through formal rulemaking and was a consistent position of the agency , in levine the only regulatory guidance indicating that federal drug law preempted state tort claims came in the form of the 2006 preamble , a position that not only contradicted earlier statements by the fda , but also was not subject to notice and comment rulemaking before being issued .

in other words , the court did not find that the fda's recently adopted position deserved any deference , and the court affirmed the decision of the lower state courts finding no preemption .

two concurring opinions were issued in levine , both of which have largely guided the case law in this area .

justice breyer , following the approach of his majority opinion in geier , wrote separately to note that it was possible for state tort law to "interfere with the fda's" objectives , and therefore be preempted .

for justice breyer , the problem for the defendant in levine was that the fda had not issued "lawful specific regulations" describing why labeling requirements serve as both a floor and a ceiling creating a preemptive effect , but instead relied on the 2006 preamble .

in other words , justice breyer , relying on an obstacle preemption theory , signaled a clear approach for future administrations to , through the issuance of formal administrative rulemaking , bar state tort claims against manufacturers of fda approved drugs .

justice thomas , on the other hand , took a far different approach than justice breyer .

thomas wrote separately , noting that while he agreed with the majority's conclusion on the issue of impossibility preemption , he did not agree with the premise that there was a constitutional basis for wyeth's obstacle or "purposes and objectives" preemption argument .

for thomas , under the supremacy clause only federal laws "made in pursuance of the constitution" preempted state laws , meaning that the law must be passed by both houses of congress and signed by the president .

for justice thomas , the "purposes and objectives" preemption doctrine invites the court to broadly look at "federal policy objectives , legislative history , or generalized notions of congressional purposes that are not contained in the text of the federal law" that was passed by congress and signed by the president .

accordingly , the court , by trying to divine the "purposes and objectives" of certain legislation to determine the preemptive effect of a law , strayed from text of the supremacy clause .

in short , justice thomas , in his concurrence in levine , announced that he would not join an opinion that relied on obstacle preemption because of the theory's tendency to "facilitat[e] freewheeling , extratextual , and broad evaluations of the 'purposes and objectives' embodied within federal law. .

the court returned to the issue of preemption and prescription drugs two years after levine in pliva v. mensing .

in the wake of levine , a majority of lower courts reasoned that levine , which was concerned with a brand name or listed drug , was equally applicable to generic drugs and that failure - to - warn claims were not preempted absent "clear evidence" that the fda would have rejected a stronger warning .

in mensing , the supreme court rejected how the lower courts had interpreted levine with respect to generic drugs .

mensing involved the consolidation of two cases in which the plaintiffs were prescribed the brand name drug reglan but were dispensed the generic drug metoclopramide by their pharmacists in order to treat a digestive track disorder .

one of the side effects of long - term metoclopramide use is the development of tardive dyskinesia , a severe neurological disorder .

in light of this side effect , over the years , the fda approved several changes to reglan's labeling to increase the strength of its warnings about tardive dyskinesia , culminating in 2009 with a "black box" warning that "[t]reatment with metoclopramide for longer than 12 weeks should be avoided in all but rare cases. .

prior to the development of the stronger labels , the plaintiffs in mensing were dispensed the metoclopramide and each developed tardive dyskinesia after taking the drug for several years .

the plaintiffs sued the manufacturers of the generic drug , arguing that the manufacturer had breached its duty of due care by failing to change its warning label "despite mounting evidence that long term metoclopramide use carries a risk of tardive dyskinesia far greater than that indicated on the label. .

the manufacturers defended on preemption grounds .

justice thomas , writing for a majority that included the three levine dissenters and justice kennedy , held that the fdca's requirements for generic drugs implicitly preempted state failure - to - warn claims for impossibility reasons .

deferring to the fda's views , the court held that fda regulations prevented generic manufacturers from "independently changing" a generic drug's safety label , and accordingly , a state tort duty requiring a generic manufacturer to strengthen the drug's label was impossible to comply with while simultaneously adhering to the federal "sameness" requirement for generic drugs .

in so concluding , the majority rejected the argument that the generic manufacturer had to prove that the fda would have rejected a suggested change to make the generic label safer because imposing such a requirement could theoretically defeat any impossibility claim because congress could always be petitioned to amend a law that conflicted with a state tort duty .

instead , mensing concluded that "when a party cannot satisfy its state duties without the federal government's special permission and assistance , which is dependent on the exercise of judgment by a federal agency , that party cannot independently satisfy those state duties for pre - emption purposes. .

thus , for the five - justice majority , mensing was distinguishable from levine in that federal law permitted manufacturers of brand name drugs to unilaterally strengthen the warning without advance approval from the fda .

two years after mensing , the supreme court again revisited the topic of preemption and prescription drugs in mutual pharmaceutical v. bartlett .

the case involved karen bartlett , a 53-year - old new hampshire woman , who , after taking sulindac , a generic drug non - steroidal anti - inflammatory drug ( nsaid ) , to treat her shoulder pain , developed a hypersensitivity reaction called stevens - johnson syndrome , a rare but known side - effect to taking a nsaid .

at the time ms. bartlett was prescribed sulindac , the drug's label did not specifically warn about stevens - johnson syndrome .

ultimately , ms. bartlett suffered severe burns , resulting in permanent near - blindness and extreme damage to her lungs .

as a consequence , ms. bartlett filed suit against the manufacturer of the generic drug in a new hampshire court , arguing that the manufacturer failed to properly warn about the dangers of the drug and , under a strict liability theory , the drug was defectively designed .

the trial judge dismissed the plaintiff's failure - to - warn claim , but the strict liability claim went to a jury , which ultimately awarded ms. bartlett over $21 million in damages .

the pharmaceutical company argued on appeal to the supreme court that ms. bartlett's strict liability claims , just like the failure - to - warn claims in mensing , were preempted by the federal sameness requirement for generic drugs .

the supreme court , in another 5-4 ruling , agreed with the generic manufacturer of sulindac and held that the strict liability claim at issue in bartlett imposed a duty that would conflict with the federal sameness requirements .

in so ruling , justice alito , writing for the court , rejected two central arguments made by the plaintiff .

first , the court dismissed the argument that state strict liability law did not impose a duty on the manufacturer , but instead merely reallocated the risks imposed as a result of an "unreasonably dangerous" product from the consumer to the manufacturer .

the court examined the underlying state law from new hampshire and concluded that the state law did indeed impose a "substantive duty" on the manufacturer not to produce an "unreasonably dangerous" product .

specifically , the court noted that new hampshire strict liability law , at least in the context of prescription drugs , ultimately mirrors the failure - to - warn claims at issue in mensing .

the reason for the similarity is because new hampshire , like many states , employs a "risk utility approach" to determine whether a product is defectively designed and "unreasonably dangerous," an approach that requires an evaluation of the usefulness of the product and risk of danger posed by the product .

with respect to prescription drugs , and especially with respect to sulindac , a one - molecule drug , redesigning the drug is impossible .

recognizing this , new hampshire , like the majority of other states , had adopted comment k to § 402a of the restatement ( second ) of torts and allows prescription drug manufacturers to avoid liability when the drug was accompanied by an adequate warning .

in other words , the underlying claim , despite being described as a strict liability claim , functioned just like an ordinary negligent failure - to - warn claim , making bartlett indistinguishable from mensing .

second , the court rejected the argument that impossibility preemption was inapplicable because a generic drug manufacturer could either "stop selling" its product or pay monetary damages under state law , and by taking either action , comply with both the federal "sameness" requirement and the duty imposed by state tort law .

for the court , the "stop selling" rationale would make impossibility preemption "all but meaningless," because the idea of it being impossible to abide by a state and federal law simultaneously usually presupposes some sort of affirmative conduct , such as selling a product .

for example , in the florida lime & avocado growers hypothetical , if the stop selling rationale governed impossibility claims , it would have been possible for an avocado grower to simultaneously comply with a state's mandate to sell high oil avocados and a federal mandate to produce only low oil avocados by simply not selling avocados in that state .

the same stop selling logic would have likewise led to an opposite conclusion in mensing .

two dissenting opinions were filed in bartlett , one by justice breyer and one by justice sotomayor .

having issued three opinions on preemption and prescription drugs in the last five terms , the supreme court appears to have limited two routes for federal drug law to impliedly preempt state tort law , while dramatically expanding another avenue for implied preemption .

specifically , levine foreclosed field preemption as a viable theory for drug manufacturers to defeat state tort claims , as a six - member majority of the court recognized that state tort law generally serves to complement federal drug law .

moreover , justice breyer's concurrence in levine and dissent in bartlett signal that there could be a majority on the court that would find state tort law serves as an "obstacle to the purposes and objectives" of federal drug law only if the fda issues a regulation worthy of deference .

however , in mensing and bartlett , the court appears to have breathed new life into impossibility preemption , a theory previously reserved to hypothetical examples in the high court's opinions .

after mensing , when an entity cannot independently satisfy both a state law requirement and federal law requirement without receiving "special permission" from the federal government , the state law must yield .

bartlett further expanded the impossibility defense by rejecting a long - time defense to conflict preemption that no conflict exists when a defendant can choose not to act or pay a state law fine — that is , the stop - selling theory .

collectively , after levine , mensing , and bartlett , state failure - to - warn claims against a manufacturer of a brand name prescription drug are not preempted by federal drug law , but state failure - to - warn and strict liability claims premised on complying with a state law duty against a generic drug manufacturer are preempted .

this result alone is significant , as generic medicines reportedly account for nearly 80% of all prescriptions dispensed in the united states and are growing at a rapid pace .

additionally , the independence principle enunciated in mensing and reaffirmed in bartlett lends to the conclusion that tort claims predicated on the chemical makeup of an approved drug , regardless of whether the drug is generic or brand name , would be preempted by the fdca .

after all , under current law no drug manufacturer can unilaterally change a drug , as the "altered chemical would be a new drug that would require its own nda to be marketed. .

even more broadly , the principles enunciated in mensing and bartlett could potentially be applied to other contexts in which the law requires approval by the government before a product can be marketed , including with respect to the § 510 ( k ) approval of medical devices , or conceivably to any other area of federal law that similarly imposes a process where the government evaluates the safety or effectiveness of a product before it can be sold .

while the broad principles of mensing and bartlett with respect to impossibility preemption may have immense implications to a host of different areas of law , the underlying rationale for impossibility preemption of failure - to - warn claims in the generic drug context — the federal sameness requirement — may be altered in the near future .

a few weeks after bartlett was issued , the fda indicated that it plans to issue a "notice of proposed rulemaking" with respect to the labeling of generic drugs .

specifically , the fda states that the proposed revisions , which may be issued as soon as september 2013 , will "create parity between nda holders and anda holders with respect to submission of cbe labeling requirements. .

in other words , the fda intends to allow generic manufacturers the ability to unilaterally update the labeling of a generic drug , which in theory would eliminate the underlying rationale for mensing by making it possible to simultaneously comply with state tort duties and federal drug law .

nonetheless , eliminating the federal sameness requirement may be difficult to legally accomplish through a change in regulation given the statutory requirement that proposed labeling for a generic drug generally be the "same as the labeling approved for" a listed drug .

that statutory basis can be eliminated by congress , as some bills have proposed doing , but such legislation may raise policy questions as to the wisdom of requiring generic manufacturers , who by definition are relying on others' safety data in marketing their products , to make unilateral determinations that the fda's original judgments regarding the labeling of the brand name product should be overridden .

another legislative solution to those who are disappointed with the outcomes of mensing and bartlett was hinted at near the end of the majority opinion in bartlett .

specifically , justice alito's opinion lamented the lack of any explicit guidance from congress with respect to the preemptive effect of the fdca's prescription drug provisions , going so far as to say the court "would welcome congress' 'explicit' resolution of the difficult pre - emption questions that arise in the prescription drug context. .

the court cites the explicit preemption clauses found in the fdca with respect to vaccines and so - called "express non - preemption" clauses found in the fdca's over - the - counter drugs provisions as examples of explicit language that congress could add to the statute .

however , the addition of language that explicitly states that state tort claims are not preempted by the fdca may do little to alter the results of mensing and bartlett , as the court has held that the existence of an express preemption clause or a savings clause does not prevent the court from examining whether a law impliedly preempts state law .

assuming mensing and bartlett remain good law , several areas of legal dispute may allow the court to revisit the issue of preemption and prescription drugs in the near future .

for example , a circuit split has developed on whether federal law preempts a tort claim that a generic drug manufacturer has a duty to update a drug's label to match the brand name drug .

in the context of mensing and bartlett , the generic sameness requirement imposed a requirement of inaction on the manufacturer without prior federal approval of a labeling change , but the same logic requires the generic label to match the pioneer's label at all times .

on one hand , state - law tort law could impose an independent duty on a manufacturer to update a generic's label which , unlike in mensing and bartlett , would be possible to satisfy while simultaneously obeying the federal sameness requirement .

on the other hand , a state duty that mirrors a federal requirement sounds very similar to the claim that was preempted in buckman , as congress intended the fdca and the requirements imposed by the law to be enforced "exclusively by the federal government. .

the specific issue of whether failure to update claims can proceed may ultimately be of little consequence , as a state claim based on a failure to update would have to prove that not updating the generic label during the time the sameness requirement was violated was the proximate cause of a plaintiff's injuries , seemingly a difficult task for any plaintiff injured by a prescription drug .

nonetheless , failure to update claims raises the specter of a broader issue — much like in the medical device context — as to whether state - law claims that are parallel to the duties imposed by the fdca's drug provisions or fda drug regulations are implicitly preempted by federal law .

beyond the issue of whether parallel state - law claims are preempted , another issue that the court may need to resolve is whether state law allowing for punitive damages for a failure - to - warn claim against a brand - name manufacturer are preempted .

courts have also split on whether a tort law claim alleging that a generic manufacturer has a duty to communicate with customers about dangers not on a drug label is preempted .

in other words , bartlett will likely not be the last time the supreme court delves into the difficult issues prompted by state tort claims , federal drug law , and constitutional preemption .

