services are a significant element across the u.s. economy , at the national , state , and local levels .

the term "services" refers to an expanding range of economic activities , such as audiovisual , construction , computer and related services , express delivery , telecommunications , e - commerce , financial , professional ( such as accounting and legal services ) , retail and wholesaling , transportation , and tourism .

services not only function as end - use products but also facilitate the rest of the economy .

for example , transportation services move intermediate products along global supply chains and final products to consumers ; telecommunications services open e - commerce channels ; and financial services provide credit for the manufacture and consumption of goods or the production of crops .

services account for a majority of the u.s. economy — 78% of u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) and 82% of u.s. private sector full - time employment .

services have also become a significant component of u.s. international trade , accounting for $752.4 billion of u.s. exports in 2016 .

as such , it is an increasingly important component of u.s. trade policy and of global trade in general .

rapid advances in information technology and the related growth of global value chains are making an expanding range of services tradable across national borders .

however , certain characteristics have limited the types and volume of services that can be traded ; for example , a hair stylist must be physically near a client .

other service providers are no longer required to be in the same location as the customer , such as a graphic designer who can send a product ( eg , an electronic file of a design ) to a client across the globe .

a number of economists have argued that foreign government barriers prevent u.s. trade in services from expanding to its full potential .

under the trump administration , the united states may continue to engage in trade negotiations on multilateral , plurilateral , bilateral , and regional agreements with one goal being to lower these barriers .

congress has a significant role to play in negotiating and implementing trade - liberalizing agreements , including those on services .

in fulfilling its responsibilities for regulation of commerce and oversight of u.s. trade policymaking and implementation , congress monitors trade negotiations and the implementation of trade agreements .

congress establishes trade negotiating objectives and priorities , including through trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation and consultations with the administration .

more directly , congress must pass legislation to implement a trade agreement requiring changes to u.s. law before it can enter into force in the united states .

this report provides background information and analysis on u.s. international trade in services , including the types and volumes of traded services .

it analyzes policy issues before the united states , especially relating to negotiating international disciplines on trade in services and the complexities in measuring trade in services .

the report also examines emerging issues and current and potential trade agreements , including renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , the trade in services agreement ( tisa ) , and the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) .

globally , the oecd finds that services account for over two - thirds of global gdp and three - quarters of global fdi in advanced economies .

according to the wto , world exports of commercial services , excluding government procurement , increased to $4.73 trillion in 2016 .

the united states is a major exporter and importer of services in global markets .

if the european union ( eu ) countries are treated separately , the united states was the largest single - country exporter ( 15.2% ) and importer ( 10.3% ) of global commercial services ( see table 2 ) .

the united states was the second - largest exporter ( 19.9% ) and importer ( 13.2% ) in 2016 , if the eu is treated as a single entity ( see table 3 ) .

the united states has worked with trading partners to develop and implement rules on several fronts to reduce barriers and facilitate trade in services without infringing on the sovereign rights of governments to regulate services for prudential , sound regulatory and national security reasons .

the broadest and most challenging in terms of the number of countries involved are the multilateral rules contained in the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) that entered into force in 1995 and are administered by the 164-member world trade organization ( wto ) .

the united states has also sought to go beyond the gats ( wto - plus ) under more comprehensive rules in the free trade agreements ( ftas ) it has in force and , according to press reports , in current renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

the administration may also decide to continue services discussions in trade in services agreement ( tisa ) and transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) .

overall u.s. negotiating objectives , as defined in legislation ( see " u.s. trade negotiating objectives " ) , in each of these fora are to establish a more open , rules - based trade regime that is flexible enough to increase the flow of services and to take into account the expansion of types of services , but clear enough not to impede the ability of governments to regulate the sectors .

one complication for the united states is that while trade negotiations are handled by the federal government , states often regulate services , including licensing and certification requirements .

while regulations may vary across states , they all must comply with the commitments made by the federal government in international trade agreements .

to date , the record on liberalization of trade in services through reciprocal trade agreements is mixed .

the 164 members of the wto negotiated and have maintained a basic set of multilateral rules in the form of the gats .

however , the gats is largely viewed as limited in scope , predating significant technological developments over the past two decades , and in need of expansion if it is to be an effective instrument of trade liberalization .

the efforts of the wto members to expand on these rules have stalled , with little prospect of success at least in the foreseeable future .

the lack of progress in the wto negotiations due to the complexity of the issues and parties involved has led to the rise of sector - specific plurilateral agreements as an alternative path forward .

in negotiating tisa , the united states has been pursuing a services - specific plurilateral agreement that includes the 28-member eu and japan — two of the most important u.s. trade partners — plus other participating countries .

the united states has made services trade liberalization and rules - setting an important component of the ftas it has negotiated and is currently renegotiating .

while these agreements have gone beyond the gats in terms of coverage , they apply to a limited number of countries , accounting for small shares of u.s. trade in services .

the outlook for the ongoing negotiations remains uncertain , as participants in each negotiation deal with difficult and complex issues .

potential policy issues for congress and negotiators to address include the following: to what extent are u.s. positions on trade in services in the renegotiation of nafta , potential renegotiation of korus , tisa , and t - tip negotiations consistent with u.s. trade negotiating objectives on services as defined in the tpa legislation ? .

how might congress work with the administration in relation to these pending negotiations ? .

how could the conclusion of or withdrawal from one agreement impact negotiations in the others ? .

what impact would these proposed agreements , or withdrawal from existing agreements , have on the u.s. economy and various stakeholders ? .

should congress conduct hearings to examine potential new bilateral fta negotiations with specific countries , such as other tpp members , or to examine implementation of commitments in past agreements ? .

the united states has negotiated a number of ftas with substantial services components .

should a model services agreement be developed that identifies u.s. interests across services ? .

advancements in information technology expand the number and types of services that can be traded and help to create new types of services .

is it possible to develop a trade arrangement that is clear enough to be effective and flexible enough to take into account rapid changes in the services sector ? .

available data measure only a limited set of sectors and countries across the various modes of international trade in services .

to the degree that data help to determine policies , should congress consider requiring the executive branch to collect more complete data where possible ? .

should the executive branch pursue enhanced regulatory cooperation with key trading partners or mutual recognition efforts in specific service sectors to lessen the burdens created by varied regulatory regimes and requirements across different markets ? .

given the role of state regulators , how might u.s. policymakers involve them in ongoing and future trade negotiations or regulatory cooperation efforts ? .

