the united states has a number of trade preference programs which offer unilateral / non - reciprocal duty - free treatment for certain products from designated countries meeting specific eligibility requirements .

the motivation for these programs can be political and / or economic .

the qiz program , attached to the u.s. - israel free trade agreement ( usifta ) , is one such program .

it was designed to strengthen the middle east peace process while stimulating the economies of jordan and egypt .

the current ongoing wave of upheaval in the middle east and north africa that started in late 2011 raises the potential for simultaneous political and economic transitions .

the qiz program is one tool available to congress for assisting on both counts .

this report briefly examines the evolution and economic effects of the qiz program for jordan and egypt during the past 15 years and identifies some related issues for congress .

it does not address the current turmoil in egypt .

for a discussion of this issue , see crs report rl33003 , egypt: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

the qualifying industrial zone ( qiz ) program was created by the 1996 west bank and gaza strip free trade benefits act , which amended the 1985 u.s. - israel free trade agreement ( usifta ) .

under this law , certain goods may enter the united states duty - free if they are ( a ) wholly produced in the west bank and / or the gaza strip ; or ( b ) co - produced by israel and jordan or israel and egypt in export processing zones called qizs and meet specific content requirements .

congress had two main motives for this legislation: to help broaden political support for the middle east peace process and end the arab economic boycott of israel .

jordan ( in 1979 ) and egypt ( in 1994 ) were the only two arab countries in the middle east - north africa ( mena ) region that had signed peace treaties with israel .

 ( see map , figure 1 . ) .

to produce tangible economic benefits for jordan , egypt , the west bank , and the gaza strip by "stimulating their economies and increasing employment. .

the qiz program had a third , more concrete economic objective .

as the reported brainchild of regional businesses in the middle east , it was proposed as a way for joint production ( between israel and other countries ) to be as lucrative as — or more lucrative than — that carried out by individual parties .

leading up to congressional passage of the qiz program , the primary focus was to provide benefits to selected countries to help promote the arab - israeli peace process .

the events of september 11 , 2001 , expanded the u.s. focus on the middle east , both geographically and politically .

this led to broader and more comprehensive u.s. - middle east trade initiatives to assist the region .

the first initiative , in 2003 , under the bush administration , called for a middle east free trade areas ( mefta ) , within 10 years , by 2013 , and resulted in the negotiation of u.s. free trade agreements with morocco , bahrain , and oman .

the second initiative was the middle - east / north africa trade and investment partnership initiative ( mena - tip ) , announced by president barack obama in 2011 .

it focused on helping countries in their efforts to undertake reforms that could lead to trade liberalization and transitions to democracy .

in his speech announcing the initiative , president obama noted that , excluding oil , the mena region of over 400 million people exports roughly the same value of goods as switzerland .

for an oil - dominated region , building up non - oil export capacity takes time .

most mena countries are outside the qiz program and do not have free trade agreements with the united states .

for many of these countries , the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program is their only trade preference option .

however , for mena countries , the gsp program is more limited than the qiz program in the following ways: the gsp program generally excludes from duty - free eligibility most of the high - tariff products exported tariff - free under the qiz program ; gsp does not authorize eligible mena countries to co - produce with other countries in order to meet the 35% qiz content requirement ; and u.s. content is not permitted to count for any of the 35% content requirement under gsp , whereas it can contribute 15% under the qiz program .

in march , 2013 , the ustr announced a qiz expansion for egypt , to include new zones in beni suef and minya , upstream on the nile river , and to declare all present and future producers in the zones eligible for qiz tariff benefits .

this raises the number of qizs to six in egypt .

some of the 13 qizs in jordan are not currently involved in qiz export , but still produce for export to the united states ( see figure 1 notes ) .

the qiz program extends u.s. tariff - free benefits to the west bank and gaza strip , and to certain goods co - produced by israel and jordan , or israel and egypt in export processing zones that meet country of origin and local content requirements .

 ( see text box 1 for the definition of qizs. ) .

production requirements mandate that the product must be grown , produced , or manufactured in , or a "new and different" article imported directly from , the west bank , gaza strip , or a qiz .

country input share requirements stem from the usifta , which requires that the sum of the cost or value of the materials or the total costs of production must be not less than 35% of the appraised value of the product at the time it enters the united states .

of this 35% , u.s. components may contribute up to approximately 15% , and inputs from israel and jordan , or israel and egypt , must total roughly 20% ( see text box 2 ) .

under the qiz law , once jordan and / or egypt decided to take advantage of the program , the parties met to determine ( a ) where qizs would be located ; and ( b ) how the approximate 20% minimum input requirement would be split up between jordanian and israeli or egyptian and israeli producers .

for goods produced by jordan and israel , these shares were jordan 11.7% , israel 8% ( 7% for high tech products ) ; and for goods produced by egypt and israel , they were 10.5% each .

 ( see text box 2 . ) .

the slight variations from the 10% each in the country sub - shares were adopted with the approval of the ustr .

after congress passed the qiz amendment to usifta in 1996 , jordan , which had previously engaged in little international trade , embraced the program , opening its first qiz in 1997 .

the program grew rapidly , giving a huge boost to jordan's economy , until the u.s. - jordan free trade agreement was well into effect .

when jordan joined the qiz program , jordan and israel agreed to , and the united states approved , 13 zone locations in jordan with coordinated plants in israel along their joint border ( see map , figure 1 ) .

the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) officially designated the jordan zones as qizs .

egypt's qiz program started out slowly , and has grown considerably .

egypt already had a strong textile and apparel export program to the united states and a relatively large economy when the qiz program began .

although it observed jordan's rapid economic growth after it began its qiz program , egypt did not enter the qiz program until 2004 , seven years after the offer was formally extended by congress .

a key impetus for egypt's participation was that the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on textiles and clothing ( atc ) , which went into effect january 1 , 1995 , was due to expire on january 1 , 2005 .

once the atc protection was gone , quota limits would be lifted , and apparel exports destined for the united states from countries such as china could crowd out those from egypt and other countries .

after egypt entered the qiz program , some of its apparel exports quickly shifted from non - qiz tariff , to qiz tariff - free status .

in addition , new investment led to the creation of additional exports .

in march 2013 , nearly a decade after egypt entered the qiz program , the ustr announced an expansion of the qiz program ( a ) to include two new qiz areas ( in beni suef and minya , in upper egypt , in addition to existing areas in and around cairo , alexandria , the suez canal , and the central delta in lower egypt ) ; and ( b ) to include all production facilities , present and future , located in the six qizs .

 ( see map , figure 1 . ) .

current congressional interest in and possible oversight of the qiz program could address a number of issues , including: is the qiz program an effective tool for economic development , and should it be given a broader role under the mena - tip initiative ? .

should the qiz program be expanded or contracted ? .

should , for example , the conditions for country eligibility , scope of coverage , or other criteria under the qiz program be changed ? .

should there be a co - production arrangement between u.s. fta partner and non - partner countries ? .

that is , should there be a new program that permits and encourages non - fta countries to co - produce with fta countries in order to meet a minimum content requirement ? .

should a regional mena trade preference program be established similar to what the united states has established for other regions , such as the caribbean or sub - saharan africa ? .

or , is gsp an effective program for the region ? .

appendix a .

the west bank / gaza strip experience the west bank and gaza strip ( wb / gs ) have a very small export program under the qiz amendment , and a history of imports from the united states characterized by wide inconsistency in products .

this inconsistency in trading is primarily due to political conditions in these two territories which interfere with the ability of trade to flow freely .

west bank and gaza strip exports to the united states must contain 11.7% materials originating in the territory ( like requirements for jordan , text box 2 , under the qiz program ) .

west bank / gaza strip exports to the united states reached a peak of $8 million in 2008 and u.s. exports to the territories reached a peak of $18 million in 2007 ( figure a - 1 ) .

west bank / gaza strip exports under the qiz program started out primarily as textiles and apparel , and have evolved into a more diversified mix of products ( figure a - 2 ) .

the composition of u.s. exports to the west bank and gaza strip has varied considerably from year to year , depending on what products are needed in the territory .

in 1999 they were led by tobacco and jewelry ; in 2001 , motor vehicles ; in 2007 , grains ; in 2010 , electrical machinery ; and in 2011 , both mechanical and electrical machinery ( figure a - 3 ) .

appendix b .

data for figures 2-13 , and a - 1-a - .

