the salton sea is located in southern california and is considered the largest inland water body in the state .

the salton sea was formed in 1905 when the colorado river broke through a canal gate , allowing water to flow into the salton basin uninterrupted for 18 months .

since its formation , the sea has been maintained largely through agricultural runoff from surrounding areas .

the salton sea was not the first body of water in the basin ; several other lakes have existed in the basin throughout its geological history .

the creation of the salton sea in 1905 eventually led to development of its shoreline and its waters were stocked with sportfish .

until the late 1960s , the salton sea was one of the most prolific sport fisheries in the country , with a high diversity of birds and wildlife .

the salton sea also serves as an important wetland area along the pacific flyway , a migratory route for birds stretching from alaska to patagonia .

the ecology and economy surrounding the salton sea has deteriorated steadily over the past several decades due , in part , to a changing ecosystem marked by decreasing water flows and increasing salinity .

the salton sea has shrunk due to evaporation and declining water inflows , resulting in increased salinity and deteriorating fish and wildlife habitat .

high salinity levels combined with toxic concentrations of substances have led to disease and widespread mortality of fish and birds .

current saline levels are nearing fatal levels for all fish , leading some scientists to predict that fatal saline levels will occur by 2018 .

the subsequent population decline of fish could have severe effects on migratory birds that use the salton sea as a primary stopover point on the pacific flyway .

furthermore , exposed lake beds could allow toxins and dust to enter the air , which could lead to air pollution and human health problems .

attention to the ecological condition of the salton sea and efforts to restore the sea have existed for several decades .

however , interest in the ecological health of the salton sea has amplified since 2003 , when the quantification settlement agreement ( qsa ) was signed by several water districts in california , the state of california , and the department of the interior ( doi ) , and signed into california law .

qsa requires california to gradually reduce its consumption of colorado river water to 4.4 million acre - feet a year ( afy ) through voluntary agriculture - to - urban water transfers and other water efficiency measures .

the implementation of this agreement has resulted in less water flowing into the salton sea , thus accelerating its ecological decline .

however , as part of the qsa , participating water districts agreed to contribute $163 million toward mitigation and restoration .

in addition , the water districts agreed to provide 200,000 afy of colorado river water to the sea though december 31 , 2017 .

while some of these mitigation efforts have been implemented , longer - term restoration efforts and the distribution of these costs are still contested and uncertain .

congressional concern for restoring the salton sea stems , in part , from the value of the sea as habitat for federal and state listed endangered species , as well as other migrating and resident bird species ; a reservoir for agricultural drainage waters ; a center for recreation ; and a large wetland ecosystem , among other things .

concerns over air pollution from exposed sea beds have also been expressed by members of congress .

these concerns have been reflected , in part , by efforts to address the restoration of the salton sea and its ecosystem .

congress has passed laws addressing the restoration of the salton sea and authorized funds for restoring the salton sea in the water resources development act of 2007 .

current restoration efforts have been led mainly by the state and local governments .

consensus around restoring the salton sea has not been fully attained .

some contend that the salton sea should not be restored .

they argue that the geological history of the salton sea demonstrates a pattern of water bodies naturally shrinking and disappearing , and then reforming over time .

they note that the salton sea will follow a similar process and that countering this natural process will be costly and ultimately not worth the cost .

these opponents argue that the restoration funds should instead be used to restore other natural wetlands in california , such as the sacramento and san joaquin rivers' delta confluence with san francisco bay ( bay - delta ) .

to counter this argument , some respond by noting that the natural inflows of water into the salton sea have been artificially diverted by humans when the colorado river was diverted into a canal and that natural processes and cycles will not exist again with these structures in place .

further , they note that the value of restoring the salton sea lies in its ecological significance as a large wetland along the pacific flyway and a habitat for fish and wildlife , and its potential to stimulate economic development in the region through tourism , recreation , and energy development .

progress towards restoring the salton sea has been slow in recent years , largely due to the lack of a comprehensive plan to guide efforts and lack of funding .

indeed , some contend that there is not full consensus behind restoring the sea .

those against restoration contend that it will naturally shrink and disappear , making attempts at restoration futile and expensive in the long term .

others counter these claims by stating the sea is in an artificial state of decline because of its reliance on agricultural runoff artificially conveyed from the colorado river .

further , they add that the increasing salinity of the sea along with its shrinkage will cause irreparable damage to the ecosystem and negatively affect fish and wildlife populations , as well as create health risks for humans due to contaminated dusts .

some contend that the federal government has not taken an active role in physically restoring the sea .

most federal actions have centered on creating proposals for restoration and conducting pilot studies .

restoration efforts have largely centered on state actions .

congress might consider shifting the federal position to a more active role by authorizing federal restoration actions and providing appropriations to implement them .

in contrast , congress might consider leaving restoration responsibilities to the state of california and allowing the federal government to continue its supporting role .

the importance of the decision of how to proceed might amplify as the qsa goes into effect and temporary local mitigation efforts end .

the presence of endangered species in the salton sea and documented health hazards from the evaporation of the sea are issues some cite to justify federal action .

the following section provides an overview of the issues concerning the federal role in restoring the salton sea , and then discusses specific aspects of the federal role and how congress might address them .

the salton sea ecosystem has been steadily changing primarily due to less water entering the sea .

the notable changes are the decreasing area of the salton sea and increasing salinity of its waters .

these changes have already caused stress on fish and wildlife species that reside in the ecosystem , and some avian species that use the ecosystem while migrating along the pacific flyway .

the condition of the salton sea ecosystem is expected to change dramatically when water transfers authorized under qsa are implemented , thus reducing water inflows into the sea .

this is expected to increase the level of salinity in the sea over a short period , thus making the sea inhabitable for most existing fish and wildlife species .

severe effects on the ecosystem are expected as soon as 2018 , according to some models .

several groups support restoring the salton sea ecosystem so that it can support fish and wildlife and stimulate economic development in the region .

specifically , proponents of restoring the sea base their arguments on the value of the salton sea as one of the few remaining habitats in the region for migratory birds and other fish and wildlife .

they note that with nearly 90% of california's original wetlands gone , the sea is of regional or national importance to pelicans and cormorants , wading birds , waterfowl , shorebirds , gulls , and terns .

further , some note that a restored sea could supports aquatic wildlife that include some threatened and endangered species and other species that might be able to support recreational or sport fishing practices .

the value of a restored sea , according to some , can also be measured in terms of its potential for recreation and economic development ( eg , tourism ) as well as its function for agricultural drainage .

some opposed to restoring the salton sea base their arguments on the premise that the salton sea is destined to evaporate and eventually convert back to a desert ecosystem .

throughout geologic history , water bodies in the salton basin have eventually dried up , leading some scientists to hypothesize that evaporation and conversion to a salt brine would be the progression of the salton sea if no restoration activities are undertaken .

some critics also argue that salinity levels will increase in the sea despite restoration attempts , especially if water inflows to the sea are reduced by water transfers or other water diversions away from the sea .

further , without the ability to use fresh water from the colorado river , many of the restoration plans and projects developed in the early 2000s may be infeasible .

as noted earlier , some argue that the high cost of restoration and the scientific uncertainty of existing proposals might not warrant limited state and federal funds .

they note that limited funds should be funneled to other restoration efforts in naturally occurring wetlands in the california san francisco bay sacramento / san joaquin rivers delta .

congress has addressed the restoration of the salton sea ecosystem through various laws that authorize , in part , the creation of restoration plans for the ecosystem and the testing of restoration methodologies through pilot projects .

however , due to the pace of change in the salton sea and the anticipation of severe effects on the ecosystem due to water transfers , congress may decide to address restoration by increasing the federal role in restoration efforts .

this could be done by funding existing federal authorities that address , or could address , restoring the ecosystem ; authorizing federal participation and appropriations for implementing existing restoration plans ; and authorizing a new comprehensive plan to be created that might involve participation from federal and non - federal stakeholders , similar to other restoration initiatives around the country .

congress might also decide not to address restoration of the salton sea ecosystem , or , rather , maintain the status quo of federal participation .

federal appropriation .

