partly as a result of the increased use of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing to extract natural gas from shale formations in the united states , the domestic supply of natural gas has increased relative to demand , leading to lower domestic prices .

domestic oil production has also increased after decades of decline thanks to new drilling technologies these production increases have generated new interest by some u.s. companies in exporting liquefied natural gas ( lng ) to take advantage of relatively higher prices in world markets .

this new interest in exporting natural gas has also produced renewed interest in the laws and regulations governing the export of other fossil fuels , including crude oil and coal .

this report reviews federal laws and the regulatory regime governing the export of natural gas , crude oil , and coal .

this report provides an overview of federal laws and regulations and agency roles in authorizing and regulating the export of these fossil fuels .

the report addresses several categories of federal laws and regulations , including ( 1 ) statutes that establish the authorization process for the actual export of any of the three listed fossil fuels ; ( 2 ) statutes that govern the permitting of the facilities that export any of the listed fossil fuels ; and ( 3 ) generally applicable trade statutes and treaties that affect exports of fossil fuels .

in general , transactions involving the export of items from the united states to a foreign country are subject to the export administration regulations ( ear ) enforced by the department of commerce's bureau of industry and security ( bis ) .

however , transactions that fall within the scope of the ear do not necessarily require an export license from bis .

whether an export license is required depends on several factors , including the nature of the item , its end use , and its ultimate destination .

the ear provides instructions for exporters to follow when determining whether an export transaction is subject to the ear and , if so , whether the transaction requires a license .

other general requirements may apply to transactions involving the export of items from the united states .

for example , for exports of items subject to the ear that do not take place electronically or in another intangible form , an exporter is required in certain circumstances to submit a shipper's export declaration ( sed ) or automated export system ( aes ) record to bis and the international trade administration in the department of commerce's bureau of the census .

a declaration or record typically contains an identification of the exporter and the commodity being shipped ; the date of exportation ; and the country of ultimate destination , among other information .

the previous section of this report discusses federal authorization of the export of natural resources , not the construction and operation of export facilities .

however , in many cases approval for the export facility itself also must be obtained from the federal government .

this section discusses various approval requirements for different types of facilities that enable the export of oil and natural gas .

note that , in addition to the facility approvals described below , a facility used in the export or import of fossil fuels may require additional federal approvals or authorizations .

for instance , construction and operation of ports in any navigable waters in the united states are regulated by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( ace ) .

in order to construct any port facility , permits must be obtained from ace , which will review applications to see that they are in compliance with the clean water act , the rivers and harbors act , and the marine protection research and sanctuaries act .

because coal is generally not exported via a special facility designed to transport the commodity , there are no special facility permitting requirements applicable to coal exports , but facilities through which coal ( or any fossil fuel ) may be exported must satisfy these generic federal requirements .

the marrakesh agreement establishing the world trade organization ( wto ) contains the agreements relating to international trade that are binding for all wto members .

although there is no specific agreement relating to trade in energy products , such as liquefied natural gas , coal , or oil , the trade in these products is regulated under the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

several of these sections could potentially impact a nation's ability to limit or restrict fossil fuels .

in addition to the gatt , the united states is party to numerous ftas .

it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss fully the provisions of each fta signed by the united states .

however , as an example , several ftas require national treatment for trade in natural gas .

these include ftas with australia , bahrain , canada , chile , colombia , dominican republic , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , jordan , mexico , morocco , nicaragua , oman , panama , peru , republic of korea , and singapore .

the ftas with costa rica and israel do not require national treatment for trade in natural gas .

as a further example , under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) the united states has certain obligations related to energy trade with mexico and canada .

chapter 6 of nafta deals with "energy and basic petrochemicals. .

chapter 6 reconfirms the parties' obligations under the gatt and imposes additional obligations on the parties , such as certain requirements for export taxes .

nafta also imposes barriers to invoking some of the general exceptions to the gatt .

for example , a country may only invoke the "conservation of exhaustible natural resources" exception if it does not result in a higher price for exports than for domestic consumption of the energy products .

these additional obligations illustrate that compliance with ftas must be considered when establishing export regulations for energy products .

in addition , according to news reports , two proposed ftas — the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) and the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) — could potentially include international obligations regarding the automatic approval by the united states of lng exports to countries such as japan ( tpp ) or the european union ( ttip ) .

s. 192 , the expedited lng for american allies act of 2013 , was introduced in the senate on january 31 , 2013 , by senator john barrasso .

an identical bill , h.r .

580 , was introduced in the house of representatives by representative michael turner .

the bills would amend section 3 of the nga to provide that expedited approval of lng exports would be granted to four different categories of foreign countries: ( 1 ) nations for which there is in effect a free trade agreement ( fta ) requiring national treatment for trade in natural gas ; ( 2 ) a member country of the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) ; ( 3 ) japan , so long as the treaty of mutual cooperation and security of january 19 , 1960 , between japan and the united states remains in effect ; and ( 4 ) "any other foreign country if the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of defense , determines that exportation of natural gas to that foreign country would promote the national security interests of the united states. .

at least two other bills that pertain to the export of natural gas have been introduced .

h.r .

1189 , the american natural gas security and consumer protection act , was introduced in the house by then - representative ed markey .

the bill would amend the nga to require the secretary of energy to develop regulations for determining whether an export of natural gas from the united states to a foreign country is in the public interest for the purposes of issuing an export authorization .

under the regulations , the public interest determination would have to be made after the secretary's consideration of several factors , including the energy security of the united states ; the ability of the united states to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ; and an environmental impact statement issued under the national environmental policy act that analyzes the impact of extraction of exported natural gas on the environment in communities where the gas is extracted .

h.r .

1191 , the keep american natural gas here act , was also introduced in the house by then - representative ed markey .

among other things , it would provide that the secretary of the interior could accept bids on new oil and gas leases of federal lands ( including submerged lands ) only from bidders certifying that all natural gas produced pursuant to such leases would be sold only in the united states .

with regard to oil , h.r .

1190 , the keep america's oil here act , was introduced in the house by then - representative ed markey .

the bill would provide that the secretary of the interior could accept bids on new oil and gas leases of federal lands ( including submerged lands ) only from bidders certifying that oil produced pursuant to such leases , and any refined petroleum products produced from that oil , would be sold only in the united states .

the bill would allow the president to waive this requirement for a lease in certain circumstances , including when a waiver is necessary under an international agreement .

in addition , s. 435 , the american oil for american families act of 2013 , was introduced in the senate by senator robert menendez .

the bill would ban the export of crude oil or refined petroleum products derived from federal lands ( including land on the outer continental shelf ) .

various other bills introduced in the 113 th congress seek to loosen restrictions on , or expedite the federal government's consideration of approvals for , the export of oil or natural gas to certain foreign countries .

recent advances in natural gas exploration and production technology have led to a newfound interest in the possibility of expanding u.s. fossil fuel exports .

such exports , and the facilities needed to conduct export operations , are subject to a panoply of federal laws and regulations .

these include the authorizations required by the natural gas act , a generic ban on crude oil exports , and various laws and regulations applicable to construction and operation of export facilities .

currently , any party wishing to export fossil fuels must comply with these laws and regulations .

under international trade rules , restrictions on exports of fossil fuels could potentially be difficult to reconcile with articles i and xi of the gatt 1994 .

article xxi , the exception for essential security interests , may be cited in order to justify potential violations of gatt articles i and xi .

the united states has traditionally considered this exception to be self - judging .

however , it is possible that a panel or the appellate body might scrutinize the united states' use of the exception .

article xx of the gatt provides additional exceptions that a member country may invoke if it is found to be in violation of any gatt obligations .

however , article xiii potentially requires that if an otherwise gatt inconsistent measure is permitted to remain in force due to an article xx exception , the measure must be administered in a nondiscriminatory manner .

export restrictions that treat wto members differently would appear not to satisfy the potential nondiscriminatory requirements of article xiii .

