this report focuses on remittances , transfers of money and capital sent by migrants and foreign immigrant communities to their home county .

increasing migration is a defining feature of the current global economy .

migrants account for around 3.4% of the global population and the number of foreign - born residents in the united states is at its highest level in u.s. history , reaching 42.4 million in 2014 .

foreign - born residents of the united states made up 13.3% of the u.s. population in 2010 , approaching levels not seen since 1910 ( 14.8% ) .

foreign migrants and their communities in the united states sent $56.3 billion in remittances in 2014 , around 13% of the worldwide total .

as migrants have become increasingly integrated into the global economy , their involvement in the economic activities of their home countries has also increased .

in 2015 , worldwide remittance flows are estimated to have exceeded $601 billion .

of that amount , developing countries are estimated to receive about $432 billion , nearly three times the amount of official development assistance ( oda ) .

only foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is a larger source of foreign capital for the world's developing countries than remittances .

the dramatic rise in the importance of remittances to global capital flows has led congress and other policymakers to take a greater interest in these flows and how they are covered under u.s. and state regulation .

recent financial reform legislation , for example , p.l .

111-203 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act , provided federal consumer protections on remittance transactions .

remittances are also subject to federal regulation to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing .

this report provides general background on remittances , analyzes global and u.s. remittance flows , examines the remittance marketplace and the regulatory regime for sending remittances from the united states , and discusses key issues for congress .

remittances are cross - border migrant financial transfers .

the primary source for international remittances data is the international monetary fund ( imf ) , which compiles statistics submitted by its member countries .

using imf statistics , the world bank publishes an annual migration and remittances factbook , and monthly and annual remittances data on its website .

there are ongoing efforts to improve remittance data .

remittances are currently defined as the sum of three entries in the imf's annual balance of payments statistics yearbook: workers' remittances ; compensation of employees ; and migrants' transfers .

w orkers' remittances are defined by the imf as transfers ( cash or in kind ) by migrants who are employed and considered resident in another country .

if the migrants live in the host country for one year or longer , they are considered residents , regardless of their immigration status .

c ompensation of employees includes wages , salaries , and other benefits of border , seasonal , and other nonresident workers ( such as local staff of embassies ) away from their home country for less than a year .

migrants' transfers are the net worth of migrants' assets that are transfers from one country to another at the time of migration ( for a period of at least one year ) , such as in the case of temporary workers .

a remittance transaction typically involves a sender , a recipient , intermediaries in both countries , and a payment system used by the intermediaries ( figure 1 ) .

remittances can be sent through informal or formal channels .

informal channels have been labeled by various terms , including "alternative remittance systems," "underground banks," and "informal value transfer systems. .

the most well - known is hawala ( hawala means "transfer" in arabic ) , which originated in india and has been in use in south asia and the middle east for several hundred years .

these services are less expensive than formal banking or money transfer arrangements , can provide anonymity for all parties involved , and can reach countries where there is no formal banking sector , in some cases even arranging for hand delivery of the cash .

while most use these systems for legitimate purposes , their lack of documentation and anonymous , informal nature may make them attractive for money laundering and / or terrorist financing purposes .

formal channels involve intermediaries that are officially licensed to operate money transfer businesses .

these consist of banks ; non - bank financial institutions , such as credit unions , savings and loan institutions , and post - offices ; and money service businesses such as western union or moneygram .

increased use of technology in developing countries has also facilitated the use of mobile and other alternative payment options .

the price of sending a remittance can vary significantly .

a number of factors affect the transfer fee charged , including the regulatory and administrative costs , the volume sent , the transfer mechanism , the receiving country's financial infrastructure , and the level of market competition ( in both the sending and receiving country ) .

in addition , the exchange rate used in the transaction can significantly affect the amount actually delivered to the recipient .

for the most part , the cost of sending remittances has declined slightly in recent years , but substantial progress would need to be made to meet the g8 target of 5% of total cost set in 2009 .

according to world bank analysis , the global average remittance cost has declined from 9.81% of the total transaction in 2008 to 7.53% during the first quarter of 2016 .

among the major economies , the united states is among the least costly from which to send money ( figure 2 ) .

for the first quarter of 2016 , the average cost to send a remittance from the united states was 6.04% of the transaction .

the world bank also tracks the cost of sending remittances from the main remittance providers .

recent data show that banks continue to be the most expensive providers , followed by post offices .

money transfer operators ( mtos ) such as western union and moneygram are the cheapest ( figure 3 ) .

remittances have increased steadily over the past three decades .

in 1990 , remittances to developing countries totaled about $75 billion .

at the time , remittances were a larger source of foreign capital to developing countries than both foreign direct investment and private capital flows ( debt and equity ) .

according to the world bank , remittances to developing countries are estimated to have risen to $432 billion in 2015 .

official remittance figures do not include informal remittance flows , which may account for an additional 35% to 75% of total remittance flows .

in 2015 , india was the largest remittance - receiving country ( $69 billion ) , followed by china ( $64 billion ) , and the philippines ( $28 billion ) .

figure 4 shows the geographical distribution of remittances since 2000 .

the emergence of large indian , chinese , and philippine diaspora populations led to the explosive growth of remittances over the past 15 years .

between 2000 and 2014 , remittances to developing countries in east asia and pacific increased by 370% , growing from $17 billion in 2000 to $79 billion in 2014 .

in south asia , remittances increased by 571% over the time period , growing from $17 billion in 2000 to $116 billion in 2014 .

despite accounting for a much smaller amount of global remittances , flows to sub - saharan africa increased by 608% from 2000 ( $5 billion ) to 2014 ( $34 billion ) .

table 1 presents the 40 largest recipients of remittances ranked by the total amount of remittances received and by the percentage share of gdp .

india is the largest individual recipient of remittances followed by china , philippines , and mexico .

while remittances serve as an important component of a diversified mix of external finance in emerging market and middle - income countries , for the poorest countries , remittances are an essential anti - poverty tool , comprising a significant share of national economic activity .

tajikistan , for example , has been dependent on remittances since an armed conflict between 1992 and 1998 claimed over 100,000 lives , destroying the economic infrastructure .

approaching 20 years after the end of the conflict , remittances account for around 42% of national gdp .

in nine countries , the total value of remittances exceeds 20% of their total gdp .

there are 12 countries on both lists , having large total volumes of remittances that also comprise a substantial share of gdp: bangladesh , the dominican republic , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , jordan , lebanon , pakistan , the philippines , nepal , serbia , sri lanka , and tajikistan .

the united states is the largest destination for international migrants and by far the largest source of global remittances .

the world bank records $56.3 billion in official remittance outflows from the united states in 2014 .

after the united states , the next largest sources of remittances in 2014 were saudi arabia ( $36.9 billion ) ; russia ( $32.6 billion ) ; switzerland ( $24.7 billion ) ; and germany ( $20.8 billion ) and other advanced european economies .

the imf , world bank , and the u.s. government do not compile and publish remittance flows from the united states ( or other countries ) to individual countries or regions .

however , since 2010 , the world bank has estimated bilateral remittance flows between its member countries .

table 2 presents the world bank's estimates for the largest recipients of remittances from the united states .

at the international level , international standards and principles governing remittances have been set by the financial action task force ( fatf ) and the bank for international settlements ( bis ) .

in the united states , the operations of u.s. banks and credit unions are closely regulated and supervised at both the state and federal level .

foreign bank branches and agencies are also governed by a combination of state and federal statutes , provisions of which include licensing requirements and permissible activities .

the primary focus of federal regulation is on anti - money laundering ( aml ) and combating the financing of terrorism ( cft ) .

individual state regulators , on the other hand , regulate the operations of federally chartered banks and msbs .

since october 2013 , the u.s. consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) has enforced various consumer protection measures included by congress in the dodd - frank wall street consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) .

various u.s. efforts in the past have attempted to harness remittances to promote foreign economic development by channeling remittances toward investment and by using remittances to bring a larger percentage of the remitting population into the formal financial sector .

key issues on remittances that members of congress may want to consider include the following .

members may wish to explore the current federal and state regulatory regime for remittance providers and customers .

effective and proportional regulation of remittances reduces corruption , enhances transparency , and facilitates a more robust business environment .

other observers , however , raise concerns about the costs for remittance providers ( and subsequently consumers ) of navigating the patchwork of banking and anti - money laundering regulation .

according to the federal reserve: [r]eports suggest that large depository institutions may be reducing or restricting correspondent banking relationships , which in turn may limit the ability of smaller depository institutions to provide remittance transfer services .

reports also suggest that depository institutions may be terminating the accounts of some nonbank payment providers that offer financial services to consumers , such as money services businesses .

without accounts at depository institutions , some nonbank payment providers may be unable to access the financial system and therefore may be unable to continue providing services , including remittance transfer services .

regarding licensing and supervision of remittance providers , recent reform proposals include assigning a single national regulator with responsibility for regulating the entire money transmission business or , at a minimum , increasing coordination and harmonization of state and federal rules on msbs .

there have been recent congressional efforts in this direction .

for example , representative spencer bachus introduced legislation in the 111 th congress , h.r .

4331 , the money services business compliance facilitation act of 2009 , that would have established an office of msb compliance in the u.s. department of the treasury , charged with ensuring that state and federal regulators coordinate standards for msb licensing and registration .

other legislation has been introduced , and passed , that aims to facilitate remittances services by making it easier for msbs to comply with federal and state regulations .

the money remittances improvement act of 201 4 ( p.l .

113-156 ) , signed into law on august 8 , 2014 , allows federal regulators , including fincen and the irs , to rely on examinations conducted by state financial supervisory agencies if ( 1 ) the category is required to comply with federal requirements , or ( 2 ) the state supervisory agency examines the category for compliance with federal requirements .

according to treasury , this legislation "should allow for better allocation of state and federal resources , better targeting of higher risk msbs , and improved aml / cft compliance across the [financial] industry. .

others propose that u.s. policymakers should prioritize access to remittance services for highly impacted communities such as somali americans .

this may mean more money for technical assistance to boost the capacity of poorly regulated jurisdictions , such as somalia .

for example , the u.s. treasury department could help integrate somali american msbs into an ach payment system ; help improve training of msbs to improve monitoring of their agents ; and / or help somalia regulate its payment systems .

members of congress may also explore the impact of the current regulatory regime on the development of emerging payments systems for sending remittances , such as mobile , card , or internet - based models .

some observers argue that current federal and state money transmission laws may be inappropriate for new and emerging payments systems .

remittance payments already touch multiple regulatory agencies , and as mobile remittances services increase , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) will likely play an increasing role .

mobile carriers and other alternative providers are less familiar than msbs with u.s. and international banking laws , and the lack of u.s. guidance or framework for mobile payments creates coverage , liability , and aml / cft concerns that congress may move to explore .

members may also pay special attention to the implementation of the "dodd - frank" consumer protections following their october 2013 implementation .

on one hand , some argue that the new protections will drive down the cost of remitting by requiring greater transparency of fees associated with money transfers .

others argue that the costs of new systems and increased liability for transaction problems will raise costs and deter msbs and financial institutions from providing remittance services .

members of congress may consider whether u.s. government efforts on remittances should extend to influencing how they are spent .

there are multiple viewpoints on the extent to which the u.s. government should promote remittances as a development tool .

many u.s. development aid officials , for example , are interested in understanding the economic impact of remittances on sending and receiving communities and developing policies to help channel remittances to their most productive use .

others argue that the remittances are foremost an anti - poverty tool , and that policymakers should be cautious about placing too much emphasis on remittances as a development tool or possibly confusing remittances with foreign aid .

importantly , remittances are a private transaction , and thus any official policy efforts , they argue , should be narrowly focused on reducing the cost of remittance transactions and creating additional opportunities for labor migration .

members may consider the interplay of u.s. remittance policy efforts and u.s. immigration policy .

some members of congress , however , have raised concerns that current customer identification policies , which do not require a remittance customer to provide documentation of legal u.s. immigration status , may undermine efforts to enforce u.s. immigration laws .

in light of this concern , senator david vitter has introduced s. 79 , remittance status verification act of 2015 , that would require remittance providers to impose a 7% fine on any sender of remittances that is unable to provide documentation of their legal status under u.s. immigration laws .

other efforts to restrict the ability of migrants to send remittances have been passed at the state level .

some analysts argue , however , that restricting remittances through taxes or additional customer identification rules would not deter migration to the united states and would only drive remittances underground to informal methods of money transfer .

in addition to increased aml / cft risk related to informal money transfer systems , shifting remittance flows to informal channels may impede policy efforts to use remittances as a means to promote access to financial services .

