despite portrayals in popular media about controversies in climate change science , almost all climate scientists agree on certain important points: the earth's climate has warmed significantly and changed in other ways over the past century ( figure 1 ) .

the warming has been widespread but not uniform globally , with most warming over continents at high latitudes , and slight cooling in a few regions , including the southeastern united states , the amazon , and the north atlantic south of greenland .

the climate has varied naturally through geologic history .

past climate changes sometimes proceeded abruptly when they passed certain "tipping points. .

the national academy of sciences concluded that the past few decades were very likely the warmest in the past 400 years , and "that temperatures at many , but not all , individual locations were higher during the past 25 years than during any period of comparable length since a.d .

900. .

although conclusions cannot yet be precise , research suggests that global average temperatures today are among the highest since human civilizations began to flourish roughly 4,000 to 8,000 years ago .

"greenhouse gases" ( ghg ) include , among others , carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , water vapor , methane ( ch 4 ) , and nitrous oxide ( n 2 o ) , as well as some aerosols .

they absorb energy into the atmosphere rather than letting it escape to space .

the presence of ghg in the atmosphere warms the earth to its current temperature .

human activities , especially fossil fuel burning , deforestation , agriculture , and some types of industry , have increased ghg concentrations in the atmosphere .

co 2 , the main ghg emitted by human activities , has risen almost 40% over the past 150 years .

about one - third of human - related co 2 has been absorbed by oceans , increasing surface water acidity by 30% .

the enhanced levels of ghg in the atmosphere contributed to the observed global average warming in recent decades .

over other time and geographic scales , such factors as the earth's orbit , solar variability , volcanoes , and land cover change have been stronger influences than human - related ghg .

there is a wide range of projections of future human - induced climate change , with all pointing toward warming .

human - induced change will be superimposed on , and interact with , natural climate variability .

human societies and ecosystems are sensitive to climate .

some climate changes benefited civilizations ; others contributed to some societies' demises .

the range of possible impacts on humans and ecosystems is also very wide .

in the near term , climate change ( including the fertilization of vegetation by co 2 ) may bring benefits for some , while adversely affecting others .

researchers expect the balance of projected climate change impacts to be increasingly adverse for a widening scope of populations and ecosystems .

as is common and constructive in science , scientists debate finer points .

some disagree with the broader consensus that ghg have been the major influence on global warming over the past few decades .

some suggest that , if ghg emissions continue unabated , the resulting climate change would be small and possibly beneficial overall .

most climate modelers project changes that are significant to large , with small likelihoods of changes that could be catastrophic for some human societies and ecosystems in coming decades .

even the best science cannot provide absolute proof ; it is fundamental to the scientific method that all theories are to some degree provisional and may be rejected or modified based on new evidence .

private and public decisions to act or not to act , to reduce the human contribution to climate change or to prepare for future changes , will be made in the context of accumulating evidence ( or lack of evidence ) , accumulating ghg concentrations , ongoing debate about risks , and other considerations ( eg , economics and distributional effects ) .

that said , billions of dollars have been invested in research on a wide range of climate change topics , including the possibility of attribution to alternative causes than greenhouse gases .

to date , scientists have found little support for the hypothesis that ghg are not responsible for observed warming , nor have they found much evidence that other factors ( including solar changes ) can explain more than a small portion of global average temperature increases since the 1970s .

for example , measurements of solar irradiance suggest that the solar influence on global temperatures has been decreasing overall since the 1930s , with the up - and - down pattern of the 11-year solar cycle evident in observations .

a large body of research is consistent with attributing the majority of global temperature increase since the 1970s to the increase in ghg concentrations .

it is this balance of evidence that leads most scientists to consider human - related ghg emissions an important global risk .

it appears unlikely that science will provide decision - makers with significantly more scientific certainty for many years regarding the precise patterns and risks of climate change .

nonetheless , both private and public decision - makers face climate - related choices .

broadly , response options to significant climate change include ( 1 ) defer the choices ; ( 2 ) find out more ; ( 3 ) inform affected populations ; ( 4 ) prepare ; ( 5 ) try to contain it ; and ( 6 ) choose to experience the consequences .

in many cases , many decision - makers are likely to face situations that require a response , such as resolving discrepancies between designated and actual flood plains or attempting to improve agricultural productivity in light of contemporary climate patterns .

based on what is and what is not well known concerning climate change , as well as other considerations , members of congress may address climate - related decisions that affect authorizations and appropriations for federal programs , including research and technology development ; tax and financial incentives for private decision - makers ; regulatory authorities ; or information or assistance to affected entities to help them adapt or rebuild after damages .

a variety of other crs reports provide background and analysis on such options and are listed at the end of this report .

most climate science experts project that if ghg emissions are not reduced far below current levels , the earth's climate would warm further , above natural variations , to levels never experienced by human civilizations .

if , and as , the climate moves further from its present state , it would reconfigure the patterns and events to which current human and ecological systems are adapted , and the risk of abrupt changes would dramatically increase .

scenarios of future ghg concentrations under current policies range from 500 ppm carbon dioxide equivalents ( co 2 e ) to over 1,000 ppm co 2 e by 2100 .

these are projected to raise the global average temperature by at least 1.5 o celsius ( 2.7 o fahrenheit ) above 1990 levels , not taking into account natural variability .

the estimates considered most likely by many scientists are for ghg - induced temperature increases around 2.5 to 3.2 o c ( 4.5 to 5.8 o f ) by 2100 .

there is a small but not trivial likelihood that the ghg - induced temperature rise may exceed 6.4 o c ( 11.5 o f ) above natural variability by 2100 .

as context , the global average temperature at the last glacial maximum has been estimated to be about 3 to 5 o c ( 5.4 to 9 o f ) cooler than present , and is estimated currently to be approaching the highest level experienced since the emergence of human civilizations about 8,000 years ago .

future climate change may advance relatively smoothly or sporadically , and some regions are likely to experience more fluctuations in temperature , precipitation , and frequency or intensity of extreme events than others .

almost all regions are expected to experience warming ; some are projected to become warmer and wetter , while others would become warmer and drier .

sea levels could rise due to ocean warming alone on average between 7 and 23 inches by 2100 .

adding to that estimate would be the effects of poorly understood but possible accelerated melting of the greenland or antarctic ice sheets .

recent scientific studies have projected a total global average sea level to rise in the 21 st century , depending on ghg scenarios , ice dynamics , and other factors , in the range of 2 to 2.5 feet , with a few estimates ranging up to 6.5 feet .

continued warming could lead to additional sea level rise over subsequent centuries of several to many meters .

improving understanding of ice dynamics is a high priority for scientific research to improve sea level rise projections .

patterns consistent among different climate change models have led to some common expectations: ghg - induced climate change would include more heat waves and fewer extreme cold episodes ; more precipitation on average but more droughts in some regions ; and generally increased summer warming and dryness in the central portions of continents .

regional changes may vary from the global average changes , however .

scientists also expect precipitation to become more intense when it occurs , thereby increasing runoff and flooding risks .

precipitation is a particularly challenging component of projecting future climate .

for example , for the contiguous united states , recent climate modeling consistently anticipates overall temperature increases , but different models produce a wide range of precipitation changes , from net decreases to net increases .

this is particularly problematic in that precipitation , and its characteristics , is closely associated with impacts on agriculture , water supply , streamflows , and other critical systems .

scientific expectations and model projections consistently point to a global average increase in precipitation with strong variations across regions and time .

generally , dry areas are expected to get dryer , and wet regions are expected to get wetter .

in many regions , the increase in evapotranspiration is expected to exceed the increase in precipitation , resulting in general drying of soils and increasing risks of droughts .

precipitation , when it occurs , is expected to be more intense .

there will be more energy available for storms , including hurricanes and thunderstorms , though whether they may increase in frequency remains unclear .

sea ice cover in the arctic is projected to continue its recent decline ( figure 5 ) .

greenland is expected to continue ice loss , adding to sea level rise , with more uncertainty about what may happen to ice cover in antarctica ( figure 5 ) .

because arctic sea ice already floats on water , its melting would not increase sea levels , but large scale melting of land - based ice in greenland and antarctica could increase average sea levels by as many as 2 meters by 2100 and several more meters over coming centuries .

nearly every human and natural system could be affected by climate changes , directly or indirectly .

the u.s .

global change research program has produced several assessments of scientific understanding of impacts of climate change on the united states .

whether climate changes are meaningful in a policy context arguably depends , on the one hand , on how they influence existing and emerging human systems , and on the other hand , the values people attach to different resources and risks .

past climate changes , often regional not global , contributed to major societal changes , including some large - scale migrations and even the demise of some civilizations .

some climate changes likely stimulated technological advances , such as development of irrigation systems .

many investments in current buildings , transportation , water systems , agricultural hybrid varieties , and other infrastructure were designed in the context of a climate of one or more decades ago , cooler on average than today .

to the degree that climate patterns were factored into design , the investments typically presumed that climate would remain stable within historical bounds of variability .

for example , levees may have been built to withstand a 100-year flood ( 1% chance to occur each year ) according to historic runoff , streamflow , and storm surge conditions going back many decades .

as climate changes produce greater , more intense precipitation and run - off , however , a 100-year flood may now be closer to the 50-year flood ( 2% chance flood ) , and potentially the 10-year flood within decades ( 10% change flood ) .

if climate continues to change from the conditions for which infrastructure and practices were designed , the risks of losses due to maladaptation would increase .

a wide band of uncertainty surrounds projections of impacts of climate change and , in particular , the critical thresholds for non - linear or abrupt effects .

some impacts of climate change are expected to be beneficial in some locations with a few degrees of warming ( eg , increased agricultural productivity in some regions , less need for space heating , less cold weather mortality , opening of the northwest passage for shipping and resource exploitation ) .

most impacts are expected to be adverse ( eg , lower agricultural productivity in many regions , drought , rising sea levels , spread of disease vectors , greater needs for cooling ) .

many impacts may be substantial but hard to assess as yet as "positive" or "negative," such as possible impacts on the structure of global financial markets .

risks of abrupt , surprising climate changes with accompanying dislocations are expected to increase as global average temperature increases ; some could push natural and socioeconomic systems past key thresholds of tolerance .

risks of future climate change would be reduced by efforts that reduce vulnerability and build resilience ( "adaptation" ) .

some populations will have the resources to migrate and adapt successfully — even profit from new opportunities that will emerge — while others could lose livelihoods or lives .

adaptations can help mitigate impacts and damage costs , but also impose costs , often on those who can least afford them .

climate change will occur with different magnitudes and characteristics in different regions .

the difficulties involved in improving predictions at regional and local scales will challenge preparations for climate change .

to a large degree , climate change will expand the uncertainties that individuals and organizations face .

climate change could have a wide array of effects on individuals , communities , and populations on a large scale .

many of these are expected to occur in small increments: shortages and increasing prices for clean water , rising food prices , higher rates of allergies and such illnesses as diarrhea or cholera , erosion of beaches , etc .

at an increasing rate may be shocks , or distinct weather events , such as more extreme heat waves , severe droughts , or loss of industrial cooling systems when intake water is in short supply or is warmer than tolerable temperatures .

extreme events , chronic economic losses , or improved opportunities elsewhere are expected to prompt migration of millions of people , largely within countries , but also across national borders .

extreme events , greater variability , and uncertainty are expected to increase stress and mental health challenges .

some experts project that climate changes could amplify instabilities in countries with weak governance and increase security risks .

this may have implications for international political stability and security .

for some experts and stakeholders , likely ecological disruptions ( and limitations on species' and habitats' abilities to adapt at the projected rate of climate change ) are among the most compelling reasons that humans must act to reduce their interference with the climate system .

some believe humans will have the wherewithal to cope , but non - human systems may not .

as the degree and distribution of climate changes continue , ranges of species are likely to change .

climate change is highly likely to create substantial changes in ecological systems and services in some locations , and may lead to ecological surprises .

the disappearance of some types of regional ecosystems raises risks of extinctions of species , especially those with narrow geographic or climatic distributions , and where existing ecological communities disintegrate .

one set of researchers found "a close correspondence between regions with globally disappearing climates and previously identified biodiversity hotspots ; for these regions , standard conservation solutions ( eg , assisted migration and networked reserves ) may be insufficient to preserve biodiversity. .

crs report r43185 , ocean acidification , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41153 , changes in the arctic: background and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34580 , drought in the united states: causes and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43199 , energy - water nexus: the energy sector's water use , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42611 , oil sands and the keystone xl pipeline: background and selected environmental issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42756 , energy policy: 113 th congress issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42613 , climate change and existing law: a survey of legal issues past , present , and future , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43120 , president obama's climate action plan , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42756 , energy policy: 113 th congress issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34266 , climate change: science highlights , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41973 , climate change: conceptual approaches and policy tools , by [author name scrubbed] .

