the 2010 patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) mandated the creation of state health care exchanges for the sale of insurance policies , including certain individual and small - group policies .

under the aca , a state may set up its own exchange or create an exchange in partnership with the federal government .

if a state chooses not to form an exchange , or cannot meet aca requirements , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) will run its exchange .

 ( see text box below , "glossary of aca terms." ) .

as of july 2014 , 14 states and the district of columbia had secured hhs approval to create their own exchanges , 7 to enter into partnership exchanges , 29 to have federally facilitated exchanges , and 2 to have state - based shop / federally facilitated individual exchanges .

the exchanges began offering insurance on october 1 , 2013 .

the insurance policies , and the exchanges , were fully operational on january 1 , 2014 .

an exchange is not an insurer , but is rather a type of marketplace where private insurance companies may sell qualified health plans ( qhp ) that meet certain federal standards .

consumers , businesses , and issuers are not required to use the exchanges to purchase insurance .

however , individuals must buy exchange - based coverage to qualify for federal premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

small businesses that apply for coverage through the exchanges may be eligible for small business tax credits .

consumers may apply for coverage over the phone , online , via mail , or in person in some areas .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that 25 million individuals will be enrolled in health insurance through the exchanges in 2024 .

new enrollees are expected to be poorer , more racially and ethnically diverse , less educated , and less familiar with insurance than those who currently have health insurance coverage .

to help these consumers negotiate the enrollment process , the aca requires exchanges to perform education and outreach functions .

exchanges may use a variety of techniques to reach out to the public including mailings , brochures , social media , corporate partnerships , health fairs , and other public events .

under the aca and implementing regulations issued by the hhs centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , consumer assistance outreach programs include the following: mandatory navigator programs designed to provide "fair and impartial" information about exchange - based insurance plans , as well as the availability of federal assistance to help defray the cost of insurance and other health programs .

non - navigator or "in - person assistance" programs at state - run exchanges and state partnership exchanges .

the non - navigators perform generally the same functions as navigators , or complement the role of navigators by reaching out to underserved populations , but have a separate source of federal funding via exchange establishment grants .

non - navigators are optional at state exchanges , and mandatory at certain partnership exchanges .

certified application counselors to help individuals apply for qhp enrollment and possible subsidies .

exchanges may designate various organizations or individuals as application counselors or allow outside organizations to certify the counselors .

counselors are mandatory , but their duties are more limited than those of navigators and non - navigators .

no new aca funds were provided for the counselors , though they may be funded through existing state , local , or federal programs .

in addition , consumers and businesses may use insurance brokers and agents , including web - based brokers ( where allowed by states ) , to purchase qhps .

brokers and agents , licensed by states , are generally paid a commission by insurance companies for selling their policies .

brokers and agents may apply to serve as navigators , but may not accept direct or indirect compensation from health or stop - loss insurers in this role .

under cms rules , consumers may also go directly to insurance companies to obtain information about qhps and other insurance options , and to sign up for such plans .

some lawmakers , as well as brokers and agents , have questioned whether cms regulations impose sufficient training and consumer safeguards for the navigator , non - navigator , and consumer assistance programs .

a number of states have passed legislation to require navigators to have additional training and licensing , or to undergo background checks .

the aca gives states flexibility to certify or license navigators , but state actions may not prevent the implementation of title i of the aca , which authorizes the exchanges .

cms has interpreted the law to mean that states may not require all navigators , for example , to be licensed as insurance agents or brokers .

 ( see " state and exchange licensing and certification ." ) .

this report outlines federal and state oversight of navigators , the role of brokers and agents , and previous education and outreach efforts for federal health care programs .

u.s. health insurance agents and brokers , collectively called "producers," are a contact point between insurance companies and applicants , helping individuals and businesses choose suitable policies .

according to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , producers selling all types of insurance , including health policies , held about 443,400 jobs in 2012 and had median annual wages of $48,150 .

insurance producers are a major segment of the u.s. financial services industry , offering annuity products , comprehensive financial planning services , such as retirement and estate planning , and business pension planning .

though insurance producers work with consumers , they are paid by insurance companies .

an agent may be a so - called captive agent who works for one insurance firm , or an independent agent who sells products from a variety of insurers .

independent agents may be paid via commission , while those working for an agency or insurer may receive a salary , often plus commission or bonus .

an insurance broker generally represents a wider array of insurance products than an agent , and assumes a greater role in assessing the potential risk profile and insurance requirements of a client , including overall insurance needs and appropriate policies .

a web - based insurance broker may offer products from a variety of insurers on a central website .

potential clients enter basic information into the site , such as zip code and family size , and are then presented with an array of possible insurance plans .

shoppers can search for plans in different ways such as company name , average monthly cost , premiums , and other variables .

hhs has carried out previous , major health insurance education and enrollment efforts , including enrollment efforts under the medicare part d prescription drug program and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

medicare also funds the state health insurance assistance program ( ship ) , which offers education and other assistance to medicare beneficiaries and their families .

these efforts differ in significant ways from current , aca outreach efforts , but have similarities including broad public relations and advertising components and extensive use of trained volunteers and community groups to help consumers make decisions about health insurance .

cms officials have looked to the programs for lessons and guidance as they launch the in - person assistance programs .

in general , government and private sector analyses of the earlier hhs efforts indicate that the most effective outreach includes a variety of techniques including distributing information via mass media ; cooperation between federal and state agencies , non - profit and business organizations ; and the use of community groups and individual counseling to reach low - income consumers and those with language barriers or physical disabilities .

some lawmakers have raised questions and concerns about the navigator programs .

two subcommittees of the house committee on oversight and investigations in may 2013 held a joint hearing on implementation of the navigator program .

some members of congress , state legislators , health care advocacy groups , and brokers and agents have raised questions about whether cms regulations go far enough to ensure protection of enrollees' personal information , such as social security numbers .

lawmakers have asked hhs for additional information about how much access navigators , non - navigators , and certified application counselors will have to enrollees' personal information .

lawmakers have asked to see specific training materials and have sought information regarding handling of documents and potential background checks of navigator personnel .

a group of 13 attorneys general in an august 14 , 2013 letter also raised concerns about the privacy regulations .

in an effort to strengthen privacy protections , hhs in may 2014 final rules required that navigators , non - navigators , and certified application counselors obtain authorization from a consumer before accessing his or her personally identifiable information , and maintain a record of the authorization .

consumers have a right to revoke the authorization at any time .

the potential for privacy violations and other consumer swindles extends well beyond exchange - sanctioned consumer assistance programs , however .

the federal trade commission warned consumers in 2012 about scam artists seeking to obtain personal information under the guise of verifying information regarding aca coverage .

45 cfr §  155 .260   privacy and security of personally identifiable information .

 ( a ) creation , collection , use and disclosure .

 ( 1 ) where the exchange creates or collects personally identifiable information for the purposes of determining eligibility for enrollment in a qualified health plan ; determining eligibility for other insurance affordability programs , as defined in 155 .20 ; or determining eligibility for exemptions from the individual responsibility provisions in section 5000a of the code , the exchange may only use or disclose such personally identifiable information to the extent such information is necessary to carry out the functions described in §  155 .200 of this subpart .

 ( 2 ) the exchange may not create , collect , use , or disclose personally identifiable information while the exchange is fulfilling its responsibilities in accordance with §  155 .200 of this subpart unless the creation , collection , use , or disclosure is consistent with this section .

 ( 3 ) the exchange must establish and implement privacy and security standards that are consistent with the following principles: ( i ) individual access .

individuals should be provided with a simple and timely means to access and obtain their personally identifiable information in a readable form and format ; ( ii ) correction .

individuals should be provided with a timely means to dispute the accuracy or integrity of their personally identifiable information and to have erroneous information corrected or to have a dispute documented if their requests are denied ; ( iii ) openness and transparency .

there should be openness and transparency about policies , procedures , and technologies that directly affect individuals and / or their personally identifiable information ; ( iv ) individual choice .

individuals should be provided a reasonable opportunity and capability to make informed decisions about the collection , use , and disclosure of their personally identifiable information ; ( v ) collection , use , and disclosure limitations .

personally identifiable information should be created , collected , used , and / or disclosed only to the extent necessary to accomplish a specified purpose ( s ) and never to discriminate inappropriately ; ( vi ) data quality and integrity .

persons and entities should take reasonable steps to ensure that personally identifiable information is complete , accurate , and up - to - date to the extent necessary for the person's or entity's intended purposes and has not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner ; ( vii ) safeguards .

personally identifiable information should be protected with reasonable operational , administrative , technical , and physical safeguards to ensure its confidentiality , integrity , and availability and to prevent unauthorized or inappropriate access , use , or disclosure ; and , ( viii ) accountability .

these principles should be implemented , and adherence assured , through appropriate monitoring and other means and methods should be in place to report and mitigate non - adherence and breaches .

 ( 4 ) for the purposes of implementing the principle described in paragraph ( a ) ( 3 ) ( vii ) of this section , the exchange must establish and implement operational , technical , administrative and physical safeguards that are consistent with any applicable laws ( including this section ) to ensure — ( i ) the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of personally identifiable information created , collected , used , and / or disclosed by the exchange ; ( ii ) personally identifiable information is only used by or disclosed to those authorized to receive or view it ; ( iii ) return information , as such term is defined by section 6103 ( b ) ( 2 ) of the code , is kept confidential under section 6103 of the code ; ( iv ) personally identifiable information is protected against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of such information ; ( v ) personally identifiable information is protected against any reasonably anticipated uses or disclosures of such information that are not permitted or required by law ; and ( vi ) personally identifiable information is securely destroyed or disposed of in an appropriate and reasonable manner and in accordance with retention schedules ; ( 5 ) the exchange must monitor , periodically assess , and update the security controls and related system risks to ensure the continued effectiveness of those controls .

 ( 6 ) the exchange must develop and utilize secure electronic interfaces when sharing personally identifiable information electronically .

 ( b ) application to non - exchange entities .

except for tax return information , which is governed by section 6103 of the code , when collection , use or disclosure is not otherwise required by law , an exchange must require the same or more stringent privacy and security standards ( as §  155 .260 ( a ) ) as a condition of contract or agreement with individuals or entities , such as navigators , agents , and brokers , that: ( 1 ) gain access to personally identifiable information submitted to an exchange ; or ( 2 ) collect , use or disclose personally identifiable information gathered directly from applicants , qualified individuals , or enrollees while that individual or entity is performing the functions outlined in the agreement with the exchange .

 ( c ) workforce compliance .

the exchange must ensure its workforce complies with the policies and procedures developed and implemented by the exchange to comply with this section .

 ( d ) written policies and procedures .

policies and procedures regarding the creation collection , use , and disclosure of personally identifiable information must , at minimum: ( 1 ) be in writing , and available to the secretary of hhs upon request ; and ( 2 ) identify applicable law governing collection , use , and disclosure of personally identifiable information .

 ( e ) data sharing .

data matching and sharing arrangements that facilitate the sharing of personally identifiable information between the exchange and agencies administering medicaid , chip or the bhp for the exchange of eligibility information must: ( 1 ) meet any applicable requirements described in this section ; ( 2 ) meet any applicable requirements described in section 1413 ( c ) ( 1 ) and ( c ) ( 2 ) of the affordable care act ; ( 3 ) be equal to or more stringent than the requirements for medicaid programs under section 1942 of the act ; and ( 4 ) for those matching agreements that meet the definition of "matching program" under 5 u.s.c .

552a ( a ) ( 8 ) , comply with 5 u.s.c .

552a ( o ) .

 ( f ) compliance with the code .

return information , as defined in section 6103 ( b ) ( 2 ) of the code , must be kept confidential and disclosed , used , and maintained only in accordance with section 6103 of the code .

 ( g ) improper use and disclosure of information .

any person who knowingly and willfully uses or discloses information in violation of section 1411 ( g ) of the affordable care act will be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per person or entity , per use or disclosure , in addition to other penalties that may be prescribed by law .

