the great lakes ecosystem is the largest system of fresh surface water in the world .

the watershed covers approximately 300,000 square miles and is shared by eight u.s. states ( illinois , indiana , michigan , minnesota , new york , ohio , pennsylvania , and wisconsin ) and one canadian province ( ontario ) .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

the great lakes contain nearly 90% of the surface freshwater of the united states and 20% of the surface freshwater of the world .

in the last several decades , agricultural activity throughout the basin , and urban and industrial development concentrated along the shoreline , have degraded water quality in the great lakes , posing potential threats to the ecosystem .

development has also led to changes in terrestrial and aquatic habitats , the introduction of nonnative species , the contamination of sediments , and the listing of more than 50 threatened or endangered species in the ecosystem .

in response to deteriorating conditions in the ecosystem , the federal governments of the united states and canada and the state and provincial governments in the great lakes basin have implemented several restoration activities .

an estimated 40 million people rely on the great lakes ecosystem for jobs , drinking water , and recreation , among other things .

in economic terms , the present - value benefit in 2007 of restoring the great lakes was estimated to be $50 billion ( in direct and indirect benefits ) over the long term .

the ultimate cost for restoring the great lakes is unclear , but the value of the potential benefits of restoration has caused , in part , several in congress to regard restoring the great lakes a priority .

the u.s. congress has played a role in restoration efforts in the great lakes and enacted more than 30 laws over several years focused on restoring aspects of the great lakes ecosystem .

these laws have authorized activities ranging from mitigating the harmful effects of toxic substances on water quality to mitigating damages caused by invasive species .

most laws address specific issues in the great lakes ; yet few address the entire ecosystem .

over the years , several stakeholders have expressed the need for initiating and implementing a comprehensive approach for restoring the great lakes ecosystem .

restoration efforts in the great lakes have been implemented over several decades by the federal government , states , and local stakeholders .

efforts have focused on specific aspects of the ecosystem , but rarely the entire ecosystem .

for example , the great lakes water quality agreement ( glwqa ) , initially signed in 1972 and then revised several times afterwards , addresses water quality characteristics in the great lakes , but not habitat issues .

after several years of restoration , the government accountability office ( gao ) concluded that progress in restoring the great lakes was slow and restoration efforts were too loosely organized .

specific concerns included the slow rate of cleaning up toxic sediments , insufficient governance to provide direction for ecosystem restoration activities , and lack of a comprehensive plan to guide restoration of the great lakes ecosystem .

in 2004 a federal great lakes interagency task force ( hereinafter referred to as the task force ) was created to provide strategic direction for great lakes policies on restoration and to form a regional collaboration of stakeholders interested in restoring the great lakes ecosystem .

this collaboration was termed the great lakes regional collaboration .

it consisted of over 1,500 stakeholders and released the great lakes regional collaboration strategy ( hereinafter referred to as the strategy ) .

the strategy recommended implementing a series of actions and activities to start the restoration of the great lakes ecosystem over a five - year period from 2006 to 2011 .

the strategy encompassed eight issue areas: aquatic invasive species , fish and wildlife habitat ( habitat / species ) , coastal health , contaminated sediments , nonpoint source pollution , toxic pollutants , indicators and information , and sustainable development .

the total cost of implementing the strategy was estimated to be $20 billion over the five - year period .

the strategy ( as a whole ) is not being implemented , although several restoration programs included in the strategy are underway or ongoing in the great lakes restoration initiative ( glri ) and other federal and state activities .

the glri was proposed in 2009 by the obama administration , and implemented in 2010 .

the glri is derived from the strategy and aims to be consistent with the strategy and glwqa .

the goal of the glri is to restore and maintain the chemical , physical and biological integrity of the great lakes basin ecosystem by directing activities to address five focus areas: toxic substances and areas of concern ; invasive species ; nearshore health and nonpoint source pollution ; habitat and wildlife protection and restoration ; accountability , monitoring , evaluation , communication , and partnerships .

federal efforts to restore the great lakes ecosystem are coordinated by the task force .

the epa , serving as chair of the task force , is the lead federal agency for implementing and administering the glri .

in appropriations laws from fy2010 to fy2013 , the epa has been given authority to receive and distribute congressionally appropriated funds to several federal agencies , which then undertake restoration activities and projects in the great lakes .

epa also implements restoration activities that are funded by the glri through the great lakes national program office ( glnpo ) .

restoration activities are being done under existing federal authorities that address restoration in the great lakes .

there is no single law that specifically authorizes the glri as a restoration initiative for the great lakes .

the implementation of the glri is being guided by recommendations from a great lakes advisory board ( glab ) .

the glab provides advice on great lakes protection and restoration policy , long term goals of protection and restoration , annual priorities to protect and restore the great lakes , and issues addressed by the task force .

glab consists of 18 members who represent nonfederal stakeholders ( eg , nongovernmental organizations , state agencies , tribal interests , and universities , among others ) in the glri .

glab is also expected to provide advice on the implementation of the great lakes water quality agreement .

since fy2010 , the implementation of the glri represents a significant increase in funding and activities for great lakes restoration and a novel attempt at restoring the ecosystem holistically .

some issues with glri that have emerged include clarity about the management structure of glri , the potential integration of glri with existing federal and state restoration efforts in the great lakes , the effectiveness of the action plan in laying out a strategy for fully restoring the great lakes , the overall direction and duration of restoring the great lakes , and the funding needed to implement and complete the glri .

some of these issues are addressed , in part , by proposed legislation introduced in the 113 th congress .

s. 1232 and h.r .

2773 would establish a governance and management structure for restoration activities in the great lakes , authorize glri and appropriations for its implementation , specify the scope and function of glri , and authorize the coordinating role of the great lakes interagency task force .

a summary of how these bills amend current law and analysis of how they might change current practices in glri is provided in the text box below .

the rest of this section reviews the aforementioned issues that might be of interest to congress .

the glri is a large - scale ecosystem restoration initiative that aims to restore the great lakes ecosystem under the framework of an action plan .

it attempts to address past criticisms of great lakes restoration activities that included claims of a loosely coordinated restoration effort , and a restoration effort that lacks a comprehensive plan .

the great lakes ecosystem is complex and covers a vast geographical area .

this inherently leads to scientific uncertainties in implementing restoration projects and unforeseen circumstances in the evolution of the ecosystem .

these factors and others may cause restoration efforts under the glri to face persistent and new questions by congress and other stakeholders .

some might question how long restoration in the great lakes may take and how much it could ultimately cost .

further , questions related to how the glri is implemented and whether it will eventually encompass all federal activities , state activities , and local activities related to great lakes restoration could be asked and discussed .

the glri is not authorized in law , but in the 113 th congress , two bills were introduced to authorize the initiative .

both bills would address similar issues , including authorizing the epa as the lead agency for implementing glri , and authorizing the task force to coordinate among federal and nonfederal stakeholders .

they would also authorize $475 million annually from fy2014 to fy2018 to fund glri activities .

