e ven today , after the passage of more than three decades , the 1979-1981 iran hostage crisis remains an event familiar to most americans .

many might be unaware that the 52 american mostly military and diplomatic personnel held hostage in tehran for 444 days or their survivors continue to strive for signif icant compensation for their ordeal .

the former hostages and their families did receive a number of benefits under various civil service laws , and each hostage received from the u.s. government a cash payment of $50 for each day held hostage .

the hostages have never received any compensation from iran through court actions , all efforts having failed due to foreign sovereign immunity and an executive agreement known as the algiers accords , which bars such lawsuits .

congress took action to abrogate iran's sovereign immunity in the case , but never successfully abrogated the executive agreement , leaving the plaintiffs with jurisdiction to pursue their case but without a judicial cause of action .

having lost their bids in the courts to obtain recompense , the former hostages have turned to congress for relief .

this report outlines the history of various efforts , including legislative efforts and court cases , and describes several bills currently before congress , the justice for former american hostages in iran act of 2015 , s. 868 , a companion bill , h.r .

3338 , and section 122 of the department of state operations authorization and embassy security act , fiscal year 2016 , s. 1635 .

the 52 americans taken hostage in tehran in november 1979 and held until january 1981 included civilian foreign service diplomats and other government employees , as well as military servicemembers and one private citizen .

concern about the effects of the ordeal on the hostages and their families led congress to enact legislation in 1980 designed to make the hostages and their families eligible for the same benefits that were available to prisoners of war and soldiers missing in action during the vietnam conflict , including their dependents .

the hostage relief act of 1980 did not provide for a cash payment to hostages or their families ; however , benefits under the act included the following: creation of an interest - bearing salary savings fund including retroactive interest ; reimbursement of medical expenses of the hostages and their family members ; extension of relief under the soldiers and sailors act to hostages ; tax relief , including deferred assessment of taxes and penalties , tax forgiveness during the period of captivity , and refunding of tax collected prior to enactment ; educational expenses for family members of hostages and retraining of hostages .

these benefits were supplemental to benefits to which government employees and servicemembers and their families were already entitled .

the congressional budget office estimated that the cost of additional medical benefits for the 1981 fiscal year would amount to $390,000 ; educational benefits would cost from $80,000 to $307,000 depending on the version of the bill enacted ; and internal revenue would decrease by less than $1 million due to the tax benefits .

a proposal to provide the hostages each with $1,000 per day to be paid from frozen iranian assets in the united states met with the objection of the state department on the grounds that it could complicate negotiations to secure the hostages' release , and it was not adopted .

in order to secure the release of the hostages and bring the crisis to an end , the u.s. government sought the good offices of algeria to broker a deal with the new iranian government .

the result was a set of executive agreements known collectively as the algiers accords .

the agreements provided not only for the release of the hostages , but also the unfreezing of iranian assets in the united states and the creation of an international tribunal to settle claims between the two governments , as well as certain private claims against either government by a national of the other , mostly arising as a result of contracts disrupted by the revolution in iran .

the algiers accords contain the following provisions respecting claims arising out of the hostage taking: [t]he united states ... will thereafter bar and preclude the prosecution against iran of any pending or future claim of the united states or a united states national arising out of events occurring before the date of this declaration related to ( a ) the seizure of the 52 united states nationals on nov. 4 , 1979 , ( b ) their subsequent detention , ( c ) injury to united states property or property of the united states nationals within the united states embassy compound in tehran after nov. 3 , 1979 , and ( d ) injury to the united states nationals or their property as a result of popular movements in the course of the islamic revolution in iran which were not an act of the government of iran .

the united states will also bar and preclude the prosecution against iran in the courts of the united states of any pending or future claims asserted by persons other than the united states nationals arising out of the events specified in the preceding sentence .

to fulfill this commitment , president carter issued executive order 12283 , citing the international emergency economic powers acts ( ieepa ) , among other authorities , to order the secretary of the treasury to promulgate regulations prohibiting any person subject to u.s. jurisdiction from bringing any court claim against iran arising out of the hostage seizure or subsequent detention .

the office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) at the treasury department amended the iranian assets control regulations ( 31 c.f.r .

part 535 ) accordingly .

on the same day the algiers accords were signed to secure the release of the hostages , president carter created the president's commission on hostage compensation and tasked it to provide recommendations as to whether the united states should provide financial compensation to the former hostages .

the commission reviewed prior practice regarding governmental compensation for prisoners of war and the value of benefits already received by the former hostages under other laws in making its recommendation .

the commission focused on the obligations it found the u.s. government owes as an employer , and concluded that "compensation in the tort sense" was not appropriate .

it did , however , recommend a "token" payment of tax - exempt detention benefits in the amount of $12.50 per day of captivity , similar to benefits paid to vietnam prisoners of war and interned civilians as well as to the crew of the uss pueblo who were detained by the government of north korea for 11 months in 1968 .

in making this recommendation , the commission was mindful of the fact that the algiers accords precluded the former hostages from suing iran for damages , but agreed with the government's position that this did not constitute a "taking" within the meaning of the fifth amendment because: ( 1 ) the president had statutory and constitutional authority to settle the potential hostage claims ; ( 2 ) the hostages could not establish for purposes of a taking claim that they suffered an actual uncompensated loss since ( a ) their claims were settled for considerable value , i.e. , their release and ( b ) their right of action against iran was of dubious value because of the unlikelihood that the u.s. courts would have been available as a forum in which to sue iran in light of certain provisions of the foreign sovereign immunities act .

the commission recommended that the government "assume the costs of restoring the hostages to health , provide disability compensation if their health cannot be restored , provide compensation for material losses and safeguard their employment rights and career prospects. .

notwithstanding the algiers accords' provision barring lawsuits , many of the former hostages brought suit against iran for damages .

these lawsuits failed for lack of jurisdiction under the foreign sovereign immunities act ( fsia ) or because of the algiers accords , or both .

in persinger v. islamic republic of iran , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit initially found jurisdiction based on the non - commercial tort exception to the fsia , on the notion that u.s. embassy grounds are within the jurisdiction of the united states .

on the merits , however , the court found that the president's order implementing the algiers accords extinguished any claim the plaintiff may have had .

despite having won the case , the u.s. government petitioned for rehearing on the foreign sovereign immunity question .

the court granted the motion and vacated its earlier opinion , agreeing with the government that the tort exception to sovereign immunity applies only to injuries occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the united states , which did not include u.s. embassies abroad .

the court held it could not , without jurisdiction over the case , reach the question regarding the legitimacy of the president's action .

some of the former hostages brought suit against the united states seeking compensation for what they viewed as an unconstitutional taking of their claim against iran , but were ultimately unsuccessful .

in belk v. united states , the united states claims court entered summary judgment in favor of the government , holding that the signing of the algiers accords did not effect a "taking" of private property because it primarily benefited the plaintiffs , the barring of claims was not novel or unexpected or outside the recognized authority of the president , and alternatively , that the presidential decision to bar claims amounted to a political question .

the court of appeals for the federal circuit affirmed , agreeing that the extinguishment of the plaintiffs' claims was not novel or unexpected , and "cannot be said to have 'interfered with distinct investment - backed expectations.' .

the appellate court also agreed that the matter was non - justiciable as a political question: it involves a policy decision made by the president during a time of crisis .

the appellants apparently contend that the president should not have entered into the algiers accords because he could have obtained better terms , and that the accords themselves were illegal because the president was coerced into agreeing to them .

the determination whether and upon what terms to settle the dispute with iran over its holding of the hostages and obtain their release , necessarily was for the president to make in his foreign relations role .

that determination was "of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion," and there are no "judicially discoverable and manageable standards" for reviewing such a presidential decision .

a judicial inquiry into whether the president could have extracted a more favorable settlement would seriously interfere with the president's ability to conduct foreign relations .

the court concluded that if any compensation of the plaintiffs for their mistreatment and suffering were to be forthcoming , it would have to be provided by "one of the other 'coordinate branches of government.' .

when congress returned to the issue of compensation for former hostages in 1985 , the house foreign affairs committee rejected the amount recommended by the commission in favor of a per diem payment based on the average government allowance for travel .

as referred to the house floor , section 802 of the omnibus diplomatic security and anti - terrorism act of 1986 provided for compensation in an amount deemed appropriate by the president taking into account the treatment the hostages received during captivity or other factors , but not less than the worldwide per diem rate under 5 u.s.c .

section 5702 .

the committee explained that: in determining a level of cash compensation for civilian captives , the committee attempted to weigh the issues presented in the debate over the rate of compensation for the iran hostages .

at the time that the president's commission on hostage compensation presented its findings , many felt that the commission's recommendation that the hostages receive $12.50 per day for every day in captivity vastly underestimated both the captivity itself and the sympathy of the american people for the captives' plight .

others suggested that any cash award should be upward of $100 per day or more .

the per diem rate chosen by the committee is a uniform rate which is a reliable gauge of the government's obligation to its employees when they are engaged in official business away from the normal duty station .

this formula would have provided compensation in the amount of $66 per day for each former hostage .

a floor amendment to reduce the amount to $20 failed , but the provision was amended in conference to provide $50 per day to the iran hostages and to reduce the minimum per - diem based rate for future victims by half .

the conference report provides no explanation for the substitution .

after congress amended the fsia in 1996 to include a new exception to immunity for acts of terrorism conducted or sponsored by designated terrorist states , the former hostages again brought suit against iran .

in order to assess how much revenue the fund envisioned by the bills described above could likely be expected to accrue , crs has compiled data available from several sources in order to estimate the total revenue from penalties and settlement agreements connected with violations of regulations proscribing economic activity with iran for the calendar years 2005-2014 .

information was obtained from the department of the treasury , office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) website ; the department of commerce , bureau of industry and security ( bis ) annual reports to congress for the years 2005-2014 ; and a report of major violations from the department of justice .

crs identified 373 penalties stemming at least in part from violations of sanctions against iran ( there may be more than one penalty per violation ) .

the data include criminal fines , forfeitures , significant special assessments , and civil penalties that were reported to have some connection with iran .

because the data sets are not complete through the time covered , and because it is not always easily ascertained whether the enforcement action summarized pertained to iran , the following should be considered an estimate only .

moreover , crs has not undertaken a thorough legal analysis of the bills' language concerning which laws and regulations might be deemed to be included under the definition of covered penalties and settlements .

it is not clear , for example , whether laws providing for forfeiture are necessarily included .

so far in 2015 , ofac and the department of justice report a total of $1,958,030,478.00 in forfeitures and fines having to do in part with violations of sanctions against iran , some of which has gone to state law enforcement and regulatory agencies .

it should be noted that a few large penalties primarily against banks account for the bulk of the total , as shown in table 2 .

these large penalties involved violations of other sanctions programs in addition to the iran sanctions .

the imposition of a 30% surcharge could result in a restructuring of future similar settlement agreements in order to isolate the violations related to iran .

as an example of how such restructuring might reduce expected penalties subject to surcharge , it might be useful to survey the case against credit agricole resolved in october 2015 .

included in the assessment of a total of $787.3 million in civil forfeitures and penalties assessed against credit agricole were some factors that might mean that a surcharge would not be applicable .

for example , only 16 of the 4,055 transactions found to be in violation of federal economic sanctions laws involved iranian transactions .

moreover , although all of the civil money penalties were premised on transactions violating the economic sanctions regulations , some of the penalties were imposed pursuant to new york state law or pursuant to federal or state banking laws or regulations .

sanctions relief envisioned under the joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) addressing iran's nuclear capabilities could reduce the future expected assessment of penalties , particularly involving foreign banks .

for information about sanctions relief under the jcpoa , see crs report r43333 , iran nuclear agreement , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

