most consumer products under the jurisdiction of the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) are imported into the united states .

each day in 2011 , almost $1.8 billion in such products entered the united states from 800,000 importers at 327 u.s. ports , according to statistics compiled by the cpsc .

more than 80% of the 473 consumer product recalls announced by the cpsc in fy2007 were recalls of imported products , and many of these products originated in china .

more recently , the cpsc reported that the agency , along with u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , department of homeland security , had stopped millions of units of imported consumer products that violated u.s. safety rules from reaching consumers in fy2012 .

in response to several recalls of lead - contaminated toys that had been manufactured in foreign countries such as china and imported into the united states , congress passed the consumer product safety improvement act ( cpsia ) in 2008 .

among other things , the act contained new requirements for testing and certification of consumer products , as well as provisions addressing the cpsc's role with regard to the import and export of consumer products .

overseeing the safety of imported consumer products in cooperation with cbp is one of the roles that the cpsc plays with respect to international trade in consumer products that are under its jurisdiction .

the cpsc may also prohibit the export for sale of certain consumer products from the united states to foreign countries .

in addition , the cspc is responsible for promulgating and enforcing certain mandatory product safety rules , bans , and standards .

the cpsc relies on voluntary standards issued by other bodies "whenever compliance with such voluntary standards would eliminate or adequately reduce the risk of injury addressed and it is likely that there will be substantial compliance with such voluntary standards. .

however , in some circumstances , the cpsc promulgates its own regulations or congress enacts a standard .

the united states has undertaken international obligations with respect to the promulgation of technical regulations by central government bodies like the cpsc .

these obligations are contained in world trade organization ( wto ) agreements such as the agreement on technical barriers to trade , as well as u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

standards - related trade obligations have been implemented in u.s. law , particularly in the trade agreements act of 1979 .

this report examines the cpsc's role in regulating u.s. imported and exported consumer products .

it also examines some of the international obligations that the united states has undertaken with respect to the promulgation of standards - related measures , such as mandatory consumer product safety regulations .

this report focuses on consumer products that fall within the jurisdiction of the cpsc .

in 1972 , the consumer product safety act ( cpsa ) established the cpsc as an independent federal regulatory agency tasked with protecting consumers against unreasonable risk of injury from hazardous products .

the cpsc has responsibility for administering and enforcing several federal consumer product safety laws , including the cpsa , the federal hazardous substances act ( fhsa ) , the flammable fabrics act ( ffa ) , the poison prevention packaging act of 1970 , and the refrigerator safety act of 1956 , among others .

the cpsc exercises regulatory jurisdiction over consumer products as defined in the cpsa .

the act defines "consumer product" as "any article , or component part thereof , produced or distributed ( i ) for sale to a consumer for use in or around a permanent or temporary household or residence , a school , in recreation , or otherwise , or ( ii ) for the personal use , consumption or enjoyment of a consumer in or around a permanent or temporary household or residence , a school , in recreation , or otherwise. .

the cpsc lacks jurisdiction over certain products , including tobacco and tobacco products , motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment , pesticides , firearms and ammunition , aircraft and components , boats and other marine vessels , drugs , medical devices , cosmetics , food , or any article that is not customarily produced or distributed for sale to , or use or consumption by , or enjoyment of , a consumer .

in addition , the cpsc lacks jurisdiction to regulate a risk of injury associated with a consumer product if such risk could be eliminated or reduced to a sufficient extent by actions taken under the occupational safety and health act , atomic energy act , or clean air act .

the cpsc also lacks the authority to regulate the risk of injury associated with electronic product radiation emitted from an electronic product if such risk of injury is subject to regulation under a certain provision of the public health service act .

the cpsc plays a major role in evaluating the safety of consumer products offered for import into u.s. customs territory .

in cooperation with cbp , the cpsc attempts to identify shipments intended for import that are likely to contain consumer products that violate import provisions enforced by the agency .

the cpsc also determines whether to admit certain consumer products offered for import into u.s. customs territory .

the cpsa , as amended , sets forth several prohibited acts involving importation and provides penalties for parties that engage in these acts .

under the amended cpsa and its implementing regulations , importers of finished products manufactured outside of the united states must certify that the products comply with all rules , bans , standards , or regulations applicable to the products under any act enforced by the cpsc .

importers have other responsibilities under the cpsa that are the same as those of manufacturers , including the responsibility to report consumer product safety problems to the cpsc .

under the fhsa and ffa , importers have responsibilities comparable to those of domestic manufacturers and distributors .

the cpsa states that the act does not apply to consumer products if it can be shown that they are manufactured , sold , or held for sale for export from the united states ( or if they are imported for export ) and are labeled as intended for export .

however , the cpsa will apply if the consumer products are distributed in commerce for use in the united states or the cpsc determines that exportation of the products presents an unreasonable risk of injury to consumers within the united states .

an exporter of a consumer product that violates a consumer product safety rule in effect under the cpsa must , no fewer than 30 days before export , file a statement with the cpsc notifying the agency of the export .

upon receiving such a filing , the cpsc must notify the government of the importing country of the export and the basis for the safety standard or rule violated .

the cpsia amended the cpsa to specify that the cpsc may prohibit a person from exporting from the united states for the purpose of sale any consumer product that violates a safety rule promulgated under cpsa unless the importing country has told the cpsc that it accepts the importation of the consumer product .

if 30 days have passed since the cpsc provided notice to the importing country of the impending shipment , the agency "may take such action as appropriate within its authority with respect to the disposition of the product under the circumstances. .

the amendment was intended to put a stop to the export of consumer products that are in violation of u.s. law .

the cpsia also made a similar amendment to the ffa .

as described above , the cpsa makes it unlawful for persons to engage in certain prohibited acts with respect to importation .

similarly , the cpsa prohibits export from the united states for the purpose of sale of a product or substance within the jurisdiction of the cpsc that ( 1 ) is subject to a cpsc order for a recall or corrective action , a court order declaring an imminent hazard , or that is a banned hazardous substance under section 2 ( q ) ( 1 ) of the fhsa ; or ( 2 ) is subject to a publicly notified voluntary corrective action taken by the manufacturer , in consultation with the cpsc .

the fhsa makes it unlawful to fail to notify the cpsc about the export of misbranded hazardous substances or banned hazardous substances .

other statutes enforced by the cpsc contain provisions pertaining to the export of consumer products , some of which are similar to those under the cpsa .

for example , section 14 of the fhsa states that "[n]ot less than thirty days before any person exports to a foreign country any misbranded hazardous substance or banned hazardous substance , such person shall file a statement with the commission notifying the commission of such exportation , and the commission , upon receipt of such statement , shall promptly notify the government of such country of such exportation and the basis upon which such substance is considered misbranded or has been banned under this act. .

the ffa contains a similar provision .

some international trade agreements classify measures that regulate on the basis of a product's characteristics or processes and production methods as technical regulations , standards , or conformity assessment procedures .

these measures are commonly referred to as "standards - related measures" or , when they act as obstacles to international trade , "technical barriers to trade. .

several international agreements contain obligations for the united states with respect to the promulgation of standards - related measures such as product safety regulations promulgated by the cpsc or product safety laws enacted by congress .

these obligations have been implemented in u.s. law .

enforcing consumer product safety laws at the border remains a priority for the cpsc and cbp .

in 2008 , following widely publicized recalls of children's toys , congress passed the cpsia .

among other things , the act contained provisions modifying the cpsc's role and authority with regard to the import and export of consumer products .

some members of congress have proposed additional legislation to address the potential harm caused by imported products .

h.r .

1910 , the foreign manufacturers legal accountability act of 2013 , was introduced in the house on may 9 , 2013 .

the bill shares some similarities with bills introduced in prior congresses that sought to hold foreign manufacturers legally responsible for the harms caused by their products in the united states .

among other things , h.r .

1910 would require the chairman of the cpsc to mandate that certain foreign manufacturers and producers of consumer products distributed in commerce establish a registered agent in the united states .

if h.r .

1910 became law , it could potentially be subject to challenge before a wto panel on the grounds that it violates the national treatment requirement contained in article iii:4 of the gatt by requiring foreign manufacturers to bear the costs of establishing a registered agent and becoming subject to product liability lawsuits , therefore possibly hurting the competitiveness of the manufacturers' products in the u.s. market as a result of higher product prices .

on the other hand , h.r .

1910 could be characterized as simply "leveling the playing field" for domestic products and not as treating imported products any less favorably .

if h.r .

1910 is adopted and later found to violate the requirements of the gatt , the united states could potentially justify the registration requirement under the exceptions provided at article xx ( b ) and ( d ) of the gatt .

both of these exceptions may require the complaining member to identify possible alternative measures available to the defending member that would be consistent — or at least less inconsistent — with the gatt .

if a measure is provisionally justified under article xx ( b ) or ( d ) , it must also satisfy the article xx chapeau .

