this report , divided into three main sections , examines the political and economic situation in venezuela and u.s. - venezuelan relations .

the first section surveys the political transformation of venezuela under the populist rule of president hugo chávez ( 1999-2013 ) and the first two years of the government of president nicolás maduro , including the government's severe crackdown on opposition protests in 2014 .

the second section analyzes venezuela's political and economic environment in 2015 and 2016 , including the opposition's december 2015 legislative victory and the maduro government's attempts to thwart the powers of the legislature ; efforts to remove president maduro through a recall referendum ; deteriorating economic and social conditions in the country ; and the government's foreign policy orientation .

the third section examines u.s. relations with venezuela , including the imposition of sanctions on venezuelan officials , and selected issues in u.s. relations — democracy and human rights , energy , counternarcotics , and terrorism concerns .

appendix a provides information on legislative initiatives in the 113 th and 114 th congresses , and appendix b provides links to selected u.s. government reports on venezuela .

significant recent developments include the following: on january 4 , 2017 , president maduro appointed former interior minister and governor of aragua state tareck el aissami as vice president , replacing aristóbulo istúriz , who served in the position for one year .

the action was significant since el aissami would serve out the remainder of president maduro's term if the president were recalled or stepped down from office .

on december 7 , 2016 , the senate foreign relations committee reported s.res .

537 ( cardin ) , amended , expressing profound concern about the ongoing political , economic , social , and humanitarian crisis in venezuela ; urging the release of political prisoners ; and calling for respect of constitutional and democratic processes , including free and fair elections .

on november 18 , 2016 , a u.s. federal court in new york convicted two nephews of venezuelan first lady cilia flores for conspiring to transport cocaine into the united states .

 ( see " counternarcotics issues ," below. ) .

on november 16 , 2016 , the organization of american states ( oas ) permanent council adopted a declaration supporting the national dialogue in venezuela , encouraging the government and the 10-party opposition coalition known as the democratic unity roundtable ( mesa de la unidad democrática , or mud ) "to achieve concrete results within a reasonable timeframe," and asserting the need for the constitutional authorities and all political and social actors to act with prudence and avoid any action of violence or threats to the ongoing process. .

 ( see " oas efforts on venezuela ," below. ) .

on november 12 , 2016 , the venezuelan government and opposition completed a second round of talks and issued a declaration expressing firm commitment to a peaceful , respectful , and constructive coexistence .

they also issued a statement that included agreement to improve the supply of food and medicine , to resolve the situation of three national assembly representatives who the maduro government blocked from taking office , and to work together in naming two national electoral council ( cne ) members whose terms expire in december .

some opposition activists have strongly criticized the dialogue as a way for the government to avoid taking any real actions , such as releasing all political prisoners .

 ( see " vatican prompts renewed efforts at dialogue ," below. ) .

from october 31 , 2016 , to november 2 , 2016 , under secretary of state thomas shannon traveled to venezuela to demonstrate support for the vatican - facilitated dialogue .

 ( see " pressing for respect for human rights , democracy , and dialogue in 2016 ," below ) .

on october 30 , 2016 , the government and representatives of most of the opposition ( with the exception of leopoldo lópez's popular will party ) held talks mediated by the vatican along with the former presidents of the dominican republic , spain , and panama and the head of the union of south american nations ( unasur. ) .

 ( see " vatican prompts renewed efforts at dialogue ," below. ) .

on october 20 , 2016 , venezuela's cne indefinitely suspended the recall referendum process after five state - level courts issued rulings alleging fraud in a signature collection drive held in june .

 ( see " efforts to recall president maduro ," below. ) .

on september 27 , 2016 , the house approved h.res .

851 ( wasserman schultz ) expressing profound concern about the humanitarian situation , urging the release of political prisoners , and calling for the venezuelan government to hold the recall referendum this year .

 ( see " pressing for respect for human rights , democracy , and dialogue in 2016 " and appendix a , below. ) .

on september 21 , 2016 , venezuela's cne announced that the signature drive for the recall referendum process would be held over a three - day period from october 26 , 2016 , to october 28 , 2016 .

the cne also said that that if a recall referendum were held , it likely would take place in the middle of the first quarter of 2017 .

 ( see " efforts to recall president maduro ," below. ) .

on september 12 , 2016 , president obama determined for the 12 th consecutive year that venezuela is not adhering to its international antidrug obligations .

 ( see " counternarcotics issues ," below. ) .

on august 11 , 2016 , the united states joined 14 other members of the organization of american states ( oas ) , in issuing a joint statement urging the venezuelan government and opposition "to hold as soon as possible a frank and effective dialogue" and calling on venezuelan authorities to realize the remaining steps of the presidential recall referendum "without delay. .

previously , the 15 countries had issued a statement on june 15 , 2016 , that , among other measures , expressed support for a "timely , national , inclusive , and effective political dialogue" and for "the fair and timely implementation of constitutional mechanisms. .

 ( see " oas efforts on venezuela ," below. ) .

on august 1 , 2016 , the u.s. federal court for the eastern district of new york unsealed a 2015 indictment against two venezuelan military officials for cocaine trafficking to the united states .

one of those indicted , general néstor luis reverol torres , had been the former head of venezuela's national anti - narcotics office .

president maduro responded by appointing general reverol as minister of interior and justice in charge of the country's police forces .

 ( see " counternarcotics issues ," below. ) .

the political and economic situation in venezuela continued to deteriorate in 2015 and 2016 , with the maduro government continuing its repression of the political opposition , the economy entering deeper into recession , with a growing humanitarian crisis .

in february 2015 , venezuela's intelligence service detained the opposition metropolitan mayor of caracas , antonio ledezma , who was subsequently charged with conspiracy in an alleged plot to overthrow the government .

 ( he was released from jail in april 2015 for surgery and has been under house arrest since june 2015. ) .

ledezma , along with leopoldo lópez ( imprisoned since 2014 ) had signed a communiqué entitled the "national agreement for transition" to take measures to overcome the country's political and economic crisis , including free and transparent presidential elections .

the maduro government viewed the document as tantamount to calling for the government's overthrow and similar to the " la salida " ( exit or solution ) strategy adopted by lópez in 2014 that tried to force maduro from power through street protests .

while the united states traditionally has had close relations with venezuela , a major oil supplier to the united states , there was significant friction with the chávez government , and this has continued under the maduro government .

over the course of chávez's tenure , u.s. officials expressed concerns about human rights , venezuela's military arms purchases ( largely from russia ) , its relations with cuba and iran , its efforts to export its brand of populism to other latin american countries , and the use of venezuelan territory by colombian guerrilla and paramilitary forces .

declining venezuelan cooperation on antidrug and antiterrorism efforts also became a major u.s. concern .

since 2005 , venezuela has been designated annually ( by president george w. bush and president obama , as part of the annual narcotics certification process ) as a country that has failed to adhere to its international antidrug obligations .

since 2006 , the department of state has made an annual determination that venezuela has not been cooperating fully with u.s. antiterrorism efforts , and as a result has imposed an embargo on arms sales to venezuela .

the united states has also imposed financial sanctions on several current or former venezuelan officials for providing support to the farc ; on several venezuelan companies for their support of iran ; and on several venezuelan individuals and companies for their support of the radical lebanon - based islamic shiite group hezbollah .

tensions in bilateral relations with venezuela under the bush administration turned especially sour in the aftermath of president chávez's brief ouster from power in april 2002 .

venezuela alleged u.s. involvement in the ouster , while u.s. officials repeatedly rejected charges that the united states was involved .

nevertheless , strong u.s. statements critical of chávez upon his return to power set the stages for continued deterioration in u.s. - venezuelan relations and strong rhetoric on both sides .

in 2006 , however , the tenor of u.s. political rhetoric changed in the second half of the year with u.s. officials refraining from responding to venezuela's rhetorical attacks .

by 2008 , u.s. policy had shifted to focusing on advancing a positive u.s. agenda for the hemisphere and refraining from getting into any unneeded conflicts or spats with president chávez .

nevertheless , u.s. relations took a turn for the worse in september 2008 when venezuela expelled the u.s .

ambassador in solidarity with bolivian president evo morales , who had expelled the u.s .

ambassador in la paz after accusing him of fomenting unrest ; the united states responded in kind with the expulsion of the venezuelan ambassador to the united states .

venezuela remains in the midst of a multifaceted political and economic crisis .

the popularity of president maduro has plummeted — less than 20% of venezuelans viewed him positively in late 2016 .

yet the maduro government has used the supreme court to cling to power by thwarting the authority of the opposition - dominated national assembly .

the opposition focused much of 2016 on efforts to recall president maduro through a national referendum , but the government resorted to delaying tactics to impede and slow the process .

the cne announced in october that it was suspending the process indefinitely .

if such a recall had been approved before january 10 , 2017 , the next step would have been for a new presidential election to be held within 30 days .

if a recall were to be held later this year , maduro's appointed vice president would serve as president for the remainder of maduro's term , through 2018 .

beginning in late october 2016 , efforts were focused on a government - opposition dialogue that was facilitated by the vatican , but a round of talks planned for early december 2016 was suspended .

some opposition leaders and activists are skeptical of the dialogue and view it as a way for the government to stall on taking any concrete actions and remain in power .

the venezuelan government's popularity is undoubtedly affected by the profound economic and social crisis that venezuela is experiencing .

the rapid decline in the price of oil has been a major factor prompting the economic crisis , but economic mismanagement has also played a significant role .

many observers contend that the road to economic recovery will take several years , no matter who is in power .

some analysts believe that the risk of a social explosion is rising because of food shortages , which have led to looting and riots , and a growing humanitarian crisis .

the obama administration spoke out strongly against the undemocratic practices of the maduro government and called for the release of those individuals imprisoned for their political beliefs , including leopoldo lópez .

it imposed visa restrictions on more than 60 current and former venezuelan officials responsible for or complicit in human rights violations and imposed asset - blocking sanctions on 7 venezuelans for human rights violations .

it also supported the efforts of oas secretary general almagro invoking the inter - american democratic charter and urging efforts to promote the normalization of the situation in venezuela and restore democratic institutions .

u.s. relations with venezuela under the maduro government are likely to remain strained if the venezuelan government does not take action to improve the human rights , political , and humanitarian situation and to engage in legitimate dialogue leading to concrete changes .

the political and economic crisis in venezuela will likely continue to sustain congressional interest in the country during the 115 th congress , including an examination of potential options for u.s. policy under the trump administration .

appendix a .

legislation initiatives 113 th congress p.l .

113-76 ( h.r .

3547 ) : consolidated appropriations act , 2014 .

signed into law january 17 , 2014 .

the administration requested $5 million in economic support funds for venezuela democracy and human rights projects , and ultimately an estimated $4.3 million in appropriations is being provided .

p.l .

113-235 ( h.r .

83 ) : consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 .

signed into law december 16 , 2014 .

division j provides funding for democracy and human rights programs in venezuela .

the administration requested $5 million in economic support funds to support such programs , although the funding measure did not specify how much to be appropriated .

p.l .

113-278 ( s. 2142 ) : venezuela defense of human rights and civil society act of 2014 .

introduced march 13 , 2014 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

the senate foreign relations considered and ordered the bill reported , amended , on may 20 , 2014 , by voice vote , although senators corker and udall asked to be recorded as voting no ( s.rept .

113-175 ) .

senate passed , amended , by voice vote december 8 , 2014 ; house passed by voice vote december 10 , 2014 .

president signed into law december 18 , 2014 .

as signed into law: section 5 ( a ) imposes sanctions ( asset blocking and visa restrictions ) against any foreign person , including a current or former venezuelan government official or a person acting on behalf of that government , that the president determines ( 1 ) has perpetrated or is responsible for ordering , controlling , or otherwise directing , significant acts of violence or serious human rights abuses in venezuela associated with antigovernment protests that began on february 4 , 2014 ; ( 2 ) has ordered or otherwise directed the arrest or prosecution of a person because of the person's exercise of freedom of expression or assembly ; or ( 3 ) has materially assisted , sponsored , or provided significant financial , material , or technological support for , or goods or services in support of , the actions just described in ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) .

section 5 ( c ) provides a presidential waiver of the sanctions if the president determines that it is in the national interests of the united states and , when or before the waiver takes effect , submits a notice and justification to four congressional committees .

section 5 ( e ) terminates the requirement to impose sanctions on december 31 , 2016 .

section 6 requires a report to congress from the broadcasting board of governors including an evaluation of the obstacles to the venezuelan people obtaining accurate , objective , and comprehensive news and information about domestic and international affairs ; an assessment of current efforts relating to broadcasting , information distribution , and circumvention technology distribution in venezuela by the u.s. government and otherwise ; and a strategy for expanding such efforts in venezuela , including recommendations for additional measures to expand upon current efforts .

s.res .

213 ( menendez ) .

introduced august 1 , 2013 ; marked up and reported favorably by the senate committee on foreign relations september 30 , 2013 ; senate approved and amended october 4 , 2013 , by unanimous consent .

expresses support for the free and peaceful exercise of representative democracy in venezuela , condemns violence and intimidation against the country's political opposition , and calls for dialogue between all political actors in the country .

h.res .

488 ( ros - lehtinen ) .

introduced and referred to the house committee on foreign affairs on february 25 , 2014 ; marked up by the subcommittee on the western hemisphere february 28 , 2014 .

house approved ( 393-1 ) march 4 , 2014 .

as passed by the house , the resolution ( 1 ) supports the people of venezuela in their pursuit of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly to promote democratic principles in venezuela ; ( 2 ) deplores acts that constitute a disregard for the rule of law , the inexcusable violence perpetrated against opposition leaders and protestors , and the growing efforts to use politically motivated criminal charges to intimidate the country political opposition ; ( 3 ) urges responsible nations throughout the international community to stand in solidarity with the people of venezuela and to actively encourage a process of dialogue between the venezuelan government and the political opposition to end the violence ; ( 4 ) urges the department of state to work in concert with other countries in the americas to take meaningful steps to ensure that basic fundamental freedoms in venezuela are in accordance with the inter - american democratic charter and to strengthen the ability of the oas to respond to the erosion of democratic norms and institutions in venezuela ; ( 5 ) urges the oas and its inter - american commission on human rights to utilize its good offices and all mechanisms at its disposal to seek the most effective way to expeditiously end the violence in venezuela in accordance with the inter - american democratic charter ; and ( 6 ) supports efforts by international and multilateral organizations to urge the venezuelan government to adopt measures to guarantee the rights to life , humane treatment , and security , and the political freedoms of assembly , association , and expression to all of the people of venezuela .

s.res .

365 ( menendez ) .

introduced february 27 , 2014 ; reported by the committee on foreign relations march 11 , 2014 , without a written report .

senate approved by unanimous consent march 12 , 2014 .

as approved , the resolution ( 1 ) reaffirms u.s. support for the people of venezuela in their pursuit of the free exercise of representative democracy as guaranteed by the venezuelan constitution and defined under the inter - american democratic charter of the oas ; ( 2 ) deplores the use of excessive and unlawful force against peaceful protestors and the use of violence and politically motivated criminal charges to intimidate the country's political opposition ; ( 3 ) calls on the venezuelan government to disarm the " colectivos " and any other government - affiliated or supported militias or vigilante groups ; ( 4 ) calls on the venezuela government to allow an impartial , third - party investigation into the excessive and unlawful force against peaceful demonstrations on multiple occasions since february 4 , 2014 ; ( 5 ) urges the president to immediately impose targeted sanctions , including visa bans and asset freezes , against individuals planning , facilitating , or perpetrating gross human rights violations against peaceful demonstrators , journalists , and other members of civil society in venezuela ; and ( 6 ) calls for the u.s. government to work with other countries in the hemisphere to actively encourage a process of dialogue between the venezuelan government and the political opposition through the good offices of the oas so that the voices of all venezuelans can be taken into account through their country's constitutional institutions as well as free and fair elections .

114 th congress p.l .

114-113 ( h.r .

2029 ) : consolidated appropriations act , 2016 .

initially , h.r .

2029 was the fy2016 military construction appropriations measure , but in december 2015 it became the vehicle for the fy2016 omnibus appropriations measure .

the president signed it into law on december 18 , 2015 .

the administration had requested $5.5 million for venezuela democracy and human rights funding , whereas the explanatory statement to the omnibus bill provided $6.5 million .

p.l .

114-194 ( s. 2845 ) : venezuela defense of human rights and civil society extension act of 2016 .

introduced and reported by the senate committee on foreign relations on april 28 , 2016 , without written report .

senate passed , amended , by unanimous consent april 29 , 2016 .

house passed by unanimous consent july 6 , 2016 .

president signed into law july 15 , 2016 .

the law extended the termination of sanctions under the venezuela defense of human rights and civil society act of 2014 through december 31 , 2019 .

p.l .

114-254 ( h.r .

2028 ) : further continuing and security assistance appropriations act , 2017 .

in april 2015 , the bill was originally introduced as the energy and water development and related agency appropriations act , 2016 , but in december 2016 , the measure became the legislative vehicle for a fy2017 continuing resolution funding most programs , including foreign aid appropriations , at the fy2016 level minus an across - the - board reduction of almost 0.2% , through april 28 , 2017 .

p.l .

114-323 ( s. 1635 ) : department of state authorities act , fiscal year 2017 .

originally introduced and reported by the senate foreign relations committee on june 18 , 2015 , without written report , as the department of state operations authorization and embassy security act , fiscal year 2016 .

senate passed , amended , by unanimous consent on april 29 , 2016 .

as approved , section 118 would have required a report to congress on political freedom in venezuela assessing u.s. democracy support for venezuela and listing sanctioned venezuelan government and security officials involved in the use of force against antigovernment protests .

house passed , amended , on december 5 , 2016 , without the venezuela report provision .

senate agreed to the house amendment on december 10 , 2016 , by unanimous consent .

signed into law december 16 , 2016 .

h.res .

851 ( wasserman schultz ) .

introduced september 8 , 2016 ; referred to house committee on foreign affairs .

on september 27 , 2016 , the house discharged the committee from further consideration and then amended and approved the resolution without objection .

as passed , the resolution ( 1 ) expresses profound concern about widespread shortages of essential medicines and basic food products and urges president maduro to permit the delivery of humanitarian assistance ; ( 2 ) calls on the venezuelan government to release all political prisoners , including u.s. citizens , to provide protections for freedom of expression and assembly , and to respect internationally recognized human rights ; ( 3 ) supports meaningful efforts toward dialogue that leads to respect for venezuelan's constitutional mechanisms and resolves the country's political , economic , social , and humanitarian crisis ; ( 4 ) affirms support for oas secretary general almagro's invocation of article 20 of the inter - american democratic charter and urges the oas permanent council to undertake a collective assessment of the constitutional and democratic order in venezuela ; ( 5 ) expresses great concern over the venezuelan executive's lack of respect for the principle of separation of powers , its overreliance on emergency decree powers , and its threat to judicial independence ; ( 6 ) calls on the venezuelan government and security forces to respect the venezuelan constitution , including provisions that provide citizens with the right to peacefully purse a fair and timely recall referendum for their president this year ; ( 7 ) stresses the urgency of strengthening the rule of law and increasing efforts to combat impunity and public corruption in venezuela ; ( 8 ) urges the u.s. president to provide full support for oas efforts in favor of constitutional and democratic solutions to the political impasse and to instruct appropriate federal agencies to hold venezuelan government officials accountable for violations of u.s. law and abuses of internationally recognized human rights ; and ( 9 ) urges the u.s. president to continue to stand in solidarity with the venezuelan people by urging the maduro government to hold a fair and free recall referendum by the end of 2016 ; release all political prisoners , including u.s. citizens ; adhere to democratic principles ; and permit the delivery of emergency food and medicine .

h.r .

5912 ( granger ) / s. 3117 ( graham ) : state department , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations , 2017 .

h.r .

5912 introduced and reported ( h.rept .

114-693 ) by the house appropriations committee july 15 , 2016 .

s. 3117 introduced and reported ( s.rept .

114-290 ) by the senate appropriations committee on june 29 , 2016 .

the report to the house bill would have provided $8 million for democracy and human rights programs in venezuela .

the report to the senate version would have fully funded the administration's request of $5.5 million but noted that additional funds could be made available if further programmatic opportunities in venezuela arise .

the 114 th congress did not complete action on fy2017 appropriations , but it approved a continuing resolution funding most programs through april 28 , 2017 .

see p.l .

114-254 noted above .

s.res .

262 ( ayotte ) .

introduced september 22 , 2015 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

the resolution would have supported the empowerment of women and urge countries to #freethe20 , including judge maria lourdes afiuni mora of venezuela .

s.res .

537 ( cardin ) .

introduced july 14 , 2016 ; reported , amended , by committee on foreign relations december 7 , 2016 .

as reported , the resolution would have ( 1 ) expressed profound concern about widespread shortages of essential medicines and basic food products and urged president maduro to permit the delivery of humanitarian assistance ; ( 2 ) called on the venezuelan government to release all political prisoners , to provide protections for freedom of expression and assembly , and to respect internationally recognized human rights ; ( 3 ) supported meaningful efforts toward a dialogue that leads to respect for venezuela's constitutional mechanisms and resolves the country's political , economic , social , and humanitarian crisis ; ( 4 ) affirmed support for the oas secretary general's invocation of article 20 of the inter - american democratic charter and urged the oas permanent council to undertake a collective assessment of the constitutional and democratic order in venezuela ; ( 5 ) called on the venezuelan government to ensure the neutrality and professionalism of all security forces and respect the venezuelan people's rights to freedom of expression and assembly ; ( 6 ) called on the venezuelan government to halt efforts to undermine the principle of separation of powers , its circumvention of the democratically elected legislature , and its subjugation of judicial independence ; ( 7 ) stressed the urgency of strengthening the rule of law and increasing efforts to combat impunity and public corruption in venezuela ; and ( 8 ) urged the u.s. president to provide full support for oas efforts in favor of constitutional and democratic solutions to the political impasse and instruct appropriate federal agencies to hold venezuelan government officials accountable for violations of u.s. law and abuses of internationally recognized human rights .

appendix b .

links to u.s. government reports u.s. relations with venezuela , fact sheet , state department date: august 31 , 2016 full text : http: / / www.state.gov / r / pa / ei / bgn / 35766.htm congressional budget justificati on for foreign operations fy2017 , annex 3 , pp .

489-490 , state department date: february 26 , 2016 full text : http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 252734.pdf country reports on human rights practices 2015 , venezuela , state department date: april 13 , 2016 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 253261.pdf country reports on terrorism 2015 ( western hemisphere overview ) , state department date: june 2 , 2016 full text : http: / / www.state.gov / j / ct / rls / crt / 2015 / 257519.htm department of state , venezuela country page link: http: / / www.state.gov / p / wha / ci / ve / international religious freedom report for 2015 , venezuela , state department date: august 2016 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 256603.pdf international narcotics control strategy report 201 6 , vol .

i , state department date: march 2016 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / j / inl / rls / nrcrpt / 2016 / vol1 / 253323.htm international narcotics control strategy report 2016 , vol .

ii , state department date: march 2016 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / j / inl / rls / nrcrpt / 2016 / vol2 / 253440.htm investment cl imate statement , 2016 , venezuela , state department date: july 2016 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / e / eb / rls / othr / ics / investmentclimatestatements / index.htm ? year=2016&dlid=254565 national trade estimate repor t on foreign trade barriers 2016 , pp .

443-449 , office of the united states trade representative date: march 2016 full text: https: / / ustr.gov / sites / default / files / 2016-nte - report - final.pdf tr affick ing in persons report 2016 , state department date: june 2016 full text: http: / / www.state.gov / j / tip / rls / tiprpt / countries / 2016 / 258891.ht .

