in 1956 , the army began the development of a family of air - transportable , armored multi - purpose vehicles intended to provide a lightweight , amphibious armored personnel carrier for armor and mechanized infantry units .

known as the m - 113 , it entered production in 1960 and saw extensive wartime service in vietnam .

considered a reliable and versatile vehicle , a number of different variations of the m - 113 were produced to fulfill such roles as a command and control vehicle , mortar carrier , and armored ambulance , to name but a few .

the army began replacing the m - 113 infantry carrier version in the early 1980s with the m - 2 bradley infantry fighting vehicle , but many non - infantry carrier versions of the m - 113 were retained in service .

according to the army the armored multi - purpose vehicle ( ampv ) is the proposed united states army program for replacement of the m - 113 family of vehicles ( fov ) to mitigate current and future capability gaps in force protection , mobility , reliability , and interoperability by mission role variant within the heavy brigade combat team ( hbct ) [now known as the armored brigade combat team – abct] .

the ampv will have multiple variants tailored to specific mission roles within hbct .

mission roles are as follows: general purpose , medical evacuation , medical treatment , mortar carrier , and mission command .

ampv is a vehicle integration program .

regarding the decision to replace remaining m - 113s , the army notes the following: the m - 113 lacks the force protection and mobility needed to operate as part of combined arms teams within complex operational environments .

for example , "commanders will not allow them to leave forward operating bases ( fobs ) or enter contested areas without extensive mission protection and route clearance. .

the use of other vehicles for m - 113 mission sets ( casualty evacuations , for example ) reduces unit combat effectiveness .

the majority of the army's m - 113s are found in armored brigade combat teams ( abcts ) , where they comprise 32% of the tracked armored vehicles organic to that organization .

the 114 m - 113 variants in the abct are distributed as follows .

in addition to the ampv requirement in the abcts , the army also planned to procure an additional 1,922 ampvs to replace m - 113s in echelons above brigade ( eab ) .

the army notes that these ampvs might have different requirements than the abct ampvs .

dod estimates if the m - 113s are replaced by ampvs at eab , total program costs could be increased by an additional $6.5 billion .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , in march 2012 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ( usd , at&l ) approved a materiel development decision for ampv and authorized the army's entry into the materiel solution analysis phase .

the army completed the ampv analysis of alternatives ( aoa ) in july 2012 and proposed a nondevelopmental vehicle ( the candidate vehicle will be either an existing vehicle or a modified existing vehicle — not a vehicle that is specially designed and not in current service ) .

because the ampv is to be a nondevelopmental vehicle , dod decided the program would start at milestone b , engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase and skip the milestone a , technology development phase .

the army planned for a full and open competition and aimed to award one industry bidder a 42-month emd contract to develop all five ampv variants .

a draft request for proposal ( rfp ) released in march 2013 stated the emd contract would be worth $1.46 billion , including $388 million for 29 emd prototypes for testing between 2014 and 2017 and $1.08 billion for 289 low - rate initial production ( lrip ) models between 2018 and 2020 .

the army had planned on releasing the formal rfp in june 2013 but instead slipped the date until mid - september 2013 , citing a delayed defense acquisition board review attributed in part to department of defense civilian furloughs .

the emd contract award was originally planned for late 2014 .

the army planned for an average unit manufacturing cost ( aumc ) of $1.8 million per vehicle .

the fy2020 budget request includes research development , testing and evaluation ( rdt&e ) and procurement funding requests for the ampv in both the base and overseas contingency operations ( oco ) budgets , as well as fy2020 requested quantities .

the army notes that fy2020 oco funding will procure 66 ampvs to support u.s. european command's ( useucom's ) requirement for unit equipment sets to deter potential adversaries and support the european deterrence initiative ( edi ) .

as previously noted , the army's optimal solution would be to replace eab m - 113s with ampvs , but the army felt that given current and projected budgetary constraints , only selected eab units outside the continental united states and in south korea and europe would receive ampvs while the remainder would receive upgraded m - 113s as an interim solution .

reportedly , on may 21 , 2018 , the army indefinitely postponed its plans to upgrade eab m - 113s and also put on hold plans to issue an rfp for upgraded m - 113s .

reportedly in january 2019 , the army decided to cancel m - 113 at eab replacement efforts .

given the frequently changing nature of the army's plans for addressing the replacement of legacy m - 113s at eab and the decision to cancel m - 113 eab replacement , it is not unreasonable to question if the army has a clearly defined "way ahead" for addressing m - 113s at eab .

will the army simply "leave" m - 113s at eab and continue to maintain them , will they replaced by another vehicle , or is the army still trying to decide on a course of action and a program strategy ? .

dod's april 2017 ig report , while acknowledging effective management of the ampv program , also raised fundamental concerns about performance and design , as well as inaccurate procurement quantities , which could adversely impact program costs .

gao's 2018 concerns regarding cost growth , difficulties meeting a variety of developmental requirements , and dependencies on other programs that are experiencing developmental challenges suggest that programmatic issues continue .

dot&e's 2018 findings noted a number of performance concerns as well .

given these concerns , a more in - depth examination of identified ampv program deficiencies might prove beneficial for dod and policymakers alike .

as previously noted , on march 13 , 2019 , army leadership reportedly announced the army had decided to cut funding over the next five years for 93 programs — including the ampv — to increase available funding for its new modernization strategy .

while the army is not expected to change its overall ampv top - line requirement , it could slow the per - year procurement rate .

once the army has finalized its revised modernization plan , including program cuts , it could be beneficial to provide policymakers with a revised overall ampv procurement plan , as well as a new fielding plan for units — both active and reserves — designated to receive ampvs .

