electromagnetic spectrum , commonly referred to as radio frequency spectrum or wireless spectrum , refers to electromagnetic waves that , with applied technology , can transmit signals to deliver voice , text , and video communications .

electromagnetic waves include radio waves , microwaves , infrared radiation , visible light , ultraviolet light , x - rays , and gamma radiation .

the allocation and assignment of radio frequency spectrum are managed by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) for commercial and other nonfederal uses and by the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) for federal government use .

wireless broadband , with its rich array of services and content , requires new spectrum capacity to accommodate growth .

spectrum capacity is necessary to deliver high speed , high quality communications to consumers and businesses and also to support the communications needs of industries that use spectrum - dependent technologies .

although radio frequency spectrum is abundant , usable spectrum is currently limited by the constraints of applied technology .

spectrum policy therefore requires making decisions about how radio frequencies will be allocated and who will have access to them .

current spectrum policy is based on managing channels of radio frequencies to avoid interference .

the fcc , over many years , has developed and refined a system of exclusive licenses for users of specific frequencies .

auctions are a market - driven solution to assigning licenses to use specific frequencies and are a recent innovation in spectrum management and policy .

previously , the fcc granted licenses using a process known as "comparative hearings" ( also known as "beauty contests" ) , and has used lotteries to distribute spectrum licenses .

the fcc also allocates spectrum for designated purposes , such as wi - fi , without assigning a license to a specific owner ( unlicensed spectrum ) .

for purposes of allocation and assignment , spectrum is segmented into bands of radio frequencies measured in cycles per second , or hertz .

standard abbreviations for measuring frequencies include khz — kilohertz or thousands of hertz ; mhz — megahertz , or millions of hertz ; and ghz — gigahertz , or billions of hertz .

the designation can refer to an entire band , such as the 700 mhz band , or to specific frequencies within a band .

most licenses are issued on a geographic basis , serving a specific area ( license coverage ) .

more than one license , therefore , is likely to have the same frequency designation .

technology for commercial mobile services generally is designed to operate most efficiently on frequencies below 3 ghz , although the ceiling has moved higher as technology has changed , so that frequencies through 5 ghz are now considered desirable for commercial network deployment .

similarly , the bandwidth of assigned frequencies is increasing .

with new technology , wider bandwidths have been shown to reduce interference and mitigate other problems hampering the efficient use of spectrum .

the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) was signed into law on february 22 , 2012 .

many of the provisions in title vi of the act focus on spectrum assignment within the existing regulatory framework , in which licenses for designated radio frequencies are awarded through competitive bidding systems ( auctions ) .

specific provisions of title vi ( frequently referred to as the public safety and spectrum act , or spectrum act ) include expediting auctions of licenses for spectrum designated for mobile broadband ; authorizing incentive auctions , which would permit television broadcasters to receive compensation for steps they might take to release some of their airwaves for mobile broadband ; requiring that specified federal holdings be auctioned or reassigned for commercial use ; and providing for the availability of spectrum for unlicensed use .

major provisions in the spectrum act that are summarized in this report cover deficit reduction ; directed auctions ; incentive auctions for television broadcasters ; reallocation of spectrum from federal to commercial use ; and unlicensed spectrum .

other provisions in the act , not covered in this report , include simplifying the approval of zoning requests for modification of cell towers at the state and local level and putting in place measures to facilitate antenna placement on federal property .

the act also provides for the establishment of a new authority to plan and develop a nationwide public safety broadband network ( firstnet ) and other measures in support of improved emergency communications .

implementation of the spectrum act raises a number of policy issues such as how to structure incentive auctions and how best to utilize spectrum assigned for federal use .

inherent to these debates is the question of how to provide access to spectrum on a competitive basis .

actions taken by the fcc that are intended to improve competitive access to spectrum include modifying fcc auction rules to provide licenses with smaller area coverage ; encouraging participation by designated entities ; and establishing limitations on the number of licenses available to verizon or at&t .

spectrum caps might limit the amount of spectrum available through auction to the top two carriers in key auctions such as those for repurposed television spectrum .

the spectrum act employs three key policy tools for increasing the availability of radio frequency spectrum for wireless broadband: allocating additional spectrum ; reassigning spectrum to new users ; and opening up spectrum for unlicensed use .

other policy options that may be employed to increase spectrum capacity include requiring that wireless network infrastructure be shared ; changing the cost structure of spectrum access ; moving to more spectrum - efficient technologies ; and sharing spectrum .

facilitating the adoption of new wireless technologies that enable spectrum sharing is emerging as a major policy consideration for spectrum management .

policies to auction licenses for exclusive use of spectrum still appear to prevail in spectrum management planning .

however , a number of new spectrum - dependent industries are emerging that do not seem well served by current policies .

these industries include much of the internet of things , such as advanced robotics , autonomous vehicles , cloud computing , and machine - to - machine communications .

spectrum resources are also needed , for example , for smart grid communications , railroad safety , water conservation , the safe maintenance of critical infrastructure industries , and for many other applications that may not have an immediate commercial value but can provide long - lasting value to society as a whole .

actions taken by the 114 th congress regarding spectrum policy include the introduction of the wireless innovation act of 2015 ( s. 1618 , senator rubio ) that , among other provisions , would require the ntia to identify for release 200 mhz of federal spectrum below 5 ghz .

the spectrum would be reallocated for commercial use according to guidelines provided in the act , notably: 120 mhz below 3.7 ghz shall be for exclusive - use , commercial licenses ; no more than 20 mhz may be allocated for unlicensed use ; and not more than 40 mhz may be shared with federal installations .

activity regarding the internet of things , in addition to several hearings , includes resolutions calling for a national strategy for the internet of things .

in march , s.res .

110 was agreed to by unanimous consent in the senate .

a similar resolution , h.res .

195 , was introduced in the house in april .

