the columbia river treaty ( crt , or treaty ) , signed in 1961 , is an international agreement between the united states and canada for the cooperative development and operation of the water resources of the columbia river basin for the benefit of flood control and power .

precipitated by several flooding events in the basin ( including a major flood in the northwest in 1948 ) , the crt was the result of more than 20 years of negotiations seeking a joint resolution to address flooding and plan for development of the basin's water resources .

the treaty provided for 15.5 million acre - feet of additional storage in canada through the construction of four dams ( three in canada , one in the united states ) .

this storage , along with agreed - upon operating plans , provides flood control , hydropower , and other downstream benefits .

in exchange for these benefits , the united states agreed to provide canada with lump - sum cash payments and a portion of hydropower benefits , known as the "canadian entitlement. .

implementation of the crt began in 1964 .

the treaty has no specific end date , and most of its provisions would continue indefinitely without action by the u.s. or canadian entities .

however , beginning in september 2024 , either nation can terminate most provisions of the treaty with a minimum of 10 years' written notice ( i.e. , notice could have been provided as early as 2014 ) .

the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the bonneville power administration ( bpa ) , in their designated role as the "u.s .

entity," undertook a review of the treaty beginning in 2011 .

based on studies and additional stakeholder input , the u.s .

entity made its recommendation to the u.s. department of state in december 2013 .

if the treaty is not terminated or modified , most of its current provisions would continue , with the notable exception of flood control operations , which are scheduled to end in 2024 and transition to "called - upon" operations .

perspectives on the crt and its review vary .

some believe that the treaty should continue but be altered to include , for example , guarantees related to tribal resources and fisheries flows that were not included in the original treaty .

others believe that the canadian entitlement should be adjusted to more equitably share actual hydropower benefits , or even be eliminated entirely .

for its part , canada has stated that without the canadian entitlement ( or with alterations that would decrease its share of these revenues ) , it sees no reason for the treaty to continue .

the final regional recommendation to the department of state , coordinated by the u.s .

entity , was to continue the treaty post - 2024 , but with modifications .

the state department has since finalized its proposed negotiating parameters , although they are not available to the public .

the canadian recommendation , finalized in march 2013 , also favored continuing the treaty , but with modifications "within the treaty framework," some of which were considerably different than those recommended by the united states .

the executive branch , through the state department , is responsible for negotiations related to the crt .

however , the senate , through its constitutional role to provide advice and consent , has the power to approve , by a two - thirds vote , treaties negotiated by the executive branch .

changes to the crt may or may not trigger such a vote ; in any case , the senate may choose to review any changes to the crt .

in addition , both houses of congress may choose to weigh in on treaty review activities by the u.s .

entity through their respective oversight powers .

this report provides a brief overview of the columbia river treaty review .

it includes background on the history of the basin and consideration of the treaty , as well as a brief summary of studies and analyses of the columbia river treaty review process to date .

the columbia river is the predominant river in the pacific northwest and is one of the largest in the united states in terms of volume flowing to the ocean .

the columbia river basin receives water that drains from approximately 259,500 square miles in the northwestern united states and southwestern canada , including parts of british columbia in canada , and four u.s. states: montana , idaho , oregon , and washington .

the basin is unique among large river basins in the united states because of its high annual runoff , limited amount of storage ( in the u.s. portion of the basin ) , and extreme variation in flow levels .

the basin has the second - largest runoff in the united states in terms of average flows ( 275,000 cubic feet per second ) , and approximately 60% of this runoff occurs in may , june , and july .

while only about 15% of the river basin's surface area is in canada , the canadian portion of the basin accounts for a considerably larger share of the basin's average annual runoff volume .

the columbia river is the largest hydropower - producing river system in the united states .

federal development of the river's hydropower capacity dates to 1932 , when the federal government initiated construction of dams of the columbia river and its tributaries .

in total , 31 federal dams within the columbia river basin are owned and operated by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the u.s. bureau of reclamation ( part of the department of the interior ) , and additional dams are owned by nonfederal entities .

power from federal dams on the columbia river and its tributaries ( collectively known as the federal columbia river power system , fcrps ) is marketed by the bonneville power administration ( bpa ) , part of the department of energy .

other than the largest of these facilities , grand coulee ( which has some storage capacity ) , most of these facilities on the main stem of the river in the united states have limited reservoir storage and are managed as "run of the river" for hydropower , flood control , and navigation .

figure 1 , below , provides an overview of the basin , including dam ownership .

figure 2 shows the relative storage capacity of these dams .

the basin is also important habitat for a number of fish species .

economically important species in the region include steelhead trout ; chinook , coho , chum , and sockeye salmon ; and other species .

these fish are important to commercial and sport anglers as well as native american tribes in the region .

the basin also provides habitat for several threatened and endangered species listed under the endangered species act ( esa , 16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1543 ) ; requirements under this law are an important factor in the operation of the fcrps .

other major uses of the basin's waters include navigation , irrigation , recreation , and water supply .

four federal dams on the river's mainstem have navigation locks which allow for barge traffic to transport bulk commodities that are important to regional and national economies .

due to this infrastructure , the columbia river is navigable up to 465 miles upstream from the pacific ocean .

six percent of the basin's water is diverted for irrigated agriculture , and is particularly important in eastern washington , northeastern oregon , and southern idaho .

basin waters are also diverted for other water supply purposes , and the rivers and reservoirs of the basin are important for recreational users .

all of these users have an interest in management of basin water supplies .

the negotiation and ratification of the crt were precipitated by several events in the basin .

most notably , a major flood event in the northwest in 1948 , the vanport flood , caused significant damage throughout the basin and served as the impetus for negotiations between the united states and canada , including studies by the international joint commission ( ijc ) .

initially , following the flood , the united states had proposed in 1951 to build libby dam in montana ( which would flood 42 miles into canada ) .

canada was opposed to this solution , and as a response proposed to divert as much as 15.5 million acre feet from the columbia river for its own purposes .

based on a number of technical studies , the ijc recommended a compromise , which included development of upriver storage in canada to help regulate flows on the columbia river , including those for flood control and hydropower generation .

the crt was signed in 1961 but was not fully ratified by both countries ( and therefore did not go into effect ) until 1964 .

implementation of the treaty occurs through the u.s .

entity ( bpa and the northwestern division of the corps , jointly ) and the canadian entity ( the british columbia hydro and power authority , or bc hydro ) .

the treaty provided for the construction of 15.5 million acre - feet ( maf ) of additional storage in canada through the construction of three dams: duncan ( completed in 1968 ) , hugh keenleyside , or arrow ( completed in 1969 ) , and mica ( completed in 1973 ) .

construction of libby dam in montana , whose reservoir backs 42 miles into canada , was completed in 1973 .

together , the four dams more than doubled the amount of reservoir storage available in the basin before construction began , providing for significant new flood protection and power benefits throughout the basin ( see figure 2 ) .

the crt also required that the united states and canada prepare an "assured operating plan" ( to meet flood control and power objectives ) for the operation of canadian storage six years in advance of each operating year .

along with "detailed operating plans," which may also be developed to produce more advantageous results for both u.s. and canadian operating entities , these plans govern project operations under the treaty .

under the crt , the united states gained operational benefits in the form of flexible storage and reliable operations in canada that provide for flood control and hydropower generation .

in exchange , canada ( through the canadian entity ) receives lump - sum payments from the united states for flood control benefits through 2024 , as well as a portion of annual hydropower benefits from the operation of canadian treaty storage .

in exchange for the assured use of 8.45 maf annually of canadian storage , the united states paid $64.4 million to canada for flood control benefits as the three canadian dams became operational .

under the crt , canada is also entitled to half of the estimated increase in downstream hydropower generated at u.s. dams .

canada initially sold this electricity ( known as the "canadian entitlement" ) to a consortium of u.s. utilities for $254 million over a 30-year term ( 1973-2003 ) .

currently , the united states delivers the canadian entitlement directly to canada through bpa's northern intertie .

the value of the canadian entitlement has been estimated by the u.s .

entity to be worth between $229 million and $335 million annually , depending on a number of assumptions .

several notable changes to columbia river operations , since ratification of the crt , factor into current negotiations .

most notably , declining populations of salmon and steelhead in the columbia and snake rivers led to listings under the endangered species act ( esa , 16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1543 ) beginning in 1991 .

these listings have resulted in steps to improve salmon and steelhead habitat in the united states , including operational changes ( eg , augmented spring and summer flows ) and mitigation actions ( eg , construction of fish passage facilities ) .

for more information on these listings and related federal actions , see crs report r40169 , endangered species act litigation regarding columbia basin salmon and steelhead , by stephen p. mulligan and harold f. upton .

the crt has no specific end date , and most of its provisions , except those related to flood control operations , would continue indefinitely without action by the united states or canada .

however , beginning in september 2024 , either nation can terminate most provisions of the treaty with a minimum of 10 years' written notice ( i.e. , notice could have been given as early as 2014 ) .

the corps and the bpa , in their role as the u.s .

entity , undertook a review of the treaty and delivered a final recommendation to the department of state in december 2013 .

if the treaty is not terminated or modified , most of its provisions would continue , with the notable exception of flood control operations .

assured annual flood control operations under the treaty are scheduled to end in 2024 , independent of a decision on treaty termination .

flood control provided by the canadian projects is expected to transition to "called - upon" operations at this time .

under called - upon operations , the united states would be allowed to request alterations to canadian operations as necessary for flood control , and canada would be responsible for making these changes .

in exchange , the united states would pay for operating costs and economic losses in canada due to the changed operation .

various perspectives on the columbia river treaty and the review process have been represented in studies , meetings , and other public forums that have been conducted since treaty review began .

the regional recommendation represents the views of the u.s .

entity and the srt , as well as many of the stakeholders who have weighed in through meetings and the public comment process .

however , the regional recommendation does not represent the final u.s. approach to treaty review .

the executive branch , through the state department , will handle those negotiations .

to date , the primary canadian perspectives provided on treaty review have been centrally coordinated by the british columbia ( bc ) provincial government , and bc announced its own decision on march 13 , 2014 .

bc recommends continuing the treaty , but seeking modifications within the existing framework .

a summary of the perspectives of the u.s .

entity , u.s. stakeholders , and bc is provided below .

the president , through the national security council , determines the negotiating position on the crt , and the state department is responsible for conducting negotiations related to the treaty .

however , congress is also involved in this process .

the constitution gives the senate the power to approve , by a two - thirds vote , treaties negotiated by the executive branch .

the senate does not ratify treaties ; instead it takes up a resolution of ratification , by which the senate may formally provide its advice and consent on the ratification process .

the senate is not required to provide an up or down vote on a resolution of ratification , nor are treaties required to be resubmitted after each congress .

in the case of the crt , as the treaty has been previously negotiated and ratified , the senate would take up a resolution of ratification if the united states and canada agree to treaty modifications and the executive branch submits the modification to the senate for review ( if the treaty is continued without modification or terminated , there would be no advice and consent role unless there was a new treaty that needs to be ratified ) .

both the house and the senate have also weighed in on treaty review in their oversight capacities .

additionally , the northwest delegation ( including all 26 lawmakers representing idaho , montana , oregon , and washington ) sent letters to president obama in 2014 and 2015 expressing concerns with the perceived slow pace of the interagency policy committee review process .

in april 2015 , lawmakers expressed a collective desire to finalize an administration position and begin negotiations with canada in 2015 .

on june 21 , 2017 , a bipartisan group of seven house members from washington and oregon wrote to president trump requesting prompt commencement of crt negotiations .

