the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) , requires that all core subject - matter teachers be highly qualified .

esea section 9101 ( 23 ) defines highly qualified as a teacher who has obtained a bachelor's degree , possesses full state certification , and demonstrated subject - matter knowledge .

this credentials - based approach has been the cornerstone of federal teacher policy for over a decade and has been criticized for setting a modest bar by using requirements for entry into the profession as a proxy for teacher quality rather than instituting performance goals to which teachers may aspire .

a growing body of research has revealed such credentials to be weakly correlated with student achievement and has led some to recast "teacher quality" in terms of student progress .

meanwhile , congressional interest in teacher policy has shifted from a focus on inputs ( i.e. , quality ) to outputs ( i.e. , effectiveness ) .

each congress since the 109 th has expanded the federal role with regard to rewarding teacher effectiveness and providing incentives for the reform of state and local teacher evaluation systems .

the 113 th congress has continued this trend by moving legislation to reauthorize the esea and including provisions that support these reforms .

still , considerable disagreement exists among members of congress over the extent to which the federal government should mandate , encourage , or be involved in teacher evaluation reform .

teacher evaluation is largely the responsibility of local school administrators working within broad rules set by state law and collective bargaining agreements .

these rules generally identify the procedures and circumstances under which a teacher may be dismissed for poor performance and have little to do with conducting teacher evaluation .

for example , state laws typically provide that a tenured teacher may not be dismissed without "just cause" — the standard which "has come to require evidence of a teacher's insubordination , incompetence , or immorality. .

in many states , requirements like these mark the limited role state policymakers have historically played in delineating k - 12 teacher evaluation systems .

until recently , only a handful of states had implemented statewide teacher evaluation policies .

the national center on teacher quality ( nctq ) has conducted annual reviews of state laws , rules , and regulations that govern the teaching profession since 2007 .

in that year , nctq found that 34 states either had no statewide teacher evaluation policy or provided minimal guidance to school leaders on how evaluations should be conducted .

the absence of state - level guidance , combined with the great complexity of measuring job performance and the high cost of dismissing a poor performing teacher , has led to what some have called the "widget effect" — that is , "the tendency of school districts to assume classroom effectiveness is the same from teacher to teacher. .

this view does not necessarily imply that school leadership shares this assumption , but rather suggests institutional limitations hinder sensitivity to assessing variation in teacher effectiveness .

within these limitations , evaluation systems have evolved in which virtually every teacher receives a "satisfactory" rating .

in a case study of 12 districts , 1% of teachers received an "unsatisfactory" rating whether the rating system was binary or involved more than two categories .

this finding is supported by data representing schools nationwide .

until recently , federal policy had been silent on the issue of teacher effectiveness ( i.e. , evaluating their performance in the classroom ) .

instead , the federal role in k - 12 teacher policy has historically been limited to issues of quality and quantity ( i.e. , workforce qualifications and supply ) .

nclb's highly qualified teacher requirement was intended to raise quality by limiting the number of teachers with emergency , temporary , or provisional licenses .

prior to nclb , the largest investment in the federal teacher portfolio was class size reduction — a program designed to limit class size by providing schools with funds to hire more teachers .

additional federal incentives exist , such as the troops for teachers and student loan forgiveness programs , for hiring teachers in hard - to - staff schools .

the federal government's first foray into teacher effectiveness policy can be traced to enactment of the teacher incentive fund ( tif ) in 2006 .

that year , tif was appropriated $99 million to award competitive grants to about three dozen school districts to support pay - for - performance incentives for teachers .

although tif authority did not initially prescribe a teacher evaluation component ( as it has since 2009 ) , the underlying premise of the program has always been to reward effective teaching .

the tif program along with the federal role in teacher effectiveness was further expanded through the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

arra's race to the top ( rtt ) authority outlines five major elements of an approved teacher evaluation system .

these same five elements ( described below ) are also required by the secretary's esea waiver package .

according to nctq , between 2009 and 2012 , a "sea change" occurred in state teacher evaluation reform with 36 states making changes to their policies .

table 1 displays the major reforms that took place during this time .

in 2009 , 14 states required that all teachers be evaluated annually and by 2012 the number had risen to 23 states .

in 2009 , 15 states required that student achievement be factored into teacher performance and 30 states required classroom observation be included in teacher evaluation compared to 30 and 39 states , respectively , in 2012 .

when nctq first began collecting information on performance levels in 2011 , 17 states required that evaluation systems differentiate teachers on multiple performance ratings ( i.e. , more than two ) ; this number grew to 25 states in a single year .

finally , in 2009 , no state required that teacher evaluation results be used to make tenure decisions ; whereas in 2012 , nine states had adopted this policy .

both the 112 th and 113 th congresses acted on bills to reauthorize the esea that included teacher evaluation provisions .

during the 112 th congress , the house committee on education and workforce reported the encouraging innovation and effective teachers act ( h.r .

3990 ) , which would have required school districts to develop and implement teacher evaluation systems that met guidelines similar to the five requirements in current federal policy ( discussed above ) .

meanwhile the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions reported the elementary and secondary education reauthorization act ( s. 3578 ) , which would have made similar teacher evaluation reforms optional .

neither of these bills received floor debate .

in the 113 th congress , both committees again reported esea reauthorization bills containing provisions on teacher evaluation .

this time , the house bill ( h.r .

5 , the student success act ) would make teacher evaluation reforms optional and the senate bill ( s. 1094 , the strengthening america's schools act ) would make teacher evaluation reforms mandatory .

these reforms may ( in the case of h.r .

5 ) or must ( in the case of s. 1094 ) meet guidelines similar to the five requirements for teacher evaluation in current federal policy ( discussed above ) .

on july 19 , 2013 , the house passed h.r .

5 and referred the measure to the senate .

s. 1094 has not received floor debate .

although there is general congressional interest in teacher evaluation reform , strong disagreement exists over whether these changes should be mandated or simply supported by the federal government .

moreover , some argue that no federal role is appropriate in this matter .

among those who think there is some appropriate federal role , there remain several areas of dispute .

some of these issues are discussed here .

how much weight should student learning have in teacher evaluation ? .

the teacher incentive fund , race to the top , and the esea waiver package all require that teacher evaluations be based "in significant part" on evidence of improved student academic achievement and growth ( both s. 1094 and h.r .

5 also use this phrase ) .

although states and school districts have flexibility around how to incorporate student learning , some serious implementation challenges likely exist — particularly regarding measurement in non - tested grades and subjects .

it is unclear whether these challenges are best addressed by "letting a thousand flowers bloom" at the local level or through guidance and / or support at a federal or national level .

which staffing decisions should be tied to teacher evaluation outcomes ? .

recently , a handful of states have newly required that teachers demonstrate positive performance in order to receive and retain tenure .

states and school districts have also instituted performance pay , with and without tif support .

some assert that evaluation reforms are too nascent for such high - stakes decisions and argue that evaluation results are better suited to provide feedback to teachers and inform professional development .

others argue that basing such high - stakes decisions on teacher performance can be a needed catalyst for wider systemic reform .

should evaluation reform include school leadership ? .

in some ways , current school - level accountability provisions have laid the groundwork for principal evaluation reform .

turnaround models for low - achieving schools included in the esea waiver package may involve removing poorly performing principals .

as the individual who may be most responsible for school - wide success , principal performance may be synonymous with school performance .

moreover , so - called value - added models , which face large implementation barriers and methodological challenges with regard to individual teacher performance , may be better suited when applied to school - wide ( or principal ) performance .

should federal funds be provided to support the development of evaluation systems and evaluator training ? .

several educational organizations have been contracting with states and school districts in this capacity for some time .

federal endorsement of such partnerships might be an efficient and effective way to promote reform .

what , if any , role should teacher evaluation systems play in the accountability of teacher preparation programs ? .

some argue that the success of these programs should be judged on the extent to which their graduates contribute to student academic achievement .

as evaluation reform may build data linkages between student learning and teacher performance , in turn teacher evaluation could be linked to preparation program performance .

on the other hand , building such data systems across numerous school systems and educational levels may not be simple or inexpensive and possibly may not be feasible .

should current federal requirements for the equitable distribution of teacher quality include an effectiveness component ? .

nclb requires that states "ensure that poor and minority children are not taught at higher rates than other children by inexperienced , unqualified , or out - of - field teachers. .

if credential - based teacher quality measures are replaced with performance - based measures , perhaps equity provisions should be amended similarly .

