energy tax policy involves the use of one of the government's main fiscal instruments , taxes ( both as an incentive and as a disincentive ) to alter the allocation or configuration of energy resources and their use .

in theory , energy taxes and subsidies , like tax policy instruments in general , are intended either to correct a problem or distortion in the energy markets or to achieve some economic ( efficiency , equity , or macroeconomic ) objective .

in practice , however , energy tax policy in the united states is made in a political setting , determined by fiscal dictates and the views and interests of the key players in this setting , including policymakers , special interest groups , and academic scholars .

as a result , enacted tax policy embodies compromises between economic and political goals , which could either mitigate or compound existing distortions .

u.s energy tax policy as it presently stands aims to address concerns regarding the environment as well as those surrounding energy security .

incentives promoting renewable energy production , energy efficiency and conservation , and alternative technology vehicles address both environmental and energy security concerns .

tax incentives for the domestic production of fossil fuels also promote energy security by attempting to reduce the nation's reliance on imported energy sources .

the idea of applying tax policy instruments to energy markets is not new .

until the 1970s , however , energy tax policy had been little used , except to promote domestic fossil fuel production .

recurrent energy - related problems since the 1970s — oil embargoes , oil price and supply shocks , wide petroleum price variations and price spikes , large geographical price disparities , tight energy supplies , and rising oil import dependence , as well as increased concern for the environment — have caused policymakers to look toward energy taxes and subsidies with greater frequency .

the direction of u.s. energy tax policy has changed several times since the 1970s .

during the 114 th congress , energy tax policy appears to be designed to encourage energy efficiency and renewable energy production while continuing to promote u.s. energy security .

several expired energy tax incentives were extended through 2016 as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

tax incentives for wind and solar were given longer - term extensions coupled with phaseouts .

absent further legislative action in the 114 th congress , several energy - related tax provisions will expire at the end of 2016 .

the president's fy2017 budget proposed a number of changes to energy tax policy .

specifically , the obama administration has proposed repealing a number of existing tax incentives for fossil fuels , while providing new or expanded incentives for carbon sequestration , alternative and advanced technology vehicles , renewable electricity , energy efficiency , and advanced energy manufacturing .

similar proposals appeared in past obama administration budgets .

the fy2017 budget also proposes imposing a per - barrel fee on oil .

the economic rationale for interventions in energy markets helps inform the debate surrounding energy tax policy .

this report begins by providing background on the economic rationale for energy market interventions , highlighting various market failures .

after identifying possible market failures in the production and consumption of energy , possible interventions are discussed .

the report concludes with an analysis of the current status of energy tax policy .

the appendix of this report provides a brief summary of energy tax legislation from the 108 th through 113 th congresses that has shaped current energy tax policy .

the primary goal of taxes in the u.s. economy is to raise revenues .

there are times , however , when tax policy can be used to achieve other goals .

these include the use of tax policy as an economic stimulus or to achieve social objectives .

tax policy can also be used to correct for market failures ( for example , the under - or over - supply of a good ) , which without intervention result in market inefficiencies .

there are a number of market failures surrounding the production and consumption of energy .

tax policy , as it relates to energy , can be used to address these market failures .

current u.s. energy tax policy is a combination of long - standing provisions and relatively new incentives .

energy - related tax incentives also support both energy production and consumption .

provisions supporting the oil and gas sector reflect desires for domestic energy production and energy security , long - standing cornerstones of u.s. energy policy .

incentives for renewable energy reflect the desire to have a diverse energy supply , also consistent with a desire for domestic energy security .

incentives for energy efficiency are designed to reduce consumption of energy from all energy sources .

incentives for renewable energy , energy efficiency , and alternative technology vehicles reflect environmental concerns related to the production and consumption of energy using fossil - based resources .

table 1 contains a current list of energy - related tax expenditures and other energy tax provisions .

several expired energy tax incentives were extended as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

most energy - related provisions were extended for two years , through the end of 2016 .

incentives for wind and solar were given longer - term extensions , with credits scheduled to phase out over a multi - year period in the future .

one issue is whether energy - related tax incentives currently scheduled to expire at the end of 2016 will be further extended .

this question has been of particular interest with respect to the ptc and itc , where wind and solar were awarded longer - term extensions , while other technologies face a 2016 expiration .

recent obama administration budget proposals have included a number of energy tax policy changes , which may or may not be considered by congress .

the president's fy2017 budget's energy - tax proposals are summarized below .

several energy - related tax provisions are scheduled to expire at the end of 2016 .

many of the provisions scheduled to expire at the end of 2016 had expired at the end of 2014 , before being retroactively extended for two years , through 2016 , by the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act of 2015 .

the path act was enacted as division q of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

table 2 lists the energy - related tax provisions scheduled to expire at the end of 2016 , notes whether the provision was extended in the path act , and the cost of that extension .

note that the path act extended all expired energy tax provisions .

thus , certain energy - related tax provisions scheduled to expire in 2016 had not expired in 2014 .

these provisions are noted in table 2 as provisions that were not extended by the path act .

there were a number of other energy tax policy changes in p.l .

114-113 .

specifically , division p of the law provided longer - term extensions with scheduled phaseouts of tax credits for wind and solar .

specifically , the renewable electricity ptc was extended through 2019 , with the phaseout starting for facilities beginning construction in 2017 .

the 30% itc for business solar was extended through 2019 and the deadline changed from a placed - in - service deadline to a construction start date .

the business solar itc was set to be 26% for facilities beginning construction in 2020 , and 22% for facilities beginning construction in 2021 , so long as these facilities are placed in service before the end of 2023 .

the business solar itc is scheduled to return to 10% in 2022 .

the tax credit for residential solar was extended through 2021 , with a phaseout starting in 2020 .

the president's fy2017 budget contained a number of energy - tax related proposals ( see table 3 ) .

specifically , the budget proposed to provide $41.5 billion in new or extended energy tax incentives between 2016 and 2026 .

nearly half of this cost is attributable to a permanent extension of the renewable ptc and itc , at a cost of $19.8 billion .

additionally , the president's budget proposed new tax credits for carbon sequestration , advanced technology and alternative fuel vehicles , and advanced energy manufacturing , and incentives for biofuels and energy - efficient buildings .

similar to previous years , the president's fy2017 budget proposed eliminating certain tax incentives that support fossil fuels , while also raising and adding new taxes on fossil fuels ( see table 3 ) .

eliminating certain provisions for oil , natural gas , and coal would raise an estimated $41.2 billion between 2016 and 2026 .

the president's fy2017 budget proposed to raise revenues to "support critical infrastructure and climate resiliency needs" through a new per - barrel fee on crude oil .

this fee would equal $10.25 per barrel , adjusted for inflation from 2016 , and be phased in over a five - year period beginning october 1 , 2016 .

the fee would apply to domestically produced and imported petroleum products , but not to exported petroleum products .

home heating oil would also be temporarily exempt .

the fee would raise an estimated $273.4 billion between 2016 and 2026 .

under the proposal , revenue from the fee would be used to fund infrastructure and transportation system upgrades , invest in cleaner transportation technologies , and to provide relief for households with "particularly heavy energy costs. .

the president's fy2017 budget also proposed to modify several other environmental taxes .

specifically , the budget proposed to ( 1 ) increase the oil spill liability trust fund ( osltf ) excise tax by one cent and expand the scope of the tax to include crudes produced from bituminous deposits and kerogen - rich rock ; ( 2 ) reinstate and extend the superfund excise taxes , including a 9.7-cents - per - barrel excise tax on domestic crude oil and imported petroleum products and a tax on hazardous chemicals and imported materials used in the manufacture of hazardous chemicals , at a rate ranging from 22 cents to $4.87 per ton ; and ( 3 ) reinstate the corporate environmental income tax , which would levy a 0.12% income tax on the amount by which corporate modified alternative minimum taxable income exceeds $2 million .

jct estimates that the proposed modifications to the osltf excise tax would raise $1.2 billion between 2016 and 2026 , with the superfund excise tax proposals raising $6.2 billion and the superfund environmental income tax raising $14.8 billion over the same budget window .

also included in the president's fy2017 budget proposal were several provisions that would affect the energy sector , but are not targeted specifically to energy .

for example , the president's fy2017 budget proposed to repeal last - in , first - out ( lifo ) inventory accounting methods .

repealing lifo would increase tax liability for firms holding inventories that are expected to increase in value over time ( eg , oil ) .

the president's fy2017 budget would also have modified the tax treatment of dual - capacity taxpayers , a proposal that would affect oil and gas companies operating abroad .

these provisions are not listed in table 3 .

as discussed above , the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act of 2015 , enacted as division q of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , extended energy tax provisions that had expired at the end of 2014 , for two years , through 2016 .

separately , division p of p.l .

114-113 provided a longer - term extension for wind and solar tax credits , with those tax credits scheduled to phase out ( the credit amounts gradually reduced ) over time .

division p of p.l .

114-113 also temporarily modified the section 199 deduction for independent refiners .

these tax policy changes were enacted alongside provisions that removed crude oil export restrictions .

the 114 th congress also passed legislation reauthorizing current law tax rates on motor fuels , which fund the highway trust fund ( htf ) and leaking underground storage tank ( lust ) trust fund ( the fixing america's surface transportation [fast] act [ p.l .

114-94 ] ) .

in addition to extending current law , the fast act changed the way excise taxes are levied on liquefied natural gas ( lng ) , liquefied petroleum gas ( propane ) , and compressed natural gas ( cng ) .

specifically , the legislation specifi ed that excise taxes on these fuels be levied on an "energy equivalent" as opposed to per gallon basis .

members of the 114 th congress have introduced various pieces of energy - tax - related legislation .

this section briefly reviews selected legislation and proposals .

on june 10 , 2016 , the house passed h.con.res .

89 , expressing the sense of congress that a carbon tax would be detrimental to the united states economy .

earlier in the 114 th congress , s.con.res .

1 was introduced to express the sense of congress that a carbon tax is not in the economic interest of the united states .

s.amdt .

350 to s.con.res .

11 , proposed and withdrawn on march 25 , 2015 , would have created a point of order against carbon tax or carbon fee legislation .

similar resolutions were introduced in the 113 th congress , as was legislation that sought to prohibit the secretary of the treasury or the environmental protection agency from implementing a carbon tax ( see h.r .

1486 in the 113 th congress ) .

legislation has been introduced in both the house and senate that would impose a tax or fee on carbon or greenhouse gas emissions .

in the house , h.r .

309 would impose a tax on co 2 emissions from highway fuels , with the idea that the tax on emissions would replace the current federal excise tax on fuels .

other legislation ( h.r .

972 ) would require emissions permits be purchased from the treasury , and impose a tax on persons failing to obtain such permits .

h.r .

1027 would take a "cap and dividend" approach to requiring emissions permits .

h.r .

2202 proposes an excise tax on greenhouse gas emissions , while h.r .

3104 proposes an excise tax on any taxable carbon substance .

the american opportunity carbon fee act of 2015 ( s. 1548 ) would assess fees on major sources of greenhouse gas emissions .

legislation in the 114 th congress proposes repealing various energy tax incentives , using revenues to reduce the corporate tax rate ( see the energy freedom and economic prosperity act [ h.r .

1001 ] ) .

legislation has also been proposed that would repeal a subset of energy tax expenditures , specifically those available to certain oil and gas companies ( eg , the close big oil tax loopholes act , s. 1907 ) .

in the house , similar provisions have also been included in legislation that would repeal the excise tax on medical devices ( h.r .

1533 ) .

other legislation has proposed repealing certain tax incentives for oil and gas while either temporarily extending ( h.r .

4040 ) or making permanent incentives for renewables ( h.r .

3733 ) .

there has also been congressional interest in ensuring that tar sands oil is subject to the oil spill liability trust fund ( osltf ) excise tax .

s.amdt .

123 to s. 1 ( the keystone xl pipeline act ) expressed the sense of the senate that all forms of unrefined and unprocessed petroleum should be subject to the osltf excise tax .

similar provisions were proposed as a revenue offset in the student loan affordability act ( s. 953 ) in the 113 th congress .

