an administrative agency may generally only exercise that authority which is provided to it by congress .

often , however , congressional delegations of authority are imprecise , and , as a result , agencies must construe ambiguous terms and make interpretive decisions in order to implement congress's delegation .

the supreme court , in chevron u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council , outlined a limited role for courts in reviewing these types of agency interpretations .

the chevron test , which has been cited and followed thousands of times by federal courts since 1984 , requires courts to enforce the clearly expressed intent of congress .

in the absence of such clarity , chevron instructs reviewing courts to defer to an agency's construction of an ambiguous statute if the agency's interpretation is reasonable .

under chevron then , it is generally left to federal agencies , and not the courts , to resolve ambiguities necessary to interpret and implement authority provided to the agency by congress .

this report will discuss the chevron decision ; explain when chevron deference applies ; highlight common agency statutory interpretations that generally do not receive deference under chevron ; and review the recent supreme court opinion in city of arlington v. fcc which clarified the applicability of chevron deference to circumstances in which an agency is interpreting the scope of its own jurisdiction .

the supreme court elucidated several reasons for favoring a restrained judicial role while granting deference to an agency interpretation of an ambiguous statute .

first , the court noted that when congress enacts an ambiguous statutory delegation , it has , in effect , delegated to the agency it has empowered the authority to clarify the ambiguity .

congress made a conscious choice in selecting a specific agency to implement the statutory delegation , and the courts , the supreme court reasoned , should respect congress's decision by granting the agency the ability to interpret the statute congress has charged it with administering .

moreover , the court noted that interpreting a statutory ambiguity is akin to making a policy decision on how to implement a statutory program .

agencies and legislators are best suited to balance applicable considerations and to resolve debates regarding competing , acceptable interpretations of an ambiguous delegation .

second , agencies have technical expertise in the field in which they are acting , and are therefore in a better position to make appropriate policy decisions as part of a large and complex regulatory scheme .

courts , on the other hand , lack such expertise .

in chevron , the court specifically acknowledged that "judges are not experts in the field," and thus "may not substitute [their] own construction of a statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation made by the administrator of an agency. .

finally , administrative agencies are politically accountable — though not directly — through the democratic process .

although courts are called to reconcile political preferences in certain circumstances , they should not do so when the power to implement the statute has been delegated to an administrative agency .

the court noted that an administration has the authority to implement its policy judgments through the permissible interpretation of a statute .

if the agency's , and by extension the administration's , permissible construction of a statute is undesirable , the electorate may have its voice heard through the democratic process .

the chevron two - step test can be summarized as follows: first , if congress has spoken clearly on an issue , the express words of the statute must be followed — the agency cannot deviate from the statutory text .

however , if the statute is ambiguous or silent , the court must determine whether the agency's construction of the statute is "permissible. .

this test is a deferential standard for judicial review .

a reviewing court shall not determine whether the agency's construction is the most obvious or the best interpretation of the statute in question , but , instead , must yield to the agency's construction if it is merely a "permissible" reading of the statute .

some scholars have noted that the significance of this decision cannot be underestimated , arguing that it created a "counter - marbury for the administrative state" because " chevron seemed to declare that in the face of ambiguity , it is emphatically the province and duty of the administrative department to say what the law is. .

in order to understand the broad implications of the chevron test , the following sections take a closer look at the application of the test as it has evolved since the chevron decision .

even if an agency interpretation does not qualify for deference under chevron , a reviewing court may still accord the agency construction of a statute significant weight pursuant to reasoning established in skidmore v. swift .

skidmore involved a claim by a group of employees for recovery of overtime pay under the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) .

the case turned on whether "waiting time" — or time that an employee spends on the employer's premises in the case of an emergency — constituted "working time" for purposes of the flsa .

the administrator of the department of labor wage and hour division had determined , through an interpretive bulletin and a series of informal rulings , that whether periods of inactivity constituted working time depended on "the degree to which the employee is free to engage in personal activities ... and the number of consecutive hours that the employee is subject to call ..." thus , the court was left with the question of "what , if any deference courts should pay to the administrator's conclusion ? .

the supreme court determined that these types of agency determinations had significant value .

while acknowledging that the administrator's determinations were neither conclusive nor binding , the court also noted that respect was due to agency policies that are "made in pursuance of official duty , based upon more specialized experience and broader investigations and information than is likely to come to a judge in a particular case. .

the court explained its holding as follows: we consider that the rulings , interpretations and opinions of the administrator under this act , while not controlling upon the courts by reason of their authority , do constitute a body of experience and informed judgment to which courts and litigants may properly resort for guidance .

the weight of such a judgment in a particular case will depend upon the thoroughness evident in its consideration , the validity of its reasoning , its consistency with earlier and later pronouncements , and all those factors which give it power to persuade , if lacking power to control .

the skidmore holding was grounded in a respect for agency expertise .

but skidmore deference does not require that a court simply defer to an agency's interpretive choice .

rather , the degree of deference accorded by a reviewing court directly correlates to the strength of the agency's reasoning .

under skidmore , evaluating the strength of an agency's interpretive choice involves an assessment of the "thoroughness," "validity," and "consistency" of the agency's decision making .

later in mead , the supreme court suggested that courts may also consider factors such as the "agency's care" and "formality" in reaching the interpretation , "consistency" with past interpretations , and the agency's "relative expertness. .

skidmore deference , then , represents a general acknowledgement by the courts that an agency's interpretive choice , due in large part to the agency's expertise , should be accorded respect by a reviewing court and may influence a court's review to the degree that the interpretation is well reasoned .

the deference received under skidmore , however , as opposed to that accorded under chevron , is clearly of a lesser degree .

