under federal law , corporations or most other legal entities may be criminally liable for the crimes of their employees and agents .

this is true in the case of regulatory offenses , like crimes in violation of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ; it is true in the case of economic offenses , like crimes in violation of the securities laws ; and it is true in the case of common law crimes , like keeping a house of prostitution in violation of the mann act .

ordinarily , the agents and employees who commit the crimes for which their principals and employers are liable also face prosecution and punishment .

individual criminal statutes , justice department policies , and the sentencing guidelines largely dictate the circumstances under which , and the extent to which , agents , employees , corporations , and similar unincorporated entities are prosecuted and punished .

this is a brief overview of federal law in the area .

it was said at common law that "a corporation cannot commit treason , or felony , or other crime , in its corporate capacity: though its members may , in their distinct individual capacities. .

that perception changed over time .

first , it was agreed that a corporation might be held criminally liable for its failure to honor certain legal obligations ( nonfeasance ) ; then for the inadequate manner in which it performed certain legal obligations ( malfeasance ) .

at the dawn of the 20 th century , the supreme court expressed a more sweeping view: it is true that there are some crimes which , in their nature , cannot be committed by corporations .

but there is a large class of offenses ... wherein the crime consists in purposely doing the things prohibited by statute .

in that class of crimes we see no good reason why corporations may not be held responsible for and charged with the knowledge and purposes of their agents , acting within the authority conferred upon them .

if it were not so , many offenses might go unpunished and acts be committed in violation of law where , as in the present case , the statute requires all persons , corporate or private , to refrain from certain practices , forbidden in the interest of public policy .

the court spoke of "crimes which in their nature , cannot be committed by corporations," but did not explain what specific crimes it had in mind .

when it spoke , it did so in the midst of a debate over whether a corporation could be held criminally liable not only for crimes of action and inaction ( malfeasance and nonfeasance ) of its agents but also for those crimes which required that their agents acted with a specific intent ( mens rea ) such as the intent to defraud ( "since a corporation has no soul , it cannot have actual wicked intent" ) .

the court pointed toward resolution of the issue , however , when it observed that the question turns on the nature of the crime and not the nature of the corporation ( "some crimes in their nature , cannot be committed by corporations" ) .

since , in the federal sphere , there is no crime but by act of congress , the question is one of statutory proscription and congressional intent .

most federal criminal statutes apply to "whoever," or to any "person" who violates their prohibitions .

although , in ordinary parlance , the word "person" usually refers to a human being , the law often gives it a broader meaning .

the dictionary act provides that "in determining the meaning of any act of congress , unless the context indicates otherwise ... the words 'person' or 'whoever' include corporations , companies , associations , firms , partnerships , societies , and joint stock companies , as well as individuals. .

the courts have used the dictionary act definition to give meaning to the words "person" or "whoever" in the context of a criminal statute .

federal statutes frequently provide individual definitions of the entities that fall within their proscriptions .

some are as terse as that of the racketeering statute , "'person' includes any individual or entity capable of holding a legal or beneficial interest in property. .

others , like the tax crime definition , are more detailed: when used in this title , where not otherwise distinctly expressed or manifestly incompatible with the intent thereof — ( 1 ) person. - the term "person" shall be construed to mean and include an individual , a trust , estate , partnership , association , company or corporation .

 ( 2 ) partnership and partner. - the term "partnership" includes a syndicate , group , pool , joint venture , or other unincorporated organization , through or by means of which any business , financial operation , or venture is carried on , and which is not , within the meaning of this title , a trust or estate or a corporation ; and the term "partner" includes a member in such a syndicate , group , pool , joint venture , or organization .

 ( 3 ) corporation. - the term "corporation" includes associations , joint - stock companies , and insurance companies .

still others have taken special care to mention governmental entities when listing those covered by their proscriptions .

the caution reflects judicial reluctance , absent explicit language , to conclude that congress intends to expose governmental entities to punitive measures .

in federal law , corporate criminal liability is ordinarily confined to offenses ( a ) committed by the corporation's officers , employees , or agents ; ( b ) within the scope of their employment ; and ( c ) at least in part for the benefit of the corporation .

the test for whether an activity falls within the individual's scope of authority is whether the individual engages in activities "on the corporation's behalf in performance of [his] general line of work.... those acts must be motivated , at least in part , by an intent to benefit the corporation. .

if the standard is met , the corporation will be liable notwithstanding the fact that it expressly directed its agent , employee , or officer not to commit the offense at issue .

under the model penal code and many state penal codes , corporate criminal liability may depend upon the misconduct of senior management officials ; the misconduct of lower level employees is not always enough even when they act within their scope of authority for the corporation's benefit .

as a general rule , "[c]orporations may be held liable for the specific intent offenses based on the 'knowledge and intent' of their employees. .

again , the rule extends only to those instances when the employee or agent acted , or acquired knowledge , within the scope of his or her employment , seeking , at least in part , to benefit the corporation .

the law is somewhat more uncertain when a corporation's liability turns not upon the knowledge or the intent of a single employee but upon cumulative actions or knowledge of several .

with rare exception , statutes which expose a corporation to criminal liability do not absolve the officers , employees , or agents whose violations are responsible for the corporation's plight .

from time to time , the courts have encountered the argument that an individual cannot be at once both the person who violates the statute and the personification of the corporation that violates the statute: "[w]hen the officer is acting solely for his corporation , the appellee contends that he is no longer a 'person' within the act .

the rationale for this distinction is that the activities of the officer , however illegal and culpable , are chargeable to the corporation as the principal but not to the individual who perpetrates them. .

to which the courts have responded , "no intent to exculpate a corporate officer who violates the law is to be imputed to congress without clear compulsion. .

conspiracy raises a slightly more difficult issue .

conspiracy is the agreement of two or more persons to commit some other federal crime .

although the courts have sometimes recognized an intracorporate defense in civil conspiracy cases , they have concluded that a corporation and each of the participating individuals may be liable for plots among two or more of the corporation's officers or employees .

on the other hand , a "corporate officer , acting alone on behalf of the corporation , [may] not be convicted of conspiring with the corporation. .

conspiracy also presents one of the three situations in which corporate officials and employees may face criminal liability under federal law even though they themselves did not commit , and perhaps did not even know of , the misconduct of other officers or employees .

thus , though an officer or employee has no direct hand in the matter , he is liable for foreseeable offenses committed by one of his co - conspirators in furtherance of their common scheme .

the second situation occurs when the official or employee either instructs another to commit a federal offense or aids and abets another in the commission of a federal offense , or takes some action after the fact to conceal the commission of a federal offense by another .

like conspiracy , liability for procuring or aiding and abetting the offense of another focuses on conduct committed before the commission of the underlying substantive offense: whoever commits an offense against the united states or aids , abets , counsels , commands , induces or procures its commission , is punishable as a principal .

 ( b ) whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed by him or another would be an offense against the united states , is punishable as a principal .

"in order to aid and abet another to commit a crime it is necessary that a defendant in some sort associate himself with the venture , that he participate in it as in something that he wishes to bring about , that he seek by his action to make it succeed. .

the officer or employee must know of the colleague's pending misconduct and by his action intend to facilitate it .

moreover , unlike conspiracy , which requires at least two individuals , even a sole stockholder may be guilty of aiding and abetting the crime of a corporation .

misprision and liability as an accessory after the fact focus on conduct committed after the commission of the underlying substantive offense .

misprision requires proof that the defendant knew of the commission of a federal felony by another , and that he not only failed to report the offense to authorities but affirmatively acted to conceal it .

an accessory after the fact charge requires proof that the defendant knew of the commission of a federal offense by another and assisted the other to avoid arrest , trial or punishment .

both statutes essentially create general obstruction of justice offenses .

consequently , the specific actions which offend their prohibitions will often constitute offenses under other more specific federal obstruction statutes .

the third instance of official liability triggered by the misconduct of others within the corporation requires no knowing participation , but instead occurs when a corporate official , responsible to do so , fails to prevent the commission of an offense .

this is the least common of the three .

it arises in the context of a regulatory scheme , crafted to ensure public welfare and capped with a criminal proscription which says nothing of the knowledge necessary for conviction .

two supreme court cases under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act first brought to prominence this so - called "responsible corporate official" doctrine .

the doctrine is triggered by legislation "of a now familiar type which dispenses with the conventional requirement of criminal conduct - awareness for some wrongdoing .

in the interest of the larger good it puts the burden of acting at hazard upon a person otherwise innocent but standing in responsible relation to a public danger. .

the legislation generally involves the regulation of "potentially harmful or injurious items. .

"in such situations," the courts "have reasoned that as long as a defendant knows that he is dealing with a dangerous device of a character that places him in responsible relation to a public danger , he should be alerted to the probability of strict regulation," and they have further "assumed that in such cases congress intended to place the burden on the defendant to 'ascertain at his peril whether his conduct comes within the inhibition of the statute.' .

thus , they "essentially have relied on the nature of the statute and the particular character of the items regulated to determine whether congressional silence concerning the mental element of the offense should be interpreted as dispensing with conventional mens rea requirements. .

in such a legislative setting , "the government establishes a prima facie case when it introduces evidence sufficient to warrant a finding by the trier of the facts that the defendant had , by reason of his position in the corporation , responsibility and authority either to prevent in the first instance , or promptly to correct , the violation complained of , and that he failed to do so. .

during a criminal investigation and throughout the course of criminal proceedings , corporations and other legal entities enjoy many , but not all , of the constitutional rights implicated in the criminal investigation or prosecution of an individual .

corporations cannot be incarcerated .

nor can they be put to death .

otherwise , corporations and individuals face many of the same consequences following conviction .

corporations can be fined .

they can be placed on probation .

they can be ordered to pay restitution .

their property can be confiscated .

they can be barred from engaging in various types of commercial activity .

corporations and individuals alike are sentenced in the shadow of the federal sentencing guidelines .

federal courts must begin the sentencing process for felonies or class a misdemeanors with a calculation of the sentencing ranges recommended by the sentencing guidelines .

when they impose sentence , they must consider the recommendation along with the factors prescribed in 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) .

appellate courts review the sentences imposed on an abuse of discretion standard and will overturn lower court sentences that are procedurally or substantively unreasonable .

a sentence is procedurally unreasonable when the sentencing court fails to correctly identify and apply the appropriate sentencing guidelines' recommended sentencing range .

a sentence is substantively unreasonable when it is unduly harsh or unduly lenient or otherwise inexpedient .

the sentencing guidelines for organizations measure punishment according to the seriousness of the offense as well as the defendant's culpability and history of misconduct .

on the other hand , they reward self - disclosure , cooperation , restitution , and preventive measures .

the guidelines supply special corporate sentencing directions for fines , probation , forfeiture , special assessments , and remedial sanctions .

the corporate fine guidelines begin with the premise that a totally corrupt corporation should be fined out of existence , if the statutory maximum permits .

a corporation operated for criminal purposes or by criminal means should be fined at a level sufficient to strip it of all of its assets .

on the other hand , a fine need not be imposed at all , if it would render full victim restitution impossible .

otherwise , corporations face different fine standards depending upon the offense of conviction .

in chapter 8c , the guidelines set specific standards for crimes with a commercial flavor — antitrust , smuggling , and gambling offenses , for instance .

the sentencing commission explicitly declined to promulgate special corporate fine standards for other offenses .

instead , corporate fines for such offenses are governed by two general statutory sentencing provisions .

one , §3571 , sets the permissible maximum amount for any fine .

the other , §3553 , outlines the sentencing factors and procedures applicable to both individuals and corporations .

the limited case law suggests that sentencing courts may disregard the guidelines completely in the case of a corporation convicted of one of these other offenses .

for the offense to which chapter 8c's fine provisions apply , a sentencing court must begin by deciding whether the defendant entity is able to pay a fine .

if so , the amount of an organization's fine is determined by the applicable offense level and the level of its culpability .

an organization's offense level is calculated in the same manner as an offense level for an individual but without the adjustments for things like vulnerability of the victim or role in the offense .

unless the amount of gain or loss associated with the offense is greater , the organization's base fine is pegged at one of 33 levels corresponding to its offense level — from $5,000 for an offense level of 6 or less to $72.5 million for an offense level of 38 or more .

the applicable fine range is then ascertained by multiplying the amount assigned to the offense level by minimum and maximum factors determined by the corporation's culpability score .

a corporation's score sheet begins at 5 .

points are added or subtracted to reflect greater or less culpability .

the lowest culpability score merits a range ascertained by multiplying the offense level amount by .05 ( setting the bottom of the range ) and 0.2 ( setting the top ) .

conversely , the highest culpability score merits a range ascertained by multiplying the offense level amount by 2.0 ( setting the bottom of the range ) and 4.0 ( setting the top ) .

the guidelines then identify 11 factors to be considered when deciding where within the applicable range a corporation ought to be fined .

the absence of an effective ethics and compliance program is perhaps the most distinctive factor on the list .

the guidelines also identify a number of circumstances that may require or argue for a fine outside of the recommended range .

first , the sentence imposed must conform to statutory requirements .

thus , applicable statutory maximums or minimums trump any conflicting guideline sentencing range boundaries .

second , the sentencing process may leave the corporation with the windfall from its misconduct .

consequently , the guidelines recommend that the fine level be set so as to disgorge any illegally gotten gains that would otherwise be left to a corporation after the payment of its fine , compliance with the restitution order , or other remedial costs .

on the other side , a fine below the recommended range should be imposed when necessary to permit restitution or may be below that range when the corporation will be unable to pay a higher fine even on an installment basis .

a below - range corporate fine may also be fitting in light of individual fines imposed upon the owners of a closely held corporation .

the guidelines supply several examples of when a fine outside the recommended range might be considered .

a fine above the range ( referred to as upward departures ) may be warranted when the offense resulted in a risk of death or serious bodily injury ; the offense constituted a threat to national security ; the offense presented a threat to the environment ; the offense presented a threat to the market ; the offense involved official corruption ; appropriate to offset reductions attributable to compliance programs ; and the corporation's culpability score exceeds the limit for additional multipliers .

departures below the range ( referred to as downward departures ) may be warranted when the corporation provides substantial assistance to authorities ; the corporation is a public entity , for example , a local governmental agency ; the corporation's beneficiaries ( other than stockholders ) are also victims of the offense ; and the corporation's remedial costs far exceed its gains from the misconduct .

corporations convicted of a federal crime must be placed on probation , if the court elects not to fine them .

if they are fined , the court may also sentence them to probation .

the court may impose a probationary term of no more than five years .

in the case of felony convictions , the term must be for at least one year .

the guidelines call for probation as a means of ensuring that convicted corporations comply with their obligations to pay a fine or special assessment , make restitution , establish a compliance program , perform community service , or comply with the court's remedial orders .

they also find probation appropriate when the organization committed the offense within five years of a prior similar conviction ; a senior corporate official involved in the offense within five years was involved in a prior similar offense ; necessary to reduce the risk of future criminal misconduct on the part of the corporation ; or necessary in order to comply with the sentencing directives of 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) , i.e. , the need to reflect the seriousness of the offense , promote respect for the law , and provide just punishment , afford adequate deterrence , protect the public , and effectively provide for offender training , care , and correctional treatment .

the only mandatory condition of corporate probation is a requirement that the corporation not engage in any further criminal conduct .

the array of discretionary probationary conditions under the guidelines includes requirements that the corporation publicize its conviction at its own expense ; establish and maintain a compliance program ; notify its employees and shareholders of its offense and compliance program ; notify or periodically report to the court or the probation service on its finances , compliance program , or involvement in government investigations or proceedings ; undergo periodic audits at its own expense ; or make periodic restitution or fine payments .

in addition , a sentencing court remains free to impose any probationary condition that is reasonably necessary and related to the considerations prescribed for sentencing generally under 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) , ( b ) ( 2 ) .

in response to a corporation's failure to comply with the conditions of its probation , a court may resentence the corporation , extend the term of its probationary period , or impose additional probationary conditions .

corporations are subject to a special assessment upon conviction at a rate of $400 for each felony count , $125 for class a misdemeanor count , $50 for each class b misdemeanor count , and $25 for each class c or infraction count .

depending on the nature of the offense , a court may be required to order a convicted corporation to pay victim restitution .

in other instances , it may do so as a matter of discretion .

in still others , the court may impose restitution as a condition of probation or pursuant to a plea bargain .

restitution is required when a defendant has been convicted of a crime of violence ; a crime against property including fraud ; maintaining a crack house ; tampering with consumer products ; theft of medical products ; sexual abuse ; child pornography ; domestic violence ; telemarketing fraud ; child support ; copyright and trademark infringement ; production of methamphetamines ; or human trafficking .

the court may order restitution when a corporation is convicted of any offense under title 18 of the u.s. code for which mandatory restitution is not required ; transportation of hazardous materials ; air transportation of hazardous materials ; air piracy ; interference with a flight crew ; or violations of the controlled substances act under 21 u.s.c .

841 ( possession with intent to distribute ) , 848 ( drug kingpin ) , 849 ( trafficking a truck stops or rest stops ) , 856 ( maintaining a crack house ) , 861 ( using children in drug operations ) , 863 ( drug paraphernalia ) .

in the absence of other specific authority , the court may order restitution as a condition of probation or pursuant to a plea bargain .

in related matter , corporate defendants convicted of fraud may be ordered to pay for victim notification .

the guidelines' effective compliance and ethics program features are perhaps its most well - known corporate component .

a corporation that lacks such a program is likely to have one imposed at sentencing or pursuant to a plea bargain .

as noted earlier , a corporation that has one is likely to fare better during the investigation , bargaining , and sentencing phases of a criminal case .

the guidelines envision programs that promote an ethical and law - abiding culture within a corporation and that are calculated to identify and prevent criminal misconduct within the corporation .

the elements of such a program consist of the following: 1 .

an established set of standards and procedures designed to detect and prevent criminal misconduct .

2 .

senior management involvement in the program including its day to day operations .

3 .

minimizing the operation participation of those previously ethically challenged .

4 .

training corporate employees and agents .

5 .

monitoring , auditing , and evaluating the program .

6 .

encourage and reward performance consistent with the program's goals ; discipline inconsistent conduct .

7 .

responding appropriately to the discovery of in - house criminal conduct .

the guidelines provide that a corporation may be sentenced to perform community service related to the harm caused by its offense as a probationary condition as long as the corporation has skills , facilities , or knowledge particularly suited to task .

otherwise , it suggests that fines or other monetary sanctions may be more appropriate and that service unrelated to harm caused by the offense is not consistent with the guideline .

the court may impose other probationary conditions that address the harm caused or to be caused by the corporation's crime , including in cases of substantial anticipated future harm the creation of a trust fund .

forfeiture , the confiscation of property as a consequence of its relation to a criminal offense , is a creature of statute .

some forfeiture statutes are remedial , some punitive , and some serve both purposes .

the guidelines confirm that the property of a corporation is no less subject to confiscation than the property of an individual .

