on december 16 , 2014 , the president signed into law the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act of fy2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , which included $3.066 billion for the department of housing and urban development's community development block grant ( cdbg ) program and a $500 million loan commitment ceiling for the cdbg section 108 loan guarantee program .

the cdf account administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) includes the community development block grants ( cdbg ) , and section 108 loan guarantees .

in addition , the cdf account has in the past included funding for section 4 capacity building grants and the administration's sustainable communities initiatives , as well as other initiatives in support of the formula - based cdbg program .

the cdbg program is the federal government's largest and most widely available source of financial assistance supporting state and local government - directed neighborhood revitalization , housing rehabilitation , and economic development activities .

these formula - based grants are allocated to approximately 1,183 entitlement communities ( metropolitan cities with populations of 50,000 , principal cities of metropolitan areas , and urban counties ) ; the 50 states ; puerto rico ; and the insular areas of american samoa , guam , the virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands .

grants are used to implement plans intended to address housing , community development , and economic development needs , as determined by local officials .

during the first weeks of the 113 th congress , the house and senate considered and passed h.r .

152 , a fy2013 disaster supplemental appropriations bill to support disaster relief and recovery activities for victims of hurricane sandy and other disasters occurring in 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 .

the measure , which was signed into law as p.l .

113-2 by the president on january 29 , 2013 , included $16 billion for hud , all allocated to the cdf , and subject to sequestration under the budget control act , as amended .

of the $16 billion appropriated for cdbg activities , p.l .

113-2 transferred $10 million to the office of the inspector general for oversight and auditing activities .

consistent with the administration's request , p.l .

113-2 included a $10 million set aside for salaries and expenses to be used to fund technical assistance and cover the costs incurred by hud's office of community planning and development ( ocpd ) in administering cdbg disaster funds .

the act allows hud to distribute cdbg disaster funds appropriated under the act to the most impacted and distressed areas affected by hurricane sandy and other eligible disaster events occurring during calendar years 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 .

p.l .

113-2 included several terms and conditions that vary from the rules governing the regular cdbg program .

these can be grouped into three broad areas governing the submission and content of disaster plans , allocation and use of funds , and waiver authority .

p.l .

113-2 : directed hud to promulgate regulations governing the distribution and use of funds within 45 days after passage of this act , including establishing minimum allocations for cdbg grantees ; required states and local government grantees to submit , and for hud to approve , disaster plans before cdbg disaster funds may be obligated ; required that a grantee's disaster plans articulate how proposed activities will support long - term recovery efforts ; required hud to certify that state and local government grantee disaster plans include adequate financial controls and procurement processes that would prevent duplication of benefits ; prevent waste , fraud , and abuse ; and encourage timely expenditure of funds ; and directed hud to allocate one - third of cdbg disaster appropriations provided in the bill to states and local government grantees within 60 days after passage of the bill .

p.l .

113-2 also established conditions and terms for the use of funds , including allowing grantees to use up to 5% of their cdbg disaster grant allocation for administrative expenses ; prohibiting grantees from contracting out the responsibility for administering the cdbg disaster programs ; requiring grantees to include performance requirements and penalties when eligible activities are undertaken through the use of contractors or procurement services ; prohibiting disaster funds from being used for activities that are reimbursable by , or made available by , fema or the army corps of engineers ; requiring grantees to maintain a publicly accessible website identifying how all grant funds are used , including information on contracting and procurement processes ; and holding harmless a state or community's regular cdbg allocation by ensuring that the amount of such funds awarded to grantees would not be affected by cdbg disaster - assistance allocations .

finally , p.l .

113-2 granted hud broad authority to waive or establish alternative program requirements , except for provisions governing fair labor standards , fair housing , civil rights , and environmental review .

however , p.l .

113-2 included two exceptions related to environmental review requirements .

specifically , it allowed cdbg disaster fund grantees who use their funding to meet certain fema matching requirements to adopt , without public review , environmental reviews performed by other federal agencies .

in cases where a grantee has already performed an environmental review or the activity or project is excluded from an environmental review , p.l .

113-2 explicitly allowed for the expedited release of funds .

the law also allowed hud to reduce , from 70% to 50% , the percentage of funds that must be targeted to activities benefiting low and moderate income ( lmi ) persons , and allows hud to reduce the lmi - targeting requirement below 50% only if the grantee can demonstrate a compelling need .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) established discretionary spending limits for fy2012-fy2021 .

signed into law on august 2 , 2011 , the bca required a joint select committee on deficit reduction to develop a federal deficit reduction plan for enactment by january 15 , 2012 .

congress and the president failed to reach agreements on a deficit reduction plan by that date , which triggered automatic spending reductions consisting of a combination of budget sequestration and lower discretionary spending caps .

under the sequestration process for fy2013 mandated by the bca , the office of management and budget ( omb ) was required to implement across - the - board spending cuts to achieve budget reductions from both defense and nondefense funding .

on january 2 , 2013 , the president signed the american taxpayer relief act , p.l .

112-240 , ( atra ) , which averted scheduled income tax rate increases and postponed spending reductions required by the sequestration process .

the atra made a number of changes to the bca , including changing the date the fy2013 sequester was to be implemented to march 1 , 2013 .

on march 1 , 2013 , president obama ordered sequestration as mandated by the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , as amended .

according to the office of management and budget , sequestration has resulted in an $85 billion reduction in fy2013 discretionary spending , including a 5% ( $965 million ) reduction in funding for cdf activities .

the $965 million identified in the omb document includes $800 million reduction in the $16 billion for cdbg disaster relief and $165 million reduction in the $3.308 billion in cdf fy2013 regular appropriations .

the fy2013 appropriations for the formula - based components of the cdbg program ( entitlement communities and states , and insular areas ) totaled $3.078 billion , which was approximately 6.8% ( $225 million ) less than the $3.303 billion appropriated for fy2011 .

for fy2012 , the cdbg allocations awarded to entitlement communities and states totaled $2.948 billion .

this represented 10.7% ( $355 million ) less than the amount allocated in fy2011 .

the reductions in appropriations for formula grant activities from fy2011 to fy2013 resulted in the average grant amount for entitlement communities declining from $2 million in fy2011 to $1.8 million in fy2013 .

this was a 10.1% reduction in the average grant amount awarded to entitlement communities ( see table 4 ) .

although the recent reductions in cdbg funding represented a decline in resources available to support local community and economic development activities , they were less than the 45% reduction proposed in the fy2014 departments of transportation and housing and urban development appropriations act , h.r .

2610 .

according to the u.s. conference of mayors and other organizations representing state and local governments , the proposed reduction in funding included in h.r .

2610 would have significantly impacted the long - term community and economic development plans of the states and local governments , forcing them to postpone or terminate activities that support private sector economic development and job creation efforts , public facilities , and public services .

the proposed funding reduction included in h.r .

2610 also would have undercut the resources of non - profit organizations serving as cdbg sub - grantees according to the cdbg coalition .

these entities are involved in managing a range of cdbg - funded public services , facilities , and activities , including homeless shelters , public safety activities , and job counseling .

supporters of the cdbg program contend that the reduction in funding disproportionately affects low and moderate income households given the statutory requirement that communities allocated at least 70% of the program's funds to activities principally benefitting low and moderate income persons .

the fy2012 appropriations for the formula component of the cdbg program were the lowest amount appropriated in more than a decade .

the reduction in funding for entitlement communities reportedly resulted in entitlement communities delaying some projects and reducing support for others , including activities undertaken by community - based organizations acting as sub - grantees .

the decline in average funding is a result of both lower appropriations and an increase in the number of communities qualifying for entitlement status .

the average state allocation declined by 25.4% , from $19.42 million in fy2011 to $18.1 million for fy2013 , while the number of entitlement communities increased from 1,168 to 1,183 during the same period .

given the current desire to address both the national debt and deficit spending , congress is unlikely to provide funds that would restore cdbg funding to significantly higher levels .

short of appropriating additional funds that would mitigate both the impact of inflation and the increasing number of eligible communities congress may consider a number of options intended to address the decline in average cdbg formula allocations .

these may include the following two options .

establishing a population threshold higher than the current 50,000 persons for entitlement city status would eliminate direct funding for hundreds of cities .

the cities that fail to meet the new higher population thresholds would have their populations and formula factors included in their urban county's calculations .

for instance , raising the population threshold for cdbg entitlement city eligibility to 100,000 persons or more would eliminate hundreds of communities from the rolls of entitlement communities and would result in many of these communities being subsumed as partners in a qualifying county's cdbg program .

the administration's fy2014 budget request included a proposal that would eliminate the grandfathering of communities that no longer meet the minimum population threshold for entitlement status and would have eliminated direct funding to entitlement cities whose annual allocation fail to meet a predetermined minimum amount .

the hud proposal would have denied direct cdbg funding to communities whose minimum allocation is less than 0.0125% of the amount allocated to all entitlement communities .

hud has argued that grants below a certain amount are too small to be effective .

according to the administration , 239 communities would have fallen below the threshold based on the program's proposed funding level for fy2014 , and an additional 57 grandfathered communities would have been eliminated because they no longer met the program's population threshold for entitlement status .

the proposal would have transitioned communities to nonentitlement status over several years ending in 2018 .

although these cities would not receive direct funding they could become a part of their respective urban county's cdbg program .

such an arrangement could reduce administrative costs and promote intra - county cooperation .

alternatively , these communities could compete for funds from the state's allocation for nonentitlement communities .

