federal crim es are usually punishable by a statutory maximum term of imprisonment , for example , "imprisoned for not more than 5 years. .

a surprising number also have statutory minimum terms of imprisonment , for example , "imprisonment which may not be less than 10 years or for life. .

under some circumstances , mandatory minimums have proven controversial .

opponents contend that in some instances they can be arbitrary and unduly severe .

proponents contend that they ensure the offenders of the most serious offenses will receive at least some minimum punishment .

legislative proposals in the 113 th congress reflected both perspectives .

congress adjourned , however , without enacting any of them .

some would have established or enhanced mandatory minimums for a variety of offenses including violent attacks on law enforcement officers , firearms offenses , reentry into the united states by dangerous aliens , and computer attacks on the nation's critical infrastructure .

others would have repealed or mitigated the impact of existing mandatory minimums , particularly with regard to controlled substance offenses .

federal courts are required to weigh the factors listed in 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) before sentencing a defendant .

the factors include things like "the need for the sentence imposed ... to provide just punishment for the offense" and "the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities ..." in doing so , however , the courts may not disregard any applicable statutory mandatory minimums .

h.r .

1695 ( representative scott ( va ) ) and s. 619 ( senator paul ) would have permitted federal courts to impose a sentence below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum when necessary to avoid violating the requirements of section 3553 ( a ) .

when exercising the authority , the court would have had to provide the government and the defendant a chance to be heard and to provide a written statement of the section 3553 ( a ) factors that justify the decision to sentence below the mandatory minimum .

the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act establish a series of mandatory minimum sentences for violation of their prohibitions .

trafficking — that is , importing , exporting , or possessing with the intent to distribute — a very substantial amount of various highly addictive substances such as more than a kilogram of heroin is punishable by imprisonment for not less than 10 years or more than life .

a subsequent conviction carries a sentence of imprisonment for not less than 20 years or more than life .

when substantial but lesser amounts are involved , such as 100 grams of heroin , sentences of imprisonment for not less than five years or more than life are called for , and imprisonment for not less than 10 years or more than life in the case of a subsequent conviction .

s. 1410 ( senator durbin ) / h.r .

3382 ( representative labrador ) would have reduced those mandatory minimum sentences by half .

the 20-year mandatory minimums would have become 10-year mandatory minimums ; the 10-year mandatory minimums would have become five - year mandatory minimums ; and the five - year mandatory minimum would have become a two - year mandatory minimum .

h.r .

3088 ( representative waters ) would have eliminated the mandatory minimum sentences so that each of those offenses would have been punishable by imprisonment for any term of years or for life .

unlike the durbin bill ( s. 1410 ) , the waters proposal ( h.r .

3088 ) would have eliminated virtually every other controlled substance mandatory minimum as well .

under present law , when a death or serious bodily injury results from the trafficking in a very substantial amount of a controlled substance like heroin , the mandatory minimum term of imprisonment is 20 years rather than 10 years .

when death or serious bodily injury results from trafficking in a substantial but somewhat lower amount of a controlled substance like heroin , the mandatory minimum term of imprisonment is 20 years rather than five years .

when an offender has two or more prior controlled substance convictions , trafficking a very substantial amount of a controlled substance like heroin carries a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment .

without regard for the type or amount of the controlled substance , simple possession by an offender with a prior controlled substance conviction is punishable by imprisonment for not less than 15 days and not more than two years .

the penalty is imprisonment for not less than 90 days and not more than three years when the offender has two or more prior convictions .

h.r .

3088 would have repealed each of these mandatory minimums , but would have left the existing maximum penalties unchanged .

finally , penalties double when the commission of a controlled substance offense involves distribution to or using a child , or when it involves distribution near a school or other protected location .

these offenses often come with a one - year mandatory minimum term of imprisonment , when the underlying distribution crime would not have otherwise carried a mandatory minimum because of the type or amount of the drugs involved .

the waters bill ( h.r .

3088 ) would have disposed of these mandatory minimums as well .

it would have left in place , however , a fairly unique provision found in the school distribution , repeat offender provision of 21 u.s.c .

860 ( b ) : any person who violates section 841 ( a ) ( 1 ) of this title ... by distributing , possessing with intent to distribute , or manufacturing a controlled substance in or on , or within one thousand feet of ... a ... school ... or housing facility owned by a public housing authority , or within 100 feet of a public or private youth center , public swimming pool , or video arcade facility , after a prior conviction under subsection ( a ) of this section has become final is punishable ( 1 ) by the greater of ( a ) a term of imprisonment of not less than three years and not more than life imprisonment or ( b ) three times the maximum punishment authorized by section 841 ( b ) of this title.... a summary of the changes in the existing controlled substance mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment , proposed in the durbin ( s. 1410 ) / labrador ( h.r .

3382 ) ( which the judiciary committee left unchanged ) and waters ( h.r .

3088 ) proposals , appears in table 1 .

s. 1410 ( judiciary ) would have added new mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for various federal sex offenses and for interstate domestic violence .

federal law prohibits various forms of computer abuse in 18 u.s.c .

1030 , ranging from espionage to hacking to computer fraud to damaging computer systems .

h.r .

1468 ( representative blackburn ) would have created a separate crime for anyone who , during and in relation to a violation of section 1030 substantially impaired or attempted to impair the operation of a critical infrastructure computer system or an associated critical infrastructure .

the bill defined the term "critical infrastructure computer" to mean a computer that manages or controls systems or assets vital to national defense , national security , national economic security , public health or safety , or any combination of those matters , whether publicly or privately owned or operated , including - ( a ) oil and gas production , storage , conversion , and delivery systems ; ( b ) water supply systems ; ( c ) telecommunication networks ; ( d ) electrical power generation and delivery systems ; ( e ) finance and banking systems ; ( f ) emergency services ; ( g ) transportation systems and services ; and ( h ) government operations that provide essential services to the public .

the offense would have been punishable by imprisonment for not less than three years or more than 20 years .

some of the federal statutes calling for imposition of a minimum term of imprisonment suggest the possibility of a fine as an alternative to imprisonment .

for example , the penalty for trafficking in 1,000 grams or more of heroin is "a term of imprisonment which may not be less than 10 years or more than life ... a fine not to exceed ... $10,000,000 ... or both. .

the bill would have suggested the possibility of a fine as an alternative to imprisonment as well .

experience with other mandatory minimums , coupled with implementing sentencing guidelines , suggests that this alternative may have been more hypothetical than real .

federal law protects federal judges and employees against murder , manslaughter , attempted murder or manslaughter , and assault .

with the exception of first degree murder , which is punishable by death or imprisonment for life , none of the prohibitions carry a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment .

flight to avoid prosecution is also a federal crime , but it does not come with a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment either .

h.r .

1577 ( representative poe ) and s. 698 ( senator cornyn ) would have expanded the class of protected public servants ; increased the penalties associated with homicides committed against them ; established mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for killing or assaulting them ; and created a new flight - to - avoid - prosecution offense for fugitives accused of such crimes , punishable by a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment .

federal law outlaws killing any federal officer or employee , including federal judges , during or on account of the performance of their duties .

it also protects anyone assisting them .

the penalties imposed depend on the nature of the homicide: first degree murder: death or life imprisonment ; second degree murder: imprisonment for any term years or for life ; voluntary manslaughter: imprisonment for not more than 15 years ; involuntary manslaughter: imprisonment for not more than eight years ; attempted murder: imprisonment for not more than 20 years ; attempted manslaughter: imprisonment for not more than seven years ; and conspiracy to murder: imprisonment for any term of years or for life .

federal law outlaws the murder of state or local officers or employees assisting in a federal investigation .

offenders are punishable by death or life imprisonment .

it also outlaws the murder of a state correctional officer by a federal prisoner or while the officer is transporting a prisoner in interstate commerce .

offenders are punishable by imprisonment for not less than 20 years or for life or by death .

murder of a federal , state , or local law enforcement officer in furtherance of a violation of the controlled substances act or the controlled substances import and export act is punishable as well by imprisonment for not less than 20 years or for life or by death .

h.r .

1577 / s. 698 would have established 30-year mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for killing , attempting to kill , or conspiring to kill three classes of public servants: ( 1 ) federal judges and federal law enforcement officers , regardless of whether the crime occurred during or on account of the performance of their duties ; ( 2 ) federally funded public servants ( state , local , territorial , and tribal law enforcement officers , firefighters , chaplains , rescue squad and ambulance crew members ) during or on account of the performance of their official duties ; and ( 3 ) former federal judges , former law enforcement officers , and former federally funded public servants , killed on account of performance of their official duties .

in addition to the 30-year mandatory minimum , the offense would have carried the prospect of imprisonment for life and , if a killing occurred , of the death penalty .

it is a federal crime punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years to travel in interstate or foreign commerce for the purpose of avoiding state or federal prosecution .

h.r .

1577 / s. 698 would have created an additional flight statute that would have proscribed flights to avoid prosecution for killing , attempting to kill , or conspiring to kill a federal judge , federal law enforcement officer , or federally funded public servant .

the offense would have been punishable by imprisonment for any term of years not less than 10 years .

section 111 prohibits assaulting a federal officer or employee during or on account of his or her official duties .

simple assault is punishable under the provision by imprisonment for not more than one year .

if the assault results in physical contact or is committed with the intent to commit another felony , the penalty increases to imprisonment for not more than eight years .

if the assault involves the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon or results in bodily injury , the penalty becomes imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

if the assault resulted in substantial bodily injury ( temporary but substantial disfigurement or loss of bodily or mental capacity ) to a federal judge or federal law enforcement officer , h.r .

1577 / s. 698 would have made the offense punishable by imprisonment for not less than five years or more than 30 years .

if the assault resulted in serious bodily injury ( risk of death , extreme pain , etc. ) .

or involved possession or use of a dangerous weapon , h.r .

1577 / s. 698 would have made the offense punishable by imprisonment for any term of years not less than 10 years or for life .

