some members of congress and policy experts allege that u.s. producers and u.s. jobs have been adversely affected by the exchange rate policies adopted by china , japan , and a number of other countries .

they maintain that some countries are purposefully using various policies to weaken the value of their currency to boost exports and create jobs , but that these policies come at the expense of other countries , including the united states .

during the global financial crisis , some political leaders and policy experts argued that there was a "currency war" in the global economy , as countries competed against each other to weaken the value of their currencies and boost exports .

even as the global financial crisis has faded , some policymakers continue to express concerns that other countries are using exchange rate policies to gain an unfair trade advantage against the united states .

some economists are skeptical about "currency manipulation" and whether it is a significant problem .

they raise questions about whether government policies have long - term effects on exchange rates ; whether it is possible to differentiate between "manipulation" and legitimate central bank activities ; and the net effect of alleged currency manipulation on the u.s. economy .

some members of congress have proposed taking additional measures to address concerns about the exchange rate policies of other countries , while other members have cautioned against aggressive measures that could trigger retaliation , among other concerns .

during the 114 th congress , two major pieces of legislation were enacted that contain provisions on currency .

tpa legislation signed into law in june 2015 ( p.l .

114-26 ) includes principal negotiating objectives addressing currency manipulation .

provisions to combat currency manipulation were also included in the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act ( p.l .

114-125 ) , signed into law in february 2016 .

in the 115 th congress , debates about currency manipulation have surfaced in the context of renegotiations of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and modifications to the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement ( korus fta ) .

this report provides information on current debates over exchange rates in the global economy .

it offers an overview of how exchange rates work ; analyzes specific disagreements and debates ; and examines existing frameworks for potentially addressing currency disputes .

it also lays out some policy options available to congress , should members want to take action on exchange rate issues .

amid heightened concerns about slow growth and high unemployment in many countries , disagreements over exchange rate policies broadened following the global financial crisis .

in 2010 , brazil's finance minister , guido mantega , declared that a "currency war" had broken out in the global economy .

even as the global economy has recovered , many concerns about exchange rates persist .

at the heart of disagreements is whether or not countries are using policies to intentionally push down the value of their currency in order to gain a trade advantage at the expense of other countries .

a weak currency makes exports cheaper to foreigners and imports more expensive to domestic consumers .

this can lead to higher production of exports and import - competing goods , which could help spur export - led growth and job creation in the export sector .

however , if one country weakens its currency , there can be negative implications for certain sectors in other countries .

in general , a weaker currency in one country can hurt exporters in other countries , since their exports become relatively more expensive and may fall as a result .

additionally , domestic firms producing import - competing goods may find it harder to compete with imports from countries with weak currencies , since weak currencies lower the cost of imports .

under certain circumstances , policies used to drive down the value of a currency in one country can cause other countries to run persistent trade deficits ( imports exceed exports ) that can be difficult to adjust and can be associated with the build - up of debt .

for these reasons , some economists view efforts to boost exports through a weaker exchange rate as "unfair" to other countries and a type of "beggar - thy - neighbor" policy — the benefit the country gets from the policy comes at the expense of other countries .

these views are particularly rooted in the experience in the 1930s , during which , some economists argue , countries devalued their currencies to boost exports , in response to widespread high unemployment and negative economic conditions .

the devaluations in the 1930s are referred to as "competitive devaluations," since a devaluation in one country was often offset by a devaluation in another country , making it difficult for any country to gain a lasting advantage .

some economists view the competitive devaluations of the 1930s as detrimental to international trade , and , in addition to protectionist trade policies , as exacerbating the great depression .

some economists disagree that "currency wars" and competitive devaluations characterized the period following the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 , and if they did , whether they are necessarily bad for the global economy .

because currency devaluations can often involve printing domestic currency , or implementing expansionary monetary policies , they can stimulate short - term economic growth .

if enough countries engage in currency interventions , then there may be no net change in relative exchange rate levels and the simultaneous currency interventions may help reflate the global economy and boost global economic growth .

economists of this viewpoint argue that competitive devaluations of the 1930s did not cause the great depression and , in fact , actually helped end it .

additionally , a weak currency in one country does not have an unambiguous negative effect on other countries .

instead , consumers and certain sectors may benefit when other countries have weak currencies .

in particular , consumers that purchase imports from abroad benefit when other countries have weak currencies , because imports become cheaper .

businesses that rely on inputs from overseas also benefit when other countries have weak currencies , by lowering the costs of inputs and thus the overall cost of production .

in current debates about exchange rates and whether countries are engaged in unfair currency policies to weaken their currencies , two major types of concerns have been raised: first , concerns about countries engaged in interventions in foreign currency markets , and second , concerns about the effects of expansionary monetary policies in some developed countries on exchange rate levels .

some members' concerns about currency manipulation and its impact on u.s. producers and workers have led to legislation over the past several decades .

key legislation seeking to address currency manipulation that has been signed into law is described below .

in addition to provisions in u.s. law that address currency manipulation , the united states is party to a number of international agreements and discussions that address exchange rate policies and currency manipulation .

concerns about the exchange rate policies of other countries persist .

during the 2016 presidential campaign , combatting currency manipulation , particularly by china , was a key issue for donald trump .

since assuming office , president trump has continued to express concerns about the exchange rate policies of other countries , although the treasury department has not formally labeled a country as a currency manipulator .

some members of congress have also proposed taking more assertive action on currency .

there are a number of options for doing so , some of which members have pursued through legislation .

policy options could include the following , among others .

exchange rates are important prices in the global economy , and changes in exchange rates have potentially substantial implications for international trade and investment flows across countries .

following the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 , tensions among countries over exchange rate policies arguably broadened .

some policymakers and analysts have expressed concerns that some governments are pursuing exchange rate policies to gain a trade advantage .

concerns have focused on both government interventions in currency markets in a number of other countries , including china , and expansionary monetary policies in some developed economies .

however , some economists argue that the effects of exchange rate policies are nuanced , creating winners and losers , and that it is hard to make generalized claims about the negative effects of "currency wars. .

to date , the most formal response to current tensions over exchange rates has been through discussions at g - 7 and g - 20 meetings .

although frameworks have been set up for addressing currency "manipulation" at the imf and through u.s. law , neither the imf nor the u.s. department of the treasury has taken formal action on current disputes over exchange rates .

there are debates about why formal action has not been taken at these institutions .

one general complicating factor in addressing currency disputes is that estimating a currency's "fundamental" or "true" value is extremely complex and subject to debate among economists .

the 114 th congress addressed currency manipulation through tpa and customs legislation .

members that continue to have concerns about currency manipulation may want to weigh the pros and cons of taking action on exchange rate disputes .

if policymakers do want to take action , there are a number of policy options to consider , including countervailing duties , countervailing interventions in foreign exchange markets , provisions in trade agreements , and urging the administration to press the issue more forcefully at international institutions .

