in the 113 th congress , members have introduced multiple bills that include provisions that would directly or indirectly address climate change .

this report describes and compares the bills and provisions that directly address climate change , as opposed to those that primarily address other issues ( eg , energy efficiency ) but could have ancillary impacts on climate .

in some cases , it is difficult to distinguish between direct and indirect climate change bills , because a specific bill or action may seek to achieve multiple objectives .

this report focuses on legislative actions — including comprehensive bills with individual climate change titles , sections , or provisions — that explicitly address climate change issues .

the provisions in these bills fall into six general categories: 1. carbon price ( i.e. , tax or fee ) on greenhouse ( ghg ) emissions ; 2. other mechanisms intended to encourage mitigation of ghg emissions ( eg , sequestration of emissions ) ; 3. research on climate change - related issues ; 4. adaptation activities related to expected climate change impacts ; 5. support for international climate change - related activities ; and 6. action that limits or prohibits climate change - related authorities , efforts , or considerations .

table 1 lists the proposals in the 113 th congress by these six broad categories .

these categories are not mutually exclusive , and several bills address more than one of the above categories .

other reviews of the same legislation may identify a different list of bills with different categorization .

table 2 provides a brief summary about each bill , including the primary sponsor , short title , major actions , and key climate change - related provisions .

as of the date of this report , one bill — s. 332 ( sanders ) — would attach a price to ghg emissions .

table 3 compares that carbon price proposal with selected state and international programs .

in addition , representative waxman and senator whitehouse offered a carbon tax "discussion draft" on march 12 , 2013 .

