the federal government is involved in mental health care in various ways , including direct provision of services , payment for services , and indirect support for services ( eg , grant funding , dissemination of best practices , and technical assistance ) .

policymakers have demonstrated interest in the federal government's broad role in mental health care .

they have done so primarily by holding hearings and introducing legislation addressing the interrelated topics of quality of mental health care , access to mental health care , and the cost of mental health care .

the mental health workforce is a key component of mental health care quality , access , and cost .

the quality of mental health care , for example , is influenced by the skills of the people providing the care .

access to mental health care depends on the number of appropriately skilled providers available to provide care , among other things .

the cost of mental health care is affected in part by the wages of the people providing care .

thus , an understanding of the mental health workforce may be helpful in crafting legislation and conducting oversight for overall mental health care policy .

it is important to note that , while the federal government has an interest in the mental health workforce , and federal initiatives may affect the training of mental health care providers , for instance , most of the regulation of the mental health workforce occurs at the state level .

state boards determine licensing requirements for mental health professionals , and state laws establish their scopes of practice .

this report begins with a working definition of the mental health workforce and a brief discussion of alternative definitions .

it then describes three dimensions of the mental health workforce that may influence quality of care , access to care , and costs of care: ( 1 ) licensure requirements and scope of practice for each provider type in the mental health workforce , ( 2 ) estimated numbers of each provider type in the mental health workforce , and ( 3 ) average annual wages for each provider type in the mental health workforce .

the report then briefly discusses how these dimensions of the mental health workforce might inform certain policy discussions .

no consensus exists on which provider types make up the mental health workforce .

while some define the workforce as a broad range of provider types , others take a more narrow approach .

for example , the national academy of medicine ( nam ) — a private , nonprofit organization that aims to provide evidence - based health policy advice to decisionmakers , often through congressionally mandated studies — has conceptualized the mental health workforce broadly , including primary care physicians , psychologists , nurses , mental health and substance abuse counselors , care managers and coordinators , and social workers .

the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) — the public health agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that leads efforts to improve the nation's mental health — has defined the mental health workforce to include psychiatry , clinical psychology , clinical social work , advanced practice psychiatric nursing , marriage and family therapy , substance abuse counseling , and counseling .

previously , samsha's definition also included psychosocial rehabilitation , school psychology , and pastoral counseling and excluded substance abuse counseling .

the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) — the public health agency within hhs with primary responsibility for increasing access to health care ( including mental health care ) for vulnerable populations — provides a more narrow definition of the mental health workforce that is tied to existing federal programs aimed at alleviating provider shortages ( eg , medicare bonus payments and health workforce recruitment programs ) .

eligibility for such programs is determined in part by the designation of a mental health professional shortage area ( mhpsa ) .

the mhpsa designation is based on a limited number of core provider types because it is intended to identify the most extreme workforce shortages in order to target federal investments .

for purposes of designating mhpsas , hrsa has identified mental health providers as licensed psychiatrists , psychiatric nurses , psychiatric social workers , clinical psychologists , clinical social workers , and family therapists , who meet specified training and licensing criteria .

notably , this definition is limited to highly trained mental health professionals .

in conceptualizing and outlining the mental health workforce , this report relies on the hrsa definition of mental health providers , including clinical social workers , clinical psychologists , marriage and family therapists , psychiatrists , and advanced practice psychiatric nurses .

for each of the five mental health professions , table 1 summarizes licensure requirements ( including degree , supervised practice , and exam ) and table 2 summarizes scope of practice ; each of these terms is explained briefly below .

although the licensure requirements vary widely across provider types , the scopes of practice converge into provider types that generally can prescribe medication ( psychiatrists and advanced practice psychiatric nurses ) and provider types that generally cannot prescribe medication ( clinical psychologists , clinical social workers , and marriage and family therapists ) .

all provider types in this report can provide psychosocial interventions ( eg , talk therapy ) .

administration and interpretation of psychological tests is generally the province of clinical psychologists .

access to mental health care depends , in part , on the number of practicing mental health providers relative to the population ; however , such information is not systematically available for analysis .

workforce data are collected and reported by multiple sources .

however , each source has its limitations in assessing the overall size of the workforce .

hrsa designates mental health professional shortage areas ( mhpsas ) based on the ratios of psychiatrists , appns , clinical psychologists , clinical social workers , and mfts to the population ; however , hrsa does not systematically collect the data used to designate mhpsas ( see text box ) .

hrsa's area health resource files ( ahrf ) compiles health - related data from various sources .

the ahrf draws much of its health workforce data from datasets created by — and more readily available from — the department of labor .

some other sources of health workforce data in the ahrf are updated infrequently , if at all .

for example , the 2016-2017 arhf includes the number of psychologists from a 2009 analysis by a private research center .

thus , other sources of mental health workforce size estimates may be more useful than the ahrf to policymakers .

national workforce data — which are not limited to the health care workforce — are generally collected by the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) within the department of labor .

each data source has important limitations , as described below .

the occupational employment statistics ( oes ) program produces employment estimates for more than 800 occupations based on a semiannual survey of establishments selected by the bls from lists maintained by state workforce agencies for unemployment insurance purposes .

an important limitation of oes data is that it excludes the self - employed .

the oes includes specific categories for psychiatrists and mfts .

within the field of psychology , the oes has a subcategory for "clinical , counseling , and school psychologists. .

within the field of social work , the oes has a subcategory for "mental health and substance abuse social workers. .

the oes does not distinguish appns from the broad category of nurse practitioners .

the current population survey ( cps ) provides information about employed persons by occupation based on a monthly household survey .

the cps does not distinguish licensed clinical psychologists from other psychologists , mental health social workers from other social workers , psychiatrists from other physicians , appns from other nurse practitioners , or mfts from counselors .

thus the cps overestimates the size of the workforce in these professions in such cases where it provides an estimate at all .

the occupational outlook handbook ( ooh ) provides information about occupations based on the national employment matrix , which combines employment data from both the oes and the cps .

like the oes , the ooh includes specific categories for psychiatrists and mfts and subcategories within psychology ( clinical , counseling , and school psychologists ) and social work ( mental health and substance abuse social workers ) .

the ooh does not distinguish appns from the broad category of nurse practitioners .

additional sources of workforce data may be available on a case - by - case basis from professional associations or other organizations .

various estimates of each mental health profession are provided below , along with their limitations .

just as access to mental health care providers depends partly on the size of the mental health workforce , the cost of mental health care depends partly on the wages paid to mental health providers .

table 3 presents mean and median annual wages from the bls .

these wage data are widely used because of their large sample size , broad geographic reach , and the comparable methodology used to collect data across occupations .

information from bls is likely to either over - or understate wages for some mental health providers ; the data are based on a survey that excludes self - employed workers ( i.e. , those in private practice ) , who may have different incomes .

for example , for both clinical psychologists and clinical social workers , the categories used by the bls include individuals who may earn substantially less than those who meet the hrsa definition of the provider type .

the wage estimates for clinical psychologists are based on a category that includes school psychologists , who do not have to meet the same licensure requirements as hrsa - defined clinical psychologists and thus might receive lower wages .

similarly , the wage estimates for clinical social workers are based on a category that includes individuals who are not licensed for independent practice and who also might earn less .

despite their limitations , the bls data are able to illuminate the relative wages of each provider type as outlined in table 3 .

psychiatrists are the relative highest earners , followed by advanced practice psychiatric nurses and clinical psychologists .

marriage and family therapists generally earn more than clinical social workers .

understanding the mental health workforce may help policymakers address a range of potential policy issues related to mental health care , including its quality , access , and cost .

an understanding of typical licensure requirements and scopes of practice may help policymakers determine how to direct federal policy initiatives focused on enhancing the quality of mental health care such as those related to training mental health providers .

if , for example , training new providers quickly is a priority , initiatives may focus on training additional providers who can be licensed with a master's degree , rather than a doctoral degree .

initiatives may focus on training providers who can prescribe medication if the need is greater for medication than for psychosocial interventions .

going beyond the provider types discussed in this report , if a priority is to expand the breadth of the mental health workforce , policymakers might also consider federal training directed toward initiatives that focus on paraprofessionals who do not require extensive training or toward primary care professionals who do not specialize in mental health but may provide care for individuals with mental illness .

increasing the breadth of the mental health workforce may also increase its overall size .

another way policymakers may influence the size of the mental health workforce ( and thus access to mental health services ) is through the provision or expansion of federal programs .

for example , the federal government may provide grants to establish or expand training programs for mental health providers .

the federal government may also provide incentives such as loan repayment or loan forgiveness to encourage individuals to enter mental health occupations , which are projected to grow faster than the overall workforce .

policymakers may consider strategies to direct people into these high growth fields as part of larger labor force policy considerations .

initiatives may be targeted to certain provider types or to certain locations ( eg , mhpsas ) .

policymakers may also wish to consider the relative wages of different provider types , particularly when addressing domains within which the federal government employs mental health providers .

for instance , agencies which employ these mental health professionals include the department of defense , the veterans health administration ( within the department of veterans affairs ) , the bureau of prisons ( within the department of justice ) , and the indian health service ( within hhs ) , among other agencies .

the federal government is the largest employer of some provider types , such as clinical psychologists and social workers .

as such , the cost of employing different provider types — as well as their scopes of practice — may be a consideration in determining staffing priorities .

appendix a .

additional resources below are resources for additional information about each mental health provider type , including national associations of state boards , professional associations , accrediting organizations for educational programs , and other relevant organizations .

in some cases , a single organization may serve multiple roles ( eg , a professional association may also accredit educational programs ) .

psychiatrists american academy of addiction psychiatry ( aaap ) : http: / / www.aaap.org / american academy of child & adolescent psychiatry ( aacap ) : http: / / www.aacap.org / american academy of clinical psychiatrists ( aacp ) : http: / / www.aacp.com / american board of medical specialties ( abms ) : http: / / www.abms.org / american board of psychiatry and neurology ( abpn ) : http: / / www.abpn.com / american psychiatric association ( apa ) : http: / / www.psychiatry.org / national board of osteopathic examiners: http: / / www.nbome.org / psychologists american psychological association ( apa ) : http: / / www.apa.org / association of state and provincial psychology boards ( asppb ) : http: / / www.asppb.net / social workers association of social work boards ( aswb ) : http: / / www.aswb.org / council on social work education ( cswe ) : http: / / www.cswe.org national association of social workers ( nasw ) : http: / / www.socialworkers.org / social work policy institute ( swpi ) : http: / / www.socialworkpolicy.org / advanced practice psychiatric nurses american academy of nurse practitioners ( aanp ) : http: / / www.aanp.org / american nurses credentialing center ( ancc ) : http: / / www.nursecredentialing.org / american psychiatric nurses association ( apna ) : http: / / www.apna.org / national association of clinical nurse specialists ( nacns ) : http: / / www.nacns.org / national council of state boards of nursing ( ncsbn ) : http: / / www.ncsbn.org / marriage and family therapists american association for marriage and family therapy ( aamft ) :  http: / / www.aamft.org / association of marital and family therapy regulatory boards ( amftrb ) : http: / / www.amftrb.org / .

