on july 30 , 2013 , s. 1392 was introduced to replace s. 761 .

the bill is based on voluntary provisions and was designed to be deficit - neutral .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources ( senr ) reported the new bill by a vote of 19-3 on july 31 , 2013 .

a motion to proceed to s. 1392 was brought to the senate floor on august 1 , 2013 , just prior to a motion to adjourn for the august recess .

there was no further action on the motion to proceed until after adjournment .

so far , only two amendments have been the subject of major floor debate: s.amdt .

1866 , on the affordable care act , and s.amdt .

1908 , on the keystone xl pipeline .

several amendments that have not been the subject of major floor debate over s. 1392 have , nonetheless , been the subject of significant controversy in other venues .

three notable examples have been selected for discussion here: fossil fuel use in new federal buildings , carbon emissions regulation , and regional haze regulation .

in order to get an agreement to limit the time available for debate , amending , and voting on amendments , the floor managers secured leadership approval to take a vote on s.amdt .

1866 .

however , the proponents of other non - energy amendments expanded the request beyond s.amdt .

1866 to encompass votes on four additional health care and environmental amendments and an unlimited number of energy amendments .

unable to resolve those differences , senate attention turned to work on a cr and an agreement to raise the federal debt ceiling .

floor managers indicated that — once the cr , shutdown , health care , and debt limit issues are resolved — they hope to resume action on s. 1392 .

meanwhile , efforts are continuing to narrow the list of amendments and to allow votes on s.amdt .

1908 — and possibly on s.amdt .

1866 .

also , floor managers are exploring the possibility of incorporating a select group of amendments into the underlying bill in order to ensure enough votes to achieve a cloture vote that would end debate and limit the number of amendments to be considered .

appendix a .

details of s. 1392 provisions title i: buildings achieving energy - efficiency improvements in a building is a much more complex undertaking than , for example , improving efficiency in an electric appliance .

the array of critical barriers to improving energy efficiency in buildings has been well documented .

in particular , the regional nature of building codes ( e.g .

houses in minneapolis need more insulation than houses in los angeles ) and other factors have made it impractical to set a single national building energy code .

instead , congress has directed doe to use its analytic capacity to develop model energy codes for residential and commercial buildings that states can adopt and adapt to local circumstances .

this title would strengthen voluntary model building codes to make new homes and new commercial buildings more energy efficient .

doe would be required to work with states and private industry to make the code - writing process more transparent .

all doe model code updates would be coordinated with updates of specified industry standards .

federal training and funding assistance would be available to states that adopt codes which meet or exceed the model codes .

states seeking such assistance would be required to certify their code updates and code compliance with doe .

incentives would be provided to train the next generation of workers in energy - efficient commercial building design and operation , and university - based building training and research assessment centers would be expanded .

subtitle a: building energy codes ( §101 ) this subtitle would amend sections 303 , 304 , 305 , and 307 of the energy policy and conservation act ( epca , p.l .

94-163 ) to create the framework and conditions for future doe updates of model building energy codes that apply to new construction .

doe would be required to provide technical assistance and incentives to state and local governments and american indian tribes that voluntarily choose to update and / or adopt codes that meet or exceed the model codes .

doe would be directed to ( 1 ) help develop and update model building energy codes for residential and commercial buildings that would enable the achievement of aggregate energy savings targets established by this act , ( 2 ) encourage and support states , american indian tribes , and local governments to adopt building energy codes that meet or exceed the model codes ; and ( 3 ) support full compliance of those state , tribal , and local codes .

definition of terms and references to code development organizations a "model building energy code" is defined to mean a voluntary building energy code and an accompanying set of standards that are developed and updated through a consensus process among interested parties .

code elements would be drawn from independent codes and standards , including the international energy conservation code ( iecc ) of the international code council and / or from the code developed by the council of american building officials ( cabo ) , the american society of heating , refrigerating , and air - conditioning engineers ( ashrae ) , and / or other appropriate organizations .

certification of updates and compliance states and indian tribes that voluntarily seek to adopt the model codes would be required to self - certify whether ( 1 ) the codes have been updated , ( 2 ) the codes meet or exceed the energy savings of the updated model building energy code or the energy saving targets established by this act , and ( 3 ) the codes have achieved full compliance with model codes .

doe would support states and indian tribes doe would be required to: 1 .

report annually on ( 1 ) the status of model building energy codes , ( 2 ) the status of code adoption and compliance by states and indian tribes , ( 3 ) the implementation of such updated codes , and ( 4 ) the energy savings attained over time as a result of targets associated with the codes .

2 .

provide technical assistance to states and indian tribes to implement requirements for updating such codes .

3 .

establish incentive funding for states and indian tribes to ( 1 ) implement the requirements , ( 2 ) improve and implement building energy codes , and ( 3 ) promote building energy efficiency through the use of such codes .

4 .

provide technical and financial support for the development of stretch codes and advanced standards for buildings that can be used as ( 1 ) an option for adoption as a building energy code by local , tribal , or state governments ; and ( 2 ) guidelines for energy - efficient building design .

such stretch codes and advanced standards would be required to be designed to ( 1 ) achieve substantial energy savings compared to the model building energy codes and ( 2 ) meet such targets , if available , at least three to six years in advance of the target years in the model code .

doe to analyze code improvements , procedures , and options doe would be directed to study the feasibility , impact , economics , and merit of ( 1 ) code improvements that would require that new buildings be designed , sited , and constructed in a manner that makes the buildings more adaptable in the future to become zero - net - energy buildings after initial construction ; ( 2 ) code procedures to incorporate measured lifetimes , not just first - year energy use , in trade - offs and performance calculations ; and ( 3 ) legislative options for increasing energy savings from building energy codes , including additional incentives for effective state and local action , and verifying code compliance and enforcement by means other than self - certification by a state or local government .

doe rulemaking would set energy - savings targets doe would be required to work with states , indian tribes , local governments , and independent developers of codes and standards to support the updating of such codes by rulemaking that establishes aggregate energy savings targets .

doe would be authorized to set separate targets for residential and commercial buildings .

the 2009 iecc is set as the initial baseline for updates of codes for residential buildings , and the ashrae standard 90.1-2010 is set as the initial baseline for updates of codes for commercial buildings .

in coordination with independent developers of codes and standards , doe would be directed to establish and revise targets for specific years at a level that ( 1 ) is the maximum level of energy efficiency that is technologically feasible and life - cycle cost effective , while accounting for economic considerations ; ( 2 ) is higher than the preceding target ; and ( 3 ) promotes the achievement of high - performance buildings .

doe would be required to set initial targets within a year .

such targets are to be developed and adjusted to recognize potential savings and costs related to ( 1 ) efficiency gains made in appliances , lighting , windows , insulation , and building envelope sealing ; ( 2 ) advancement of distributed generation and on - site renewable power generation technologies ; ( 3 ) equipment improvements for heating , cooling , and ventilation systems ; ( 4 ) building management systems and smartgrid technologies to reduce energy use ; and ( 5 ) other technologies , practices , and building systems that doe considers appropriate for building plug load and other energy uses .

further , doe is directed to consider the economic feasibility of achieving such targets and the potential costs and savings for consumers and building owners .

doe would be directed to provide technical assistance to independent developers of model codes and standards .

within 15 months of any future revisions to the iecc or ashrae standard 90.1 , doe would determine whether the revisions would improve energy efficiency ( relative to the existing model code ) and whether those revisions would meet the targets .

if the revisions appear to not meet the targets , doe would recommend to the code developers ways to adjust the energy code so that it would meet the targets .

any model building code or standard established under this title would be prohibited from being made binding on a state , tribal , or local government .

authorization of appropriations for all of the provisions covered in subtitle a of title i , $200 million would be authorized for appropriations , until expended .

subtitle b: worker training and capacity building ( §111-112 ) building training and assessment centers ( §111 ) doe would be directed to provide grants to establish building training and assessment centers at universities and colleges .

the purposes of the centers are to identify energy efficiency opportunities , promote new concepts and technologies , train engineers and architects , promote r&d on alternative energy sources , and assist other technical training facilities .

such centers would be co - located with doe's industrial assessment centers ( iacs ) .

funding of $10 million would be authorized until expended .

career skills training ( §112 ) doe would be required to make grants to eligible nonprofit partnerships to pay the 50% federal share of career skills training programs .

the purpose of the program is to help students become certified to install energy efficient buildings technologies .

funding of $10 million would be authorized , until expended .

title ii: industrial efficiency and competitiveness subtitle a: manufacturing energy efficiency ( §201-204 ) section 201 sets out the purposes of title ii , which are to reform and reorient doe's industrial efficiency programs , accelerate technology deployment for industrial energy efficiency , strengthen public - private partnerships , and to stimulate industrial productivity , competitiveness , and economic growth .

future of industry program ( §202 ) section 452 of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) would be amended to rename the energy - intensive industries subprograms as the future of industry program .

program modifications and initiatives would include a definition of an "energy service provider" company ( espc ) , a doe requirement to assess sustainable manufacturing goals , improved coordination with manufacturing partnership centers of the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and with certain other doe programs and national labs , increased partnerships with espcs , doe funding of outreach activities by industrial assessment centers ( iacs ) to small - and medium - sized firms , doe funding of the 50% federal share of industrial internship programs , and small business administration ( sba ) expediting of applications from eligible small businesses for loans to implement recommendations of iacs .

sustainable manufacturing initiative ( §203 ) the energy policy and conservation act ( epca , p.l .

94-163 ) would be amended to require that — at the request of a manufacturer — doe's office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) conduct on - site technical assessments to identify opportunities to maximize the energy efficiency of industrial processes , prevent pollution , minimize waste , improve water use efficiency in manufacturing processes , and conserve natural resources .

also , eere's industrial efficiency programs would be directed to carry out an industry - government partnership program — in coordination with nist — to research , develop , and demonstrate new sustainable manufacturing and industrial technologies and processes that maximize energy efficiency .

subtitle b: supply star ( §211 ) epca would be amended to create a new "supply star" program at doe to promote practices , recognize companies , and identify products that use highly efficient supply chains of equipment and materials that conserve energy , water , and other resources .

any doe evaluation of a product's supply chain efficiency would be required to consider energy and resource use throughout the product's lifecycle — including production , transport , packaging , use , and disposal .

however , in such an evaluation , doe would be prohibited from considering climate change and from counting outsourcing of american jobs as a positive factor .

doe would be authorized to award grants or other incentives for entities to study supply chain energy resource efficiency and demonstrate supply chain efficiency improvements .

also , doe would be required to fund training programs to improve supply chain efficiency .

funding of $10 million would be authorized to cover the period from fy2014 through fy2023 .

subtitle c: electric motor rebate program ( §221 ) doe would be directed to establish a rebate incentive program for: the cost to purchase and install a new constant speed electric motor control that reduces motor energy use by at least 5% ; and certain commercial or industrial machinery or equipment ( new or used ) — with greater than 1 horsepower capacity — that incorporates an advanced motor and drive system .

the rebate would be capped at $250,000 for any single company or other entity .

the bill would authorize $5 million for fy2014 , and another $5 million for fy2015 , both of which would remain available until expended .

subtitle d: transformer rebate program ( §231 ) doe would be directed to create a rebate program for the cost to purchase and install a qualified new energy efficient electric power transformer .

the transformer must meet or exceed the national electrical manufacturers association ( nema ) "premium efficiency" designation .

eligible participants include owners of industrial or manufacturing facilities , commercial buildings , and multifamily residential buildings .

rebate amounts would be specified to be ( 1 ) between $5 and $15 per kilovolt - ampere for three - phase transformers , depending on capacity ; and ( 2 ) 75% of such amounts for single - phase transformers of the same capacities .

table a - 1 , below illustrates how the incentive would apply to three - phase transformers .

the bill would authorize $5 million for fy2014 , and another $5 million for fy2015 , both of which would remain available until expended .

the program would terminate on december 31 , 2015 .

title iii: federal agency energy efficiency information and communication technologies ( §301 ) within one year of enactment , doe would be required to issue guidance to federal agencies on how to employ advanced tools ( e.g .

computer hardware and energy software ) that promote energy efficiency through the use of information and communications technologies .

each federal agency would be required to report to doe on ( 1 ) its plans for implementing such guidance , and ( 2 ) estimated energy and financial savings from using such tools .

funds to update designs of new buildings ( §302 ) for any general services administration ( gsa ) building project for which congressional approval has been received and the design has been substantially completed — but for which construction has not begun — gsa would be authorized to use appropriated funds to update the building's design to meet energy efficiency and other standards for new federal buildings .

however , the funds used for such purpose may not exceed 125% of the estimated energy or other cost savings associated with the updates , as determined by a life - cycle cost analysis specified under the national energy conservation policy act ( necpa , p.l .

95-619 ) .

consolidation of federal data centers ( §303 ) the administrator for the office of e - government and information technology within the office of management and budget ( omb ) would be directed to develop and publish a goal for the total ( and annual ) amount of planned energy and cost savings and increased productivity by the government through the consolidation of federal data centers during the five - year period that would commence with enactment .

the high performance computing modernization program of the department of defense ( dod ) would be exempt from the scope of this provision .

title iv: funding offsets ( §501 ) to offset the costs of this bill , eisa section 422 ( f ) would be amended to reduce the funding authorized for the zero net energy commercial buildings initiative for fy 2014 through fy2017 .

appendix b .

partial list of bipartisan amendments appendix c. energy efficiency amendments appendix d. other energy and carbon emissions amendments appendix e. non - energy amendment .

