in january 2003 , president bush announced the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , a government - wide initiative to combat global hiv / aids .

pepfar supports a wide range of hiv / aids prevention , treatment , and care activities and is the largest commitment by any nation to combat a single disease .

later that year , congress enacted the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 ( leadership act ) , p.l .

108-25 , which authorized $15 billion to be spent from fy2004 to fy2008 on bilateral and multilateral hiv / aids , tuberculosis ( tb ) , and malaria programs .

the act included language that instructed how the funds should be spent , listed several goals and targets , and required the president to establish the coordinator of the united states government activities to combat hiv / aids globally ( known as the global aids coordinator ) at the department of state .

the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) distributes the majority of the funds it receives from congress for global hiv / aids programs to u.s. federal agencies and departments and multilateral groups like the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria ( global fund ) .

in 2008 , congress enacted the tom lantos and henry j. hyde united states global leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 ( lantos - hyde act ) , p.l .

110-293 , which amended the leadership act to authorize the appropriation of $48 billion for global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria efforts from fy2009 to fy2013 .

key amendments in the act established the coordinator of the united states government activities to combat malaria globally ( known as the malaria coordinator ) at the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

the malaria coordinator oversees implementation of related efforts by usaid and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and is advised by an interagency advisory group that includes representatives from usaid , department of health and human services ( hhs ) , department of state ( state ) , department of defense ( dod ) , the national security council ( nsc ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

certain provisions within the leadership act , as amended , and the lantos - hyde act are set to expire at the end of fy2013 .

the 113 th congress is considering whether to reauthorize these authorities .

on september 24 and 25 , 2013 , respectively , companion bills were introduced in the senate and house ( s. 1545 and h.r .

3177 ) entitled the pepfar stewardship and oversight act .

the bills extend authorities related to key priority areas: authorizing appropriations for the global fund , expanding reporting requirements , and allocating a portion of global hiv / aids funds for orphans and vulnerable children ( ovc ) and for hiv / aids treatment and care .

table a - 1 in appendix a offers a side - by - side comparison of the leadership act in its original form and the lantos - hyde act , which amends the leadership act and other legislation .

a third column explains which sections are set to expire and summarizes language in s. 1545 and h.r .

3177 that amend the leadership act , as amended .

the leadership act , as amended , lantos - hyde act , and legislation that these acts amend include language to facilitate oversight of u.s. global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs , as well as to ensure key congressional priorities are met .

the related reporting requirements are listed in table a - 2 of appendix a .

this report explains briefly which authorities in these two acts are set to expire and which are permanent .

congressional interest in combating hiv / aids , tb , and malaria has been unwavering .

the leadership and lantos - hyde acts are important tools congress has used to influence the design of projects aimed at fighting the three diseases and to oversee their implementation .

the 108 th and 110 th congresses were able to overcome ideological and political differences to enact the leadership and lantos - hyde acts .

it does not appear some of the contentious issues that dominated debate when crafting the leadership and lantos - hyde acts ( such as family planning ) will be revisited at this time .

s. 1545 , the pepfar stewardship and oversight act and its house companion ( h.r .

3177 ) do not offer a comprehensive extension of the leadership act , as amended .

instead , it focuses on key priorities related to strengthening oversight , extending funding authorities for the global fund , orphans and vulnerable children , and hiv / aids treatments and care programs .

a summary of the authorities that s. 1545 and h.r .

3177 seek to amend are listed in table b - 1 of appendix b .

key authorities that are set to expire revolve around four themes: establishing performance targets ; evaluating and overseeing program implementation ; advancing research on curative and preventive tools ; and directing how funds are to be utilized .

there are far more permanent authorities than expiring ones .

enduring legislation authorized: the establishment of hiv / aids and malaria coordinators ; regular reporting on program evaluation and implementation ; research for the identification and development of improved tools ; mechanisms for advancing country ownership and cost sharing ; the integration of nutritional support into hiv / aids programs ; exemption from certain hiv / aids prevention activities due to moral objections ( known as the conscience clause ) ; and hiv - positive individuals to enter the united states .

public statements by the obama administration and several members of congress suggest that support for maintaining global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs remains strong in both branches .

prospects remain high that the administration will continue to request that congress maintain funding levels for these programs in the coming years and congress may comply , whether or not congress enacts another five - year authorization for the diseases .

the following sections describe which authorities in the leadership act , as amended , and the lantos - hyde act are set to expire and which are enduring .

some of the provisions in the leadership and lantos - hyde acts that shape u.s. global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs are set to expire at the end of fy2013 .

these primarily entail the establishment of performance targets and interagency strategies for addressing the three diseases .

other expiring authorities enhance congressional oversight capacity , promote research , and direct how funds are to be spent .

the discussion below summarizes authorizing language in the leadership and lantos - hyde acts that includes a precise end date .

the subsections are discussed sequentially .

congress has played a key role not only in ensuring that global hiv / aids , tb , and malaria programs are adequately funded , but also in shaping how the programs are to be implemented .

the section below highlights the sections in these acts that are enduring .

section 102 of the lantos - hyde act amended section 1 ( f ) ( 2 ) of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 to establish an interagency working group on hiv / aids headed by ogac and comprised of representatives from usaid and hhs to coordinate overall u.s. global hiv / aids policy and programs , among other things .

in an effort to oversee pepfar implementation and assess its impact , several sections in the leadership act , as amended , direct several groups to evaluate the initiative .

these sections are listed below .

 ( a complete list of reporting requirements and the status of compliance is outlined in table a - 2 ) .

section 101 requires ogac to publish annually a best practices report that highlights the programs receiving financial assistance from the united states that have the potential for replication or adaption , particularly at a low cost , across global aids programs .

section 101 requires ogac to publish annually a report on per - patient hiv / aids treatment costs .

section 403 requires the president to submit annual reports on the u.s. global hiv sexual transmission prevention strategy .

the lantos - hyde act ( primarily through amendments to permanent statutes ) includes authorities that expanded u.s. engagement in research and development for the identification of improved tools for controlling and curing the three diseases .

the relevant sections are summarized below .

subpart 1 of part d of title xxii of the public health service act , as amended , requires nih to carry out research on identifying safe and effective methods of preventing hiv transmission , including microbicides , among women .

section 307 of the public health service act , as amended , authorizes hhs to enter into cooperative agreements with other countries for the advancement of biomedical research , health care technology , health services research , and statistical analysis , and permitted hhs to provide financial assistance for the construction of facilities in foreign countries as part of related research efforts .

section 206 of the lantos - hyde act requires usaid to coordinate with other development agencies to collect evidence for informed decision - making and introduction of new vaccines , including potential hiv / aids , tb , and malaria vaccines ; and to review protocols for clinical trials .

the section also requires the united states to participate in negotiations for advance market commitments for the development of future vaccines , including potential vaccines for hiv / aids , tb , and malaria .

language in the section requires the president to produce a comprehensive report that sets forth a coordinated strategy to accelerate development of vaccines for infectious diseases .

as discussed earlier , the sustainability of pepfar programs and country ownership of related activities became an increasingly important part of debates about pepfar implementation .

section 301 ( c ) ( 6 ) of the lantos - hyde act amended section 104a ( d ) of the faa to require the development of compacts or framework agreements at the country level that promote host government commitment ; contribute to deeper integration of hiv / aid services into health systems ; strengthen health systems ; and enhance sustainability .

among other things , the country compacts outline the role of the united states and recipient countries in achieving national hiv / aids plans and specify cost sharing over a five - year period .

during the first phase of pepfar , a large body of research demonstrated how insufficient nutritional intake reduced the efficacy of hiv / aids treatment .

support for including nutritional support in pepfar programs grew and congress amended section 301 ( c ) of the faa to require ogac and usaid to adhere to world health organization ( who ) standards for hiv / aids food and nutrition services , integrate nutrition programs with hiv / aids activities , and provide food and nutritional support as a component of hiv / aids care and treatment programs .

debate about appropriate methods of preventing sexual transmission of hiv / aids has been intense , particularly in the early years of pepfar .

congress amended section 301 ( c ) of the faa and added language , known as the "conscience clause," to exempt faith - based groups and other organizations from engaging in activities that they deem morally objectionable .

specifically the faa , as amended , specifies that organizations , including faith - based organization ( fbos ) , shall not be required to endorse or utilize a multisectoral or comprehensive approach to combating hiv / aids ; endorse , utilize , make a referral to , become integrated with , or otherwise participate in any program or activity to which the organization has a religious or moral objection ; and shall not be discriminated against in the solicitation or issuance of such grants .

meanwhile , congress amended section 403 ( a ) of the leadership act to ensure that the promotion of abstinence and monogamy would remain a central focus in any u.s. hiv / aids sexual prevention strategy .

specifically , the leadership act , as amended requires ogac to establish an hiv sexual transmission prevention strategy governing the expenditure of funds .

if any country does not allocate at least 50% of sexual transmission prevention funds to activities promoting abstinence , delay of sexual debut , monogamy , fidelity , and partner reduction , the act directs ogac to submit a report to congress no later than 30 days after issuance of the strategy justifying the decision .

programs and activities that implement or purchase new prevention technologies or modalities , such as medical male circumcision and microbicides , are not to be included in determining compliance .

although discussions about reauthorizing the lantos - hyde act and leadership act , as amended , tend to focus on global hiv / aids programs , the acts also featured language that authorizes support for global tb and malaria programs .

in addition to expiring authorities cited above , language in the leadership act , as amended and lantos - hyde act ( and the legislation that they amended ) set program targets for tb programs , prioritized u.s. efforts to fight tb and malaria worldwide , and established a coordinator of all u.s. global malaria programs .

specific language included: section 104b ( b ) of the faa , as amended , makes tb a major objective of u.s. foreign assistance , supports the objectives of the multilateral global plan to stop tb , and establishes related goals for u.s. programs , which are to: halve the tb death and disease burden from 1990 levels and sustain or exceed the detection of at least 70% sputum smear - positive cases of tb and successfully treating at least 85% of the cases detected in countries with usaid programs .

section 302 ( d ) of the lantos - hyde act requires the president to submit an annual report to congress that describes the impact of u.s. foreign assistance on efforts to control tb .

section 303 of the leadership act , as amended , makes the prevention , control , treatment , and ultimate eradication of malaria a major u.s. objective .

section 304 of the leadership act , as amended , establishes a malaria coordinator at usaid to oversee and coordinate all u.s. resources for combating malaria worldwide .

section 304 of the leadership act , as amended required the president to submit an annual report to congress on u.s. assistance for preventing , treating , controlling , and eliminating malaria .

hiv / aids advocates have long fought u.s. laws prohibiting hiv - positive people without special waivers from entering the united states .

section 305 of the lantos - hyde act ended this practice by amending section 212 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) of the immigration and national act .

the amendment removed hiv / aids as a health - related ground for making an individual ineligible to receive a visa or be admitted into the united states .

due to the amendment , the united states was able to host the international aids conference for the first time in july 2012 .

people living with hiv / aids are critical participants in the biannual conference .

appendix a .

legislative tables the leadership act , as amended , lantos - hyde act , and foreign assistance act as amended , include several reporting requirements .

the tables below list each requirement by section .

the status column provides an interpretation of the extent to which the requirements have been addressed in formal reporting documents .

" / " means some elements of the reporting requirement were included in the report , but not all. .

" means all elements of the reporting requirement were included in the report .

"x" means no elements of the reporting requirement were included in the report .

the administration may have submitted reports to congress that adhered to reporting requirements but not made them publically available .

" ? .

indicates that the report was not available on an executive agency website , but may have been made available elsewhere .

this review of compliance is described chronologically and is limited to the reports indicated within the table notes .

appendix b .

summary of the pepfar stewardship and oversight act the pepfar stewardship and oversight act ( h.r .

3177 and s. 1545 ) extend certain funding authorities and strengthen program oversight .

the bills do not authorize multi - year funding levels for bilateral hiv / aids , tuberculosis ( tb ) , and malaria assistance overall , though they do authorize support for the global fund .

the table below distinguishes authorities the bills seek to amend from those that are set to expire .

permanent authorities are not detailed here .

