federal executive branch agencies hold an extensive real property portfolio that includes approximately 361,000 buildings .

these assets have been acquired over a period of decades to help agencies fulfill their diverse missions .

agencies hold buildings with a range of uses , including offices , health clinics , warehouses , and laboratories .

as agencies' missions change over time , so , too , do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether .

healthcare provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs .

similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) reduced its force by 36% after the cold war ended , and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures .

agencies are required to dispose of real property that they no longer need , but many continue to hold onto unneeded building space .

in fy2010 , the government held 77,700 buildings it identified as either not utilized or underutilized and spent $1.67 billion operating and maintaining them .

federal agencies have indicated that their disposal efforts are often hampered by legal and budgetary disincentives , and competing stakeholder interests .

this report begins with an explanation of the real property disposal process and then discusses some of the factors that have made disposition relatively inefficient and costly .

it then examines key provisions of four real property reform bills introduced in the 113 th congress: the federal real property asset management reform act of 2013 ( s. 1398 ) ; the excess federal building and property disposal act of 2013 ( h.r .

328 ) ; and two versions of the civilian property realignment act of 2013 ( h.r .

695 , s. 1715 ) , which take similar , but not identical approaches to reforming the real property disposal process .

this report concludes with a discussion of policy options for enhancing the disposal process , including the potential use of public - private partnerships to generate revenue from underutilized properties .

s. 1398 was introduced on july 30 , 2013 , and referred to the homeland security and governmental affairs committee .

the committee ordered the bill reported without amendment favorably on july 31 , 2013 .

s. 1398 takes a broad approach to real property management , one that builds on existing resources and expertise , requires new performance measures and reporting , emphasizes finding opportunities for agency consolidation , colocation , and reconfiguration , and requires a thorough examination of the federal leasing process .

it would expand the role of the frpc in collecting and analyzing real property data .

s. 1398 would also require the establishment of a real property database that might enhance congressional oversight .

h.r .

328 was introduced january 22 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on oversight and government reform .

the committee ordered it to be reported without amendment favorably on march 20 , 2013 .

h.r .

328 also takes a broad approach to real property disposal reform .

it includes provisions that would expedite the disposal of certain high - value properties , reduce the scope of the mckinney - vento act , and require landholding agencies to implement policies and practices that would reduce the number of unneeded properties in their portfolios .

the bill would also require the establishment of a real property database that might enhance congressional oversight .

there are currently two bills before congress that share the title civilian property realignment act ( cpra ) .

h.r .

695 was introduced on february 14 , 2013 , and referred to three committees: transportation and infrastructure , oversight and government reform , and rules .

as of june 13 , 2014 , no further action has been taken in the house .

s. 1715 was introduced november 14 , 2013 , and was referred to the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

as of june 13 , 2014 , no further action has been taken by the senate .

the house and senate versions of cpra take similar , but not identical approaches to reforming the real property disposal process .

in terms of overarching structure , both the house and senate versions would draw on the military base realignment and closure ( brac ) model of real property disposal by establishing an independent commission to assess agency portfolios and to recommend actions for reducing the government's inventory of unneeded and underutilized buildings .

within this structure , the bills differ in a number of ways , the most substantive of which are identified in the following discussion of key provisions .

 table 1 , below , compares key provisions from each of the four proposals examined in this report — s. 1398 , h.r .

328 , h.r .

695 , and s. 1715 .

an analytical discussion follows table 1 .

each of the bills analyzed in this report would establish procedures for selecting federal properties to sell and for the distribution of sales proceeds .

generally , each of the bills would apply net proceeds towards further real property disposals and reducing the federal deficit or debt .

it is not clear , however , that much revenue might be generated under each bill , given the lack of even the most basic data needed for analysis .

for example , it is not known how many excess , surplus , and underutilized properties are held by each agency , how much it would cost to bring each property to market , and the estimated fair market value of individual properties .

frpp data show that sales have not generated significant net proceeds — the amount of revenue remaining after the cost of bringing the property to market is deducted — in recent years .

for example , in fy2010 , the government sold 466 properties that generated in $57 million in net proceeds , and in fy2009 the government sold 2,228 properties that generated $50 million in net proceeds .

the costs of bringing properties to market — whether they are due to environmental remediation or historic preservation requirements — or the undesirable location of unneeded properties are among reasons that so little profit is generated through sales .

the proposed bills may increase sales revenue , however , by bringing properties to market that are in more desirable locations .

h.r .

695 , for example , would both require the civilian property realignment commission to recommend at least five properties that are not identified as excess or surplus — and therefore not subject to disposal requirements — but which have relatively high fair market value ( $500 million ) .

similarly , under s. 1398 the director of omb would have the authority to require agencies to sell properties that are not excess or surplus .

if agencies are holding properties that are valuable , and which they have not declared excess — the first step in the disposal process — then these bills may provide a mechanism by which those properties may be brought to the market and possibly generate greater net proceeds than sales have in recent years .

h.r .

328 would limit the scope of its real property disposal pilot program to properties that are declared excess or surplus , but it might also increase sales revenue and net proceeds by bringing the 15 properties most likely to sell at a high market value to be auctioned .

if agencies invest their real property funds in bringing these properties to market as soon as possible , then valuable properties which might otherwise have been conveyed or slowly moving through the screening process would be up for sale weeks , months , or even years sooner than under the current process .

frpp data also show that the reduction of operating and maintenance costs has yielded greater annual savings to the government than net proceeds from sales have .

in fy2010 the government reduced its annual operating costs by $274 million — four times the amount of net proceeds from sales that same year .

these figures do not include savings reported in the frpp data that are the result of transferring properties between federal agencies , since the operating and maintenance costs have only been shifted from one agency to another , not eliminated .

there are underutilized and vacant properties , perhaps thousands of them , which agencies cannot dispose of because they lack the funding to make needed repairs .

the total cost of these repairs government - wide is not known , but several agencies have reported repair backlogs in excess of $1 billion .

public - private partnerships ( ppps ) may be an option for funding some of these repairs .

while ppps may be structured in many different ways , they generally entail a contractual relationship between a non - federal entity — defined here as a private sector entity or state or local government — and a federal agency , in which the non - federal entity provides the capital to renovate or develop an underutilized property in return for a share of the revenue the improved property generates .

some agencies have the authority to enter into specific types of ppps — the department of veterans affairs can enter into enhanced use leases , for example — which has enabled them to generate positive cash flow from underutilized or vacant properties .

expanding ppp authorities , however , might come with risks to the government .

many agencies may lack sufficient expertise among their staff to negotiate ppp contracts effectively , and the result may be a contract that is not in the best interest of the government .

