congress was an active participant in the policy responses to the 2007-2009 recession and its aftermath and has an ongoing interest in macroeconomic conditions .

current macroeconomic concerns include whether the economy is in a sustained recovery , rapidly reducing unemployment , and speeding a return to normal output and employment growth .

faced with fiscal consolidation and limited further impetus from monetary policy , the momentum of the current economic recovery will likely be determined by the strength of spending by the private economy , particularly the strength of consumer spending .

in the aftermath of the deep 2007-2009 recession , involving a huge loss of net worth and a large increase in the burden of debt , households' actions to repair their balance sheets is thought by many economists to be a key factor dissipating the strength of consumer spending and , in turn , slowing economy - wide recovery and job creation .

where households currently stand in repairing their balance sheets is likely to have a strong effect on the strength of consumer spending .

if substantially complete , it would point to the prospect of stronger consumer spending and increased momentum of the economic recovery ; but if substantial wealth building is still needed , it would diminish that prospect .

this report begins with a discussion ( accompanied by graphics ) of the slower than normal pace of the ongoing economic recovery and the likely role in that of weak consumer spending forced by a sharp loss of household net worth during the recession and the subsequent need to rebuild that lost wealth .

next , the report examines ( also accompanied by graphics ) where balance sheet repair currently stands , paying particular attention to the composition of assets that have been accumulated and the degree of debt reduction achieved .

the report then considers the near - term prospect for stronger consumer spending and more rapid economic recovery .

the report concludes with a discussion of the possible implications of household balance sheet repair for economic policy .

a number of indicators paint a mixed picture of the prospect for stronger consumer spending .

consumer confidence , as measured by households' attitudes and expectations about their finances , economic conditions and the buying climate has increased to the highest level in six years according to the thomson reuters / university of michigan index .

the federal reserve's senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices reported for the fifth consecutive month that the demand for prime residential mortgages had strengthened on net .

in addition , the demand for automobile and credit card loans had strengthened on balance .

the personal saving rate out of real disposable income in 2012 was 4.1% , down from 5.1% in 2011 .

in the first quarter of 2013 , the personal saving rate decreased to 2.5% .

a fall in the saving rate could be an indicator of households turning away from balance sheet repair and toward increased consumption spending .

however , the first quarter result could also be a manifestation of lower disposable income caused by the increase in the payroll tax in january .

with income down , households may have reached into saving to maintain their level of consumption spending , an action unlikely to be sustainable .

real consumer spending in the first half of 2013 increased at an annual rate of 2.0% , slower than the 2.2% pace seen over the previous three years .

this rate of spending falls short of what would be needed to accelerate the pace of the recovery ( and as noted above may have received a temporary boost from reduced saving ) .

also , core retail sales for april through june 2013 have slowed relative to the first three months of the year .

if household net worth is judged not to have fully recovered from the damage incurred in 2008-2009 , particularly for the typical household , then this would suggest to some a continuing need for macroeconomic policy to provide stimulus to maintain the recovery's upward momentum .

at this point , stimulus from fiscal policy has ended and concerns about long term fiscal imbalance are a barrier to its being reapplied .

so the question of continued need relates to monetary policy and when the federal reserve could begin to taper its asset purchases associated with its current policy of quantitative easing ( commonly referred to as qe3 ) .

the fed has said that a slowing of qe3 is contingent on clear signs of improving economic conditions , particularly labor market conditions .

the incomplete repair of the household balance sheet would be one factor suggesting that those clear signs are not likely to appear in the immediate future .

the current state of household net worth , particularly the still large number of households with negative equity in their homes , could also have implications for the continuing need for federal policies such as the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) that are aimed at providing direct help in removing the burden of household debt through policies that restructure mortgage debt .

