the syrian government's apparent acceptance of a russian proposal for syria to acknowledge its chemical weapons and place them under international control has recast the ongoing debates over how to respond to an august 21 chemical weapons attack and bring an end to the syrian civil war .

other parties including senator richard lugar had proposed a u.s. - russian - facilitated disarmament initiative prior to the announcement .

on september 10 , syrian officials signaled their willingness "to disclose the locations of chemical weapons , to stop producing them , and to reveal these locations to representatives of russia , other states , and the united nations" with the goal of "ending our possession of all chemical weapons. .

on september 12 , in an interview on russian television , president asad reportedly said that "syria is placing its chemical weapons under international control because of russia .

the u.s. threats did not influence the decision. .

president asad also stated that his government will be sending documents "in the next few days" to the united nations for joining the international convention that bans the use of chemical munitions .

speaking in a national address on september 10 , president barack obama said: ... over the last few days , we've seen some encouraging signs , in part because of the credible threat of u.s. military action , as well as constructive talks that i had with president putin .

the russian government has indicated a willingness to join with the international community in pushing assad to give up his chemical weapons .

the assad regime has now admitted that it has these weapons and even said they'd join the chemical weapons convention , which prohibits their use .

it's too early to tell whether this offer will succeed , and any agreement must verify that the assad regime keeps its commitments , but this initiative has the potential to remove the threat of chemical weapons without the use of force , particularly because russia is one of assad's strongest allies .

i have therefore asked the leaders of congress to postpone a vote to authorize the use of force while we pursue this diplomatic path .

i'm sending secretary of state john kerry to meet his russian counterpart on thursday , and i will continue my own discussions with president putin .

i've spoken to the leaders of two of our closest allies - - france and the united kingdom - - and we will work together in consultation with russia and china to put forward a resolution at the u.n. security council requiring assad to give up his chemical weapons and to ultimately destroy them under international control .

president obama and senior members of his administration continue to seek authorization from congress for a limited use of military force against the asad regime while exploring the potential for the establishment of international control over syria's chemical weapons stockpiles and related elements of its chemical weapons program .

the governments of china , the united kingdom , and france have responded favorably to the proposal , and , as of september 11 , russia had rejected a french plan for a binding united nations security council resolution that could be enforced with military action .

u.s. secretary of state john kerry and russian foreign minister sergei lavrov are scheduled to meet in geneva , switzerland , on september 12 to discuss the proposal further .

some syrian rebel leaders have rejected the proposal and characterized it as a delaying tactic while maintaining their calls for international assistance and punishment of the syrian government .

on august 30 , the obama administration presented intelligence analysis stating with "high confidence" that the syrian government was responsible for an august 21 chemical weapons attack against civilians in rebel - held areas of the suburbs of damascus .

the syrian government continues to categorically deny any responsibility for any chemical weapons attack .

president obama called the syrian government's reported use of chemical weapons "an assault on human dignity" that "presents a serious danger to our national security. .

he further requested that congress authorize the use of force for military operations "against syrian regime targets" to "hold the assad regime accountable for their use of chemical weapons , deter this kind of behavior , and degrade their capacity to carry it out. .

according to the president , such military operations would be "limited in duration and scope" and "would not put boots on the ground. .

in the wake of the russian disarmament proposal , president obama requested that lawmakers pause in their formal consideration of proposed legislation to authorize the use of force in syria .

nevertheless , debate continues among members of congress about the pros and cons of proposed authorization approaches as well as the disarmament proposal now under discussion .

president obama has stated his view that "the credible threat of u.s. military action" contributed to the emergence of the disarmament initiative , and has underscored that he has "ordered our military to maintain their current posture to keep the pressure on assad and to be in a position to respond if diplomacy fails. .

a draft resolution authorizing the use of force submitted to congress by the white house would authorize the president: to use the armed forces of the united states as he determines to be necessary and appropriate in connection with the use of chemical weapons or other weapons of mass destruction in the conflict in syria in order to – ( 1 ) prevent or deter the use or proliferation ( including the transfer to terrorist groups or other state or non - state actors ) , within , to or from syria , of any weapons of mass destruction , including chemical or biological weapons or components of or materials used in such weapons ; or ( 2 ) protect the united states and its allies and partners against the threat posed by such weapons .

lawmakers in the senate and house are considering alternative authorization proposals , amid concerns that the administration's proposed text may not sufficiently limit the scope or duration of any potential military response .

others reportedly are drafting proposals that would reflect the disarmament proposal under consideration and could seek to make an authorization for the use of u.s. military force contingent on the satisfaction of criteria related to the enforcement of a disarmament agreement .

on september 4 , the senate foreign relations committee debated and adopted an alternative resolution authorizing the use of military force for specific purposes , including to deter further use of chemical weapons and to prevent the transfer to terrorist groups or other state or non - state actors within syria of any weapons of mass destruction .

the provision would limit the deployment of u.s. forces on the ground for "combat operations" but may not constrain the deployment of u.s. forces in syria for other purposes .

as of september 11 , the house had not formally considered an alternative authorization proposal , although some members had circulated draft proposals or introduced measures that would restrict the availability of funds for u.s. military operations or support for opposition groups in syria .

in syria , the brutal civil war continues , even as syrian government forces were reported to be taking measures to prepare for potential u.s. - led military operations against them .

president bashar al asad has stated that the united states and others accusing it of carrying out chemical weapons strikes have not presented any evidence to support their allegations , and he has warned that external military intervention in syria's civil war risks igniting a regional conflict .

u.s. military officials have confirmed that the syrian government has taken steps to prepare for potential attacks , but as of september 10 , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff general martin dempsey testified that "the indications are , today , that [syria's chemical weapons capability] does remain under the firm control of the regime. .

syrian officials have requested that the united nations security council act to prevent aggression against syria .

iran's supreme leader , grand ayatollah ali khamene'i , has said that a u.s. attack on syria would be a "disaster for the region. .

there have been similar statements from other senior iranian leaders , but these leaders have not threatened that iran itself would conduct any retaliation .

iranian revolutionary guard commander major general mohammed ali jafari has stated that , "the u.s. imagination about limited military intervention in syria is merely an illusion , as reactions will be coming from beyond syria's borders. .

russian and chinese officials remain opposed to the u.s. proposal for punitive military strikes , while the arab league has modified its original position insisting on united nations security council action to call for the security council and the international community to "take the deterrent and necessary measures against the culprits of this crime for which the syrian regime bears responsibility. .

the arab league has welcomed the russian disarmament proposal , but arab league secretary general nabil al arabi has emphasized that the group remains focused on punishment for the august 21 incident and international action to bring an end to the civil war .

united kingdom leaders stated prior to the russian proposal that they have no intention of seeking new authorization from parliament to participate in any international military operation following parliament's rejection of a measure to do so .

french government officials have proposed measures to implement the russian proposal and presented supporting intelligence on september 2 to french legislators concerning what they describe as "the massive use of chemical agents" by syrian government forces .

u.s. military assets remain in place in the vicinity of syria .

as of september 2 , five guided missile destroyers were reported to be deployed in the eastern mediterranean sea: the uss stout , uss gravely , uss mahan , uss barry , and uss ramage .

the uss san antonio , carrying forces from the 26th marine expeditionary unit , and unspecified attack submarines also were reported to be nearby .

the uss kearsarge and the uss nimitz aircraft carrier strike group were reported to be deploying westward toward the red sea .

in announcing his decision that punitive military action was required on august 31 , president obama stated , "i'm comfortable going forward without the approval of a united nations security council that , so far , has been completely paralyzed and unwilling to hold asad accountable. .

president obama also said , "i believe i have the authority to carry out this military action without specific congressional authorization. .

the war in syria and the debate over possible punitive u.s. military action against the asad regime for its alleged use of chemical weapons pose a uniquely challenging series of questions for policy makers .

the overarching questions remain how to define , prioritize , and secure the core interests of the united states with regard to syria's complex civil war .

the immediate questions are whether and how best to respond to the apparent use of chemical weapons in syria and how such a response might affect u.s. interests and standing regionally and globally .

in weighing these questions , many members of congress and administration officials are seeking both to protect concrete u.s. national security interests and to preserve abstract international security principles that may serve those interests .

a mass casualty chemical weapons attack in the damascus suburbs on august 21 was the latest and most deadly of a string of reported instances where syrian forces allegedly have used chemical weapons despite president obama's prior statement that the transfer or use of chemical weapons is "a red line" that would "change his calculus. .

the president and senior members of his administration have argued that the united states has a national security interest in ensuring that "when countries break international norms on chemical weapons they are held accountable. .

administration officials and some observers believe that by failing to respond after setting out a so - called "red line," the united states would risk not only undermining any international norms against the use of such weapons but would risk undermining its own credibility .

by his own account , president obama believes that extensive , sustained u.s. military intervention to shape the outcome of syria's civil conflict is undesirable .

instead , the obama administration has worked with congress to increase u.s. assistance to non - radical elements of the opposition .

in response to previous instances of alleged chemical weapons use , the administration reportedly notified congress in july 2012 of its intent to begin covert u.s. arming of select groups .

on august 31 , the president stated his conclusion that the united states should respond to alleged syrian chemical weapons use with limited militarily strikes .

administration officials have cited a number of reasons for their skepticism of direct military involvement to shift the balance of power in the underlying conflict , including fears of exacerbating the violence ; inviting greater regional spillover or intervention ; or opening a power vacuum that could benefit extremists .

other foreign policy priorities also have influenced the administration's position , such as a desire to maintain limited international consensus on iran's nuclear program and concern that sectarian and strategic competition in syria could ignite a regional conflict and threaten u.s. allies and security interests .

while condemning asad as a thug and a murderer and aiding some of his adversaries , u.s. officials have continued to stress the need for a negotiated political solution to the conflict in the hopes of keeping the syrian state intact , securing its chemical weapon stockpiles and borders , and combating extremist groups now active there .

some critics have argued that the potential risks that even a limited military response could pose to these objectives outweigh the potential benefits to the united states of reasserting an international standard or being seen to have reliably followed through on a commitment to act .

these arguments suggest that if a military strike makes the political solution desired by u.s. officials less likely , then the destabilizing conflict could continue or worsen .

similarly , this line of argument suggests that if military operations were to dramatically degrade remaining state authority — whether intentionally or unintentionally — then undesired outcomes with regard to terrorism , proliferation , or mass atrocities could occur .

still other critics of the administration , including some members of congress , charge that u.s. hesitation to intervene militarily to protect syrian civilians and / or help oust the asad government has unnecessarily prolonged the fighting .

over time , these critics argue , the costs of inaction have grown intolerably as the humanitarian situation has deteriorated , violent extremist groups have seized the initiative , and syria's neighbors , including several u.s. partners , have been overwhelmed by refugees and threatened with violence .

others have argued that by failing to halt the fighting in syria , the united states and others are exacerbating already volatile sunni - shiite sectarian tensions throughout middle east , thus posing risks to other strategically important countries .

finally , some critics argue that u.s. global credibility is being diminished by asad's reluctance to step down or end abuses of civilians despite u.s. demands .

the russian disarmament proposal and syria's reported acceptance of its basic terms have introduced even further complication to these debates .

at present debate centers on the parameters of the proposal , the feasibility of implementation , the risks and rewards it poses relative to u.s. regional security and nonproliferation goals , and its implications for u.s. international leadership .

syrian opposition leaders' rejection of the proposal and their calls for punitive action and assistance in their struggle against the asad regime may complicate u.s. relations with opposition groups moving forward .

reconciling immediate u.s. goals with regard to the august 21 incident , medium - term u.s. goals with regard to the conflict and syria , and overarching goals related to weapons of mass destruction may prove challenging .

sorting through these competing perspectives and prescriptions now falls to members of congress as they consider the president's proposed course of action , his request that congress authorize the use of force , the feasibility of international disarmament proposals for syria , and the future of u.s. policy with regard to the conflict in syria and its regional consequences .

the august 21 incident occurred as the popular - uprising - turned - armed - rebellion in syria is in its third year and has devolved into a bloody struggle of attrition between the government and a diverse array of opposition militias .

over the course of syria's civil war , momentum has shifted between government and rebel forces .

support provided by iran and lebanese hezbollah fighters appears to have helped the asad regime wrest the initiative from the opposition near the city of homs and to launch counteroffensives on the outskirts of the capital .

the august 21 attack appears to have been part of a fierce and ongoing syrian military bombardment of rebel - held eastern suburbs of damascus .

various opposition forces control areas of northwestern , eastern , and southern syria ( see figure 2 below ) .

in areas near the northern city of aleppo , diverse rebel forces have announced limited tactical successes in recent weeks , including the fall of a key military air base .

according to close observers of the conflict , some extremist militia groups are seeking to assert political and social control over some areas in which they operate , while they and others among the range of "extraordinarily fractured" militia groups continue to battle regime forces for contested areas .

reportedly , the supreme military council ( smc ) , to which the united states has provided aid , "is still far from a functioning rebel leadership. .

european press reporting contends that offensives by rebels in northern syria and by foreign trained rebels in the vicinity of damascus have caused serious alarm among regime leaders since mid - august .

united nations officials cite estimates that over 100,000 syrians have been killed in the conflict .

as many as 4.25 million syrians have been displaced inside the country and more than 2 million syrian refugees are in neighboring countries .

the syrian conflict and the humanitarian crisis it has created have deepened the economic and political challenges facing the region and exacerbated sectarian tensions and violence , particularly in iraq and lebanon .

to date , the united states has provided over $1 billion in humanitarian aid in syria and neighboring countries , with u.n. appeals seeking over $4 billion in assistance .

president obama called for syrian president bashar al asad's resignation in august 2011 , but , as noted above , the obama administration has rejected calls for more direct u.s. intervention in syria .

nevertheless , the intensifying regional costs of the syrian crisis and reports of chemical weapons use by syrian government forces have placed increasing pressure on the obama administration to respond .

secretary kerry has signaled that the administration may seek to further augment u.s. support to some opposition elements in parallel with any limited military operations focused on chemical weapons .

in the 113 th congress , some members have introduced proposed legislation that would authorize expanded assistance to the opposition .

h.r .

1327 , the free syria act of 2013 , would , among other things , authorize the president , under certain conditions and with various reporting and certification requirements , to supply nonlethal and / or lethal support to syrian opposition groups .

s. 960 , the syria transition support act of 2013 , would , among other things , authorize the president , notwithstanding any other provision of law that restricts assistance to syria , to provide assistance , including defense articles , defense services , and training to vetted opposition forces .

the senate foreign relations committee approved s. 960 as amended by a 15-3 vote in may 2013 .

an important u.s. concern regarding possible military action against syria is potential retaliation by syria and its allies — especially iran and lebanon - based hezbollah , but also possibly gaza - based militants such as palestine islamic jihad — against israel .

possible threats of retaliation against other u.s. regional allies ( including turkey , jordan , and gulf arab states ) are linked to these countries' involvement in aiding the syrian opposition and potentially serving as bases for u.s. - led military operations .

even though israel has reportedly carried out limited strikes in syria this year to prevent the transfer of weapons to hezbollah , retaliatory threats against it appear to stem less from its recent involvement in the conflict than from historical and geopolitical animosities and probable desires among syria and its allies to deter the united states from acting militarily — given long - standing u.s. interests in israel's security .

at least since the 1991 persian gulf war , u.s. regional military planning has taken into account the possibility of attacks on israel and the potential for any israeli response to trigger wider regional war .

in the present case , u.s. consideration of this factor is seemingly being weighed alongside concerns about possible consequences for israel ( in connection with overarching questions about defense of u.s. allies and u.s. credibility ) if either the united states does not respond to the asad regime's apparent use of chemical weapons in syria , or any response it makes is ineffective .

in september 3 hearing testimony before the senate foreign relations committee regarding the possible use of u.s. military force in syria , secretary kerry said: i can make it crystal clear to you that israel will be less safe unless the united states takes this action .

iran and hezbollah are two of the three biggest allies of assad .

and iran and hezbollah are the two single biggest enemies of israel .

so , if — iran and hezbollah are advantaged by the united states not curbing assad's use of chemical weapons , there is a much greater likelihood that at some point down the road , hezbollah , who has been one of the principal reasons for a change in the situation on the ground , will have access to these weapons of mass destruction .

israeli prime minister binyamin netanyahu has said , "now the whole world is watching .

iran is watching and it wants to see what would be the reaction on the use of chemical weapons. .

yet , some accounts indicate that israeli officials "have little desire to see [asad] toppled," given what may follow , and are "wary of creating any perception that they are meddling in either american politics or the civil war in neighboring syria. .

american jewish and self - described "pro - israel" organizations are participating in the public discourse on the question of u.s. intervention .

according to a washington post article , "groups such as the american israel public affairs committee and the conference of presidents of major american jewish organizations called for bipartisan consensus [on september 3] around the use of force. .

j street , another organization , issued an august 29 statement on its website that read , "as president obama and world leaders contemplate the appropriate course of action , we are cognizant that there are no easy or clear - cut solutions. .

intense current speculation centers around the potential for punitive u.s. - led military strike on syrian government forces and the russian government's proposed disarmament plan for syria .

action on either of these initiatives would have major implications for the ongoing conflict in syria and the international crisis the conflict has created .

given stated u.s. objectives and fears of a deeper power vacuum in syria , it appears unlikely that any u.s. actions in the immediate future would attempt to eliminate the asad regime entirely .

president obama has said "i have no interest in any kind of open - ended conflict in syria," and , at present , u.s. officials hope to achieve a negotiated political settlement to establish a new government that can keep the syrian state intact , secure its chemical weapon stockpiles , secure its borders , and prevent or combat terrorism .

the importance of the war in syria for broader u.s. national security policy objectives may be linked more to its consequences for regional and global stability than to the details and outcome of the syrian conflict itself .

the civil war has sharpened divisions between the united states and some members of the european union on the one hand and russia and china on the other over competing concepts of how the international community should enforce peace and security and defend international norms .

in the wake of the libya conflict , the latter countries have continually opposed u.s. and european efforts to use the united nations security council to endorse the protection of civilians in syria .

it remains to be seen whether the members of the security council will find a mutually acceptable formula for implementing the proposed disarmament initiative .

the war also has raised concern that transnational terrorist groups modeled on al qaeda in afghanistan - pakistan may be resurgent in syria and may gain access to advanced conventional weapons and weapons of mass destruction .

additionally , the syrian government's alleged use of chemical weapons against its opponents and civilians is not only a serious development in the syrian conflict but a potential precedent for other countries with possible chemical , biological , or nuclear programs .

how the united states and others respond in the days and weeks ahead will most likely be watched closely in countries concerned with the potential for confrontation over similar programs in iran and north korea .

the war in syria also has been a major dividing line within the united states over competing visions of u.s. foreign policy .

some commentators continue to assert that the american public is "war - weary," and that military intervention is inadvisable when public backing for expending "blood and treasure" on an operation of any duration and scope is uncertain .

others suggest that u.s. global leadership is needed more than ever to steer the country and its people away from what some see as isolationist tendencies .

the following analysis is based on the following texts available as of september 6 , 2013: administration draft proposal: cnn , text of draft legislation submitted by obama to congress , august 31 , 2013 .

s.j.res .

21 : available online from the senate foreign relations committee at http: / / www.foreign.senate.gov / imo / media / doc / s.%20j.%20res.%2021.pdf draft proposal from representatives van hollen and connolly: available at: http: / / www.lawfareblog.com / wp - content / uploads / 2013 / 09 / 165278488-house - van - hollen - connolly - syria - resolution.pd .

