this report provides a status update on fy2014 appropriations actions for accounts traditionally funded in the appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) .

this bill provides discretionary and mandatory appropriations to three federal departments: the department of labor ( dol ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of education ( ed ) .

in addition , the bill provides annual appropriations for more than a dozen related agencies , including the social security administration ( ssa ) .

discretionary funds represent less than one - quarter of the total funds appropriated in the l - hhs - ed bill .

nevertheless , the l - hhs - ed bill is typically the largest single source of discretionary funds for domestic non - defense federal programs among the various appropriations bills ( the department of defense bill is the largest source of discretionary funds among all federal programs ) .

the bulk of this report is focused on discretionary appropriations because these funds receive the most attention during the appropriations process .

the l - hhs - ed bill typically is one of the more controversial of the regular appropriations bills because of the size of its funding total and the scope of its programs , as well as various related policy issues addressed in the bill , such as restrictions on the use of federal funds for abortion and for research on human embryos and stem cells .

see the key policy staff at the end of this report for information on which analysts to contact at the congressional research service with questions on specific agencies and programs funded in the l - hhs - ed bill .

this report is divided into several sections .

the current section provides an explanation of the scope of the l - hhs - ed bill ( and hence , the scope of this report ) , as well as an introduction to important terminology and concepts that carry throughout the report .

next is a series of sections describing major congressional actions on fy2014 appropriations and ( for context ) a review of the conclusion of the fy2013 appropriations process .

the following section provides a high level summary and analysis of proposed and enacted mandatory and discretionary appropriations for fy2014 , compared to fy2013 pre - and post - sequester funding levels .

the body of the report concludes with overview sections for each of the major components of the bill: the department of labor , the department of health and human services , the department of education , and related agencies .

these sections provide selected highlights of the fy2014 omnibus , compared to proposed appropriations in the senate committee - reported bill ( s. 1284 ) , the fy2014 president's request , and final fy2013 ( pre - and post - sequester ) .

finally , an appendix to the report provides a summary of budget enforcement activities .

this includes a brief description of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) , a discussion of sequestration in fy2013 and fy2014 , and an overview of other budget enforcement issues , including congressional work on an fy2014 budget resolution and 302 ( b ) allocations ( i.e. , budget enforcement caps ) .

 table 1 provides a timeline of major legislative action toward full - year fy2014 l - hhs - ed appropriations for fy2014 .

the remainder of this section provides additional detail on these and other steps toward full - year l - hhs - ed appropriations .

 table 2 displays the total amount of fy2014 discretionary and mandatory l - hhs - ed funding provided or proposed , by title , compared to comparable pre - and post - sequester fy2013 funding levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority provided in the bill ( i.e. , all funds appropriated in the current bill , regardless of the fiscal year in which the funds become available ) , not total budget authority available for the current fiscal year .

 ( for a comparable table showing current year budget authority , see table a - 2 in the appendix to this report. ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding , hhs received roughly 80% of total l - hhs - ed appropriations in fy2013 and fy2014 ( see figure 2 for the bill composition in fy2014 ) .

this is largely due to the sizable amount of mandatory funds included in the hhs appropriation , the majority of which is for medicaid grants to states and payments to health care trust funds .

after hhs , the department of education and related agencies represent the next - largest shares of total l - hhs - ed funding , accounting for about 9% apiece in fy2013 and the fy2014 omnibus .

the majority of appropriations for ed are discretionary , while the bulk of funding for the related agencies goes toward mandatory payments and administrative costs of the supplemental security income program at the social security administration .

finally , the department of labor accounts for the smallest share of total l - hhs - ed funds: 2% in fy2013 and the fy2014 omnibus .

when looking only at discretionary appropriations , however , the overall composition of l - hhs - ed funding is noticeably different ( see figure 2 ) .

hhs accounts for a smaller share of discretionary appropriations ( 43% in fy2013 and the fy2014 omnibus ) , while ed accounts for a larger share ( 41% in fy2013 and the fy2014 omnibus ) .

together , these two departments represent the majority ( 84% ) of discretionary l - hhs - ed appropriations in fy2013 and fy2014 .

meanwhile , the department of labor and related agencies combine to account for a roughly even split of the remaining 16% of discretionary l - hhs - ed funds in fy2013 and fy2014 .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for unemployment insurance benefits payments ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percent changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds for hhs agencies provided through other appropriations bills ( eg , funding for the food and drug administration ) or outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for medicare or pre - appropriated mandatory funds provided by authorizing laws , such as the patient protection and affordable care act [aca , p.l .

111-148] ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percent changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , certain direct appropriations for federal direct student loans and pell grants ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percent changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

note that figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefit payments by the social security administration ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percent changes in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

the fy2014 omnibus provided roughly $70.11 billion in combined mandatory and discretionary funding for related agencies funded through this bill .

this is about $2.29 billion ( + 3.4% ) more than the fy2013 post - sequester funding level and about $584 million ( +0.8% ) more than the fy2014 request .

 ( see table 10 . ) .

of the total provided for related agencies in the fy2014 omnibus , roughly $14.06 billion ( 20% ) is discretionary .

this amount is $725 million ( + 5.4% ) more than the post - sequester fy2013 discretionary funding level and $591 million ( + 4.4% ) more than the discretionary total requested in the fy2014 president's budget .

in general , the largest share of funding appropriated to related agencies in the l - hhs - ed bill goes to the social security administration ( ssa ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding , the ssa accounted for 97% of the entire related agencies appropriation in fy2014 .

the bulk of mandatory ssa funding from the l - hhs - ed bill supports the supplemental security income program which provides means tested benefits to disabled children and adults and to person 65 and older .

when looking exclusively at discretionary funding , the ssa remains the largest component of the related agencies appropriation , constituting roughly 84% of discretionary funds in fy2014 .

the majority of discretionary ssa funding covers administrative expenses for social security , ssi , and medicare .

after the ssa , the next - largest agency of the related agencies appropriation is the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) , which constituted roughly 2% of all funding and 8% of discretionary funding in fy2014 .

typically , each of the remaining related agencies receives less than $1 billion from the annual l - hhs - ed appropriations bill .

for more information , see table 11 .

the most significant highlight from the fy2014 budget and appropriations actions among the l - hhs - ed related agencies was ssa's proposal to largely remove funding for program integrity activities from the limitation on administrative expenses ( lae ) account and create , through authorizing legislation , a new source of mandatory annual funding for program integrity activities in a new program integrity administrative expenses ( piae ) account .

no legislation creating the piae account or the mandatory funding for program integrity has been introduced in either house of congress and no such provision was part of p.l .

113-76 .

the ssa's total program integrity request for fy2014 was $1.5 billion , with $273 million requested as part of lae and the remaining $1.2 billion requested via the proposed mandatory spending for the piae account .

the fy2014 omnibus did not include the proposed piae or any mandatory program integrity spending , but did include $1.2 billion in program integrity funding as part of lae , an increase of $441 million ( +58% ) over the pre - sequester program integrity funding provided for fy2013 .

budget control act and sequestration congress considered fy2014 appropriations in the context of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) which established initial discretionary spending limits for fy2012-fy2021 .

the bca also tasked a joint select committee on deficit reduction with developing a deficit reduction plan for congress and the president to enact by january 15 , 2012 .

the failure of congress and the president to enact deficit reduction legislation by that date triggered an automatic spending reduction process consisting of a combination of sequestration and lower discretionary spending limits .

fy2013 for fy2013 , the bca called for sequestration of both mandatory and discretionary spending .

president obama issued the required fy2013 sequestration order on march 1 , 2013 .

concurrently , the office of management and budget ( omb ) issued a report containing the amounts by which budgetary resources must be reduced in order to achieve the necessary spending reductions in fy2013 .

in general , omb estimated that the joint committee sequester would require a 5.0% reduction in non - exempt nondefense discretionary funding , a 2.0% reduction in certain medicare funding ( subject to a special rule ) , and a 5.1% reduction for most other non - exempt nondefense mandatory funding .

 ( omb also reported on the required percent reductions of non - exempt defense spending — 7.8% for non - exempt defense discretionary and 7.9% for non - exempt defense mandatory — but these do not apply to l - hhs - ed. ) .

omb applied these percentages to funding levels in place at that time ( a six - month cr , p.l .

112-175 ) to determine dollar amount reductions for each budget account .

these reductions were later applied to full - year fy2013 funding levels following the enactment of full - year funding in p.l .

113-6 .

fy2014 and beyond for fy2014-fy2021 , the bca requires annual reductions to both mandatory and discretionary spending .

these reductions are to be achieved through a combination of ( 1 ) continued sequestration for non - exempt mandatory programs and ( 2 ) lower spending limits for discretionary programs .

subsequent laws ( p.l .

113-67 , p.l .

113-82 ) have amended the bca to extend sequestration for non - exempt mandatory programs through fy2024 .

in addition , the discretionary spending limits for fy2014 and fy2015 have been modified by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra , p.l .

112-240 ) and the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba , division a of p.l .

113-67 ) .

the bca does not call for sequestration of discretionary spending in fy2014 unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits ( also called budget caps ) is breached .

there are separate limits for defense ( budget function 050 ) and nondefense spending , but the l - hhs - ed bill only includes funding in the nondefense category .

on april 10 , 2013 , concurrent with the release of the fy2014 president's budget , president obama issued a sequestration order for non - exempt fy2014 mandatory spending .

the sequester order took effect on october 1 , 2013 .

omb's fy2014 joint committee reductions report stated that the sequestration percentages were equal to 2% of nonexempt medicare spending and 7.2% of non - exempt nondefense mandatory spending in fy2014 .

 ( the report also estimated reductions of 9.8% in non - exempt defense mandatory spending , but this is not applicable to the l - hhs - ed bill. ) .

the omb report's appendix displays the actual dollar amounts to be sequestered from each budget account .

while the report displays reductions at the account level , the sequester itself is implemented at the program , project , or activity level .

sequestration of discretionary spending was not required in fy2014 .

according to omb's analysis , after making allowable adjustments , the fy2014 omnibus did not violate the defense and nondefense spending limits .

cap adjustments , exemptions , and special rules the bca ( as amended by atra and the bba ) established discretionary spending caps for fy2012-fy2021 .

the law includes provisions allowing for limited adjustments to the caps .

for l - hhs - ed , the most notable of these is for increases ( up to a point ) in new budget authority for specified program integrity initiatives at hhs and the social security administration .

in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules .

the l - hhs - ed bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments .

the l - hhs - ed bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare .

fy2014 budget resolution and 302 ( b ) allocations the bba , which was enacted december 26 , 2013 , resulted from negotiations between the chairs of the house and senate budget committees in association with the conference committee on the fy2014 budget resolution .

the bba includes a section titled , "establishing a congressional budget" ( title i , subtitle b ) , which provided an alternative mechanism for budget enforcement that could serve as a substitute for a traditional congressional budget resolution for fy2014 and potentially for fy2015 .

following enactment of the bba , the chairs of the house and senate budget committees submitted statements for publication in the congressional record that included committee spending levels ( 302 ( a ) allocations ) for the house and senate appropriations committees for fy2014 "consistent with the discretionary spending limits" set forth in the bba .

once filed , these levels became enforceable on the house and senate floor .

according to analysis by cbo and omb , the discretionary appropriations in the fy2014 omnibus , enacted on january 17 , 2014 , adhered to these spending caps .

prior to congressional action on the bba , both the house and senate had taken action on their own budget resolutions .

on march 23 , 2013 , the senate agreed to an fy2014 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

8 ) by a vote of 50-49 .

on march 21 , 2013 , the house agreed to its own fy2014 budget resolution ( h.con.res .

25 ) by a vote of 221-207 .

on the basis of the overall spending levels established by h.con.res .

25 and s.con.res .

8 , the house and senate took steps to adopt limits for each of the appropriations subcommittees .

these subcommittee spending caps are commonly called 302 ( b ) allocations .

the house most recently reported revised 302 ( b ) allocations for fy2014 on july 8 , 2013 .

meanwhile , the senate appropriations committee adopted subcommittee spending guidance for fy2014 at a markup on june 20 , 2013 .

no new subcommittee allocations were released publicly following the enactment of the bba and the submission of the new budgetary levels into the congressional record by the house and senate budget committee chairs .

see table a - 1 for an overview of the published l - hhs - ed 302 ( b ) allocations for fy2014 , as compared to the proposed fy2014 senate committee bill and the enacted fy2014 omnibus .

note that the most recently published 302 ( b ) allocations do not reflect the revisions to overall caps established by the bba .

note also that compliance with the discretionary spending caps is evaluated based on budget authority available in the current fiscal year , adjusted for scorekeeping by the congressional budget office .

as such , totals shown in this table may not be comparable to other totals shown in this report .

current year budget authority table a - 1 displays the total l - hhs - ed current year budget authority for fy2014 discretionary and mandatory appropriations provided or proposed , by title , compared to comparable pre - and post - sequester fy2013 funding levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority available for obligation in the fiscal year , regardless of the year in which it was first appropriated .

 ( for a comparable table showing total budget authority in the bill , rather than current year budget authority , see table 2 in the body of this report. ) .

