widely publicized allegations of sexual assault in the military have led to questions on how the military pursues claims of sexual misconduct .

recent high - profile military justice issues include dismissal of charges by setting aside findings in an aviano court - martial related to sexual offenses ; alleged sexual assault of a civilian by an officer serving as the chief of the air force sexual assault prevention & response branch at the pentagon ; and sexual assaults by instructors on recruits and tech school trainees at lackland air force base .

these incidents have raised questions regarding how allegations of sexual assault are addressed by the chain of command , the authority and process to convene a court - martial , and the ability of the convening authority to provide clemency to a servicemember convicted of an offense .

the u.s. constitution imposes on the government a system of restraints to provide that no unfair law is enforced and that no law is enforced unfairly .

what is fundamentally fair in a given situation depends in part on the objectives of a given system of law weighed alongside the possible infringement of individual liberties that the system might impose .

in the criminal law system , some basic objectives are to discover the truth , punish the guilty proportionately with their crimes , acquit the innocent without unnecessary delay or expense , and prevent and deter further crime , thereby providing for the public order .

military justice shares these objectives in part , but also serves to enhance discipline throughout the armed forces , serving the overall objective of providing an effective national defense .

the constitution , in order to provide for the common defense , gives congress the power to raise , support , and regulate the armed forces , but makes the president commander in chief of the armed forces .

article iii , which governs the federal judiciary , does not give it any explicit role in the military , and the supreme court has taken the view that congress's power "to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces" is entirely separate from article iii .

therefore , courts - martial are not considered to be article iii courts and are not subject to all of the rules that apply in federal courts .

under article i , section 8 of the u.s. constitution , congress has the power to raise and support armies ; provide and maintain a navy ; and provide for organizing and disciplining them .

under this authority , congress has enacted the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) , which is the code of military criminal laws applicable to all u.s. military members worldwide .

the president implemented the ucmj through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) , which was initially prescribed by executive order 12473 ( april 13 , 1984 ) .

the mcm contains the rules for courts - martial ( rcm ) , the military rules of evidence ( mre ) , and the ucmj .

the mcm covers almost all aspects of military law .

because military courts are not considered article iii courts but instead are established pursuant to article i of the constitution , they have limited jurisdiction .

congress , exercising its constitutional authority to raise , support , and regulate the armed forces , has attempted to address the issue of sexual assaults and other sex - related offenses under the ucmj through the introduction of various legislative proposals .

the proposed language , if enacted , would prohibit the enlistment of individuals previously convicted of sexual offenses , eliminate the statute of limitations on prosecution of sexual offenses , and prohibit commanders from overturning a court - martial conviction as part of the post - trial review process .

the house and senate have included numerous provisions addressing sexual assault , including those mentioned above , in the respective versions of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 ( fy2014 ndaa ) .

for example , the house version includes at least 20 provisions requiring statutory changes to the ucmj , modification of the rules for courts - martial , and other policy changes ; while the senate version , as reported by the senate armed services committee , incorporates at least 26 changes .

additionally , secretary of defense chuck hagel recently announced that the department of defense would implement a series of new initiatives designed to address sexual assaults in the military , many of which are addressed by proposals contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa .

due to the sheer number and scope of the provisions contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa , this report addresses selected proposals including requiring creation of special victims' counsel programs , changes to disposition and clemency authorities , mandatory minimum punishments , commander's authority to transfer an accused , and protections for recruits and trainees .

in addition to the various provisions discussed above , senator kirsten gillibrand ( ny ) introduced a bill with a different approach to sex - related offenses .

s. 967 addresses sex - related offenses under the ucmj by modifying the authority to proceed to trial by court - martial , modifying the manual for courts - martial to eliminate the factor relating to character and military service of the accused on initial disposition , modifying the authority to convene general and special courts - martial , creating a deadline for a military judge to call general and special courts - martial into session , modifying clemency authority of the convening authority , and requiring command action on reports of sexual offenses .

it remains unclear if the bill will be introduced in whole or part as amendments during the senate debate on the fy2014 ndaa .

however , as an example of a different approach to an issue receiving significant congressional interest , the various sections are discussed below .

section 2 modifies the authority to determine to proceed to trial by courts - martial .

the language , if enacted , would create a bifurcated military justice system .

offenses for which the maximum confinement adjudged may be greater than one year fall under a separate military justice system with respect to disposition and convening authority .

however , certain offenses are excluded — for example , article 106 ( spies ) and article 112a ( wrongful use , possession of controlled substance ) — and would remain under the military justice system as it is established today , with the commanding officer retaining disposition authority .

disposition authority under the new system is held by an officer in the grade of o - 6 ( i.e. , colonel or navy captain ) or higher who is available as a trial counsel ( jag officer ) , has significant experience in trials by general and special courts - martial , and is outside of the chain of command of the accused .

the officer with the disposition authority determines whether to try the charges by a special or general court - martial .

the determination on how to proceed is binding on any applicable convening authority , and shall be free from any unlawful or unauthorized influence or coercion .

section 3 , which modifies the mcm to eliminate the factor relating to the character and military service of the accused in the initial disposition of charges , uses essentially the same language contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa discussed above .

the language suffers from the same ambiguity as the house and senate language , in that rule 306 is cited as rule 306 of the mcm and not specifically cited as rule 306 of the rcm .

the section 4 provision that changes the officers authorized to convene general and special courts - martial is a concept that is not reflected in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa .

if enacted , certain officers currently authorized to convene courts - martial would lose that authority .

additionally , officers granted disposition authority under section 2 of s. 967 ( discussed above ) would also be granted convening authority , except in instances when the accused and / or victim are in the officer's chain of command .

finally , new offices are created within each military service called the "chief of staff on courts - martial," with the responsibility to convene general and special courts - martial and detail military judges to convened courts - martial , as well as detail members to convened courts - martial .

section 5 , creating a deadline for military judge to call general and special courts - martial into session , is a concept that is not included in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa .

if enacted , the section would require a military judge to call the court into session not later than 90 days after the authority determines to try such charges by court - martial .

the language cites ucmj article 39 with respect to sessions of the court - martial when creating the 90 day deadline .

however , the language does not address ucmj article 40 , which authorizes a military judge , for reasonable cause , to grant a continuance to any party for such time , and as often , as may appear to be just .

absent further clarification , conflict exists between statutory provisions requiring a deadline to proceed and the ability to grant continuances .

section 6 , addressing the convening authority and clemency , is largely reflected by the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa ( discussed above ) .

the biggest difference being that section 6 prohibits the ca from dismissing any charge or specification by setting aside a finding of guilty or changing a finding of guilty to a charge to a finding of a guilty of a lesser included offense , while the house and senate versions restrict the ca's authority to specific offenses .

section 7 , if enacted , would require that a commanding officer , immediately upon receiving a report of a sexual - related offense involving a member of the armed forces in his or her chain of command , refer the report to the responsible criminal investigation office .

the proposed language does not define what constitutes a sexual - related offense , which could result , in theory , in some offenses falling through the reporting requirements .

