congress's interest in the receipt of government assistance by noncitizens dates back to at least 1882 , when the country's first general immigration law excluded aliens who were deemed "likely to become a public charge" after they came to the united states .

the term public charge has historically meant persons who are "primarily dependent upon the government for subsistence," and the 1882 measure effectively limited aliens' receipt of government assistance by barring aliens who were likely to substantially rely upon such assistance from entering the united states .

since that time , congress has returned periodically to the topic of noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits , sometimes restricting noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits and sometimes expanding it .

congressional interest has been particularly high in recent years due to the sizable number of aliens who are unlawfully present in the united states ( i.e. , entered without inspection , or overstayed or otherwise violated the terms of their visas ) .

some have suggested that noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits is a "magnet" for unauthorized immigration and ought to be further restricted .

others have sought to expand at least certain aliens' eligibility for public benefits on humanitarian or public interest grounds .

whether and when persons who are present in the united states , but not u.s. citizens or nationals , may receive particular types of government assistance can be difficult to ascertain because of the various federal , state , and local laws governing their eligibility for such assistance .

the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) was enacted to establish "national policy with respect to welfare and immigration. .

with certain exceptions , prwora bars aliens who are not "qualified aliens" from receiving federal , state , or local "public benefits," and precludes qualified aliens from receiving federal "means - tested public benefits" for 5 or more years after they enter the united states in a qualified status .

however , there are also a number of other federal , state , and local measures adopted prior to , or after , the enactment of prwora , some of which make different provisions for noncitizens' eligibility for particular benefits .

the applications of these measures can raise complicated issues of constitutional law , statutory interpretation , and administrative law .

this report provides an overview of prwora and illustrative pre - and post - prwora enactments regarding noncitizen eligibility for public benefits as background , before turning to a discussion of the major legal issues raised by such measures .

the discussion of enactments other than prwora and the legal issues they raise is selective .

the report does not attempt to identify all legal measures that might affect noncitizens' eligibility for particular benefits , or all legal issues that could potentially be raised .

rather , its focus is upon illustrative measures , and major legal issues that have recurred .

the report also does not address legal issues that could potentially be raised by noncitizens' receipt of public benefits , particularly whether the receipt of such benefits may result in aliens being found to be inadmissible or deportable on public charge grounds .

a separate report , crs report r43220 , public charge grounds of inadmissibility and deportability: legal overview , by [author name scrubbed] , discusses these issues .

there are also several crs reports addressing policy issues related to noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits .

prwora , as amended , establishes certain default rules regarding noncitizens' eligibility for federal , state , and local public benefits by creating various categories of aliens and benefits , and prescribing when particular aliens may receive certain benefits .

however , numerous measures had been enacted prior to prwora , which prwora effectively nullified or modified .

in addition , congress , states and , in some cases , localities have enacted additional measures post - prwora that either expand , or restrict , noncitizens' eligibility for particular benefits .

construing and applying prwora and related measures to determine whether individual aliens are eligible for particular benefits can raise a number of legal issues , including ( 1 ) the constitutional rights of aliens ; ( 2 ) whether federal law preempts state or local measures ; and ( 3 ) whether particular types of government assistance constitute benefits under particular definitions of this term .

in particular , questions regarding noncitizens' rights to equal protection and preemption are particularly likely to arise in facial challenges seeking to invalidate particular measures .

questions regarding what constitutes a benefit , in contrast , tend to occur in challenges to applications of particular measures .

as the foregoing discussion illustrates , noncitizen eligibility for public benefits can raise complicated legal issues in part because of the various federal , state , and local statutes regarding such eligibility , and in part because the construction and application of these statutes can raise questions of constitutional law , statutory interpretation , and administrative law .

the situation does not seem likely to change in the near future .

in fact , congress has recently considered a number of changes to noncitizens' eligibility for public benefits , some intended to expand , and other to restrict , such eligibility .

issues related to noncitizens' eligibility are also being litigated in the courts , with different jurisdictions coming to sometimes different conclusions on the same question ( eg , the standard of review applicable to measures affecting nonimmigrant aliens ) .

