the statutory framework for the communications sector largely was enacted prior to the commercial deployment of digital technology .

the telecommunications act of 1996 ( 1996 act ) , the most recent comprehensive revision of that framework , is virtually silent with respect to internet protocol ( ip ) , broadband networks , and online voice , data , and video services .

the expert agencies charged with implementing the relevant statutes — the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the copyright office — have had to determine if and how to apply the law to technologies and circumstances that were not considered by congress .

frequently , their decisions have led to litigation , requiring the courts to rule with limited guidance from the statutes .

this has led to long delays in the rule implementation and increased market uncertainty .

these new technologies have driven changes in market structure throughout the communications sector that were not contemplated by the 1996 act .

technological spillovers have allowed for the convergence of previously service - specific networks , creating new competitive entry opportunities .

but they also have created certain incentives for market consolidation .

firms also have used new technologies to attempt to "invent around" statutory obligations or prohibitions , such as retransmission consent and copyright requirements .

in addition , firms have developed new technologies that allow consumers to avoid paying for programming or to skip the commercials that accompany video programming , challenging traditional business models .

the statutory framework imposes obligations and prohibitions on certain networks and service providers , but also provides privileges and rights .

in some cases , entrants employing new technologies are not subject to the obligations and prohibitions imposed on the incumbents they compete against , but also are denied access to privileges and rights that accrue to those incumbents .

members on both sides of the aisle as well as industry stakeholders have suggested that many existing provisions in the communications act of 1934 , as amended , and in the copyright act of 1976 , as amended , need to be updated to address current technological and market circumstances .

there is no consensus about the changes needed .

there is agreement , however , that the statutory framework should foster innovation , investment , and competition both in physical broadband networks and in the applications that ride over those networks .

one of the challenges is to determine the appropriate mix of market forces and regulation when the sector is characterized by a small number of vertically integrated network providers that also offer applications in direct competition with the independent applications providers that must use those networks .

any statutory provision intended to create incentives for one group of industry players to innovate and invest runs a risk of creating disincentives for other groups to do likewise .

three broad , interrelated policy issues are likely to be prominent in any policy debate over how to update the statutory framework: how to accommodate technological change that already has taken place and , more dynamically , how to make the framework flexible enough to accommodate future technological change ; given that underlying scale economies allow for only a very small number of efficient facilities - based network competitors , how to give those few network providers the incentive to invest and innovate while also constraining their ability to impede downstream competition from independent service providers who must use their networks ; and given that spectrum is an essential communications input , how to implement a framework that fosters efficient spectrum use and management .

congress will be addressing these three broad questions during a time of great market uncertainty .

technology - driven market forces are potentially undermining the established business models of many incumbent firms , even as the viability of most new entrants remains uncertain .

but the communications sector as a whole is robust and growing , with overall usage and revenues increasing , many incumbents enjoying record revenues and profits , and many new entrants enjoying rapid revenue gains though they may not yet have attained profitability .

it is difficult to predict which business models ultimately will succeed , and therefore it is difficult to predict the ultimate impact of proposed statutory changes .

while this suggests the need for caution , it should not necessarily be justification for inaction if technology - driven market forces have rendered some existing statutory provisions ineffective or even counterproductive .

the communications sector does not look at all as it did when the telecommunications act was passed in 1996 .

most significantly , consumer behavior in 2013 bears little resemblance to that in 1996 .

the centers for disease control's national health interview survey found that 38.2% of u.s. households had only wireless telephones during the second half of 2012 , and six in 10 adults aged 25-29 lived in households with only wireless telephones .

according to emarketer , which performs data collection and analysis on digital markets , "the average adult will spend over 5 hours per day online , on nonvoice mobile activities or with other digital media this year ... compared to 4 hours and 31 minutes watching television. .

thus it is not surprising that verizon communications chief financial officer francis shammo reportedly has stated that its recent deal with the national football league for the rights to live - stream football games on 7.5-inch devices or smaller ( including smartphones ) was "pretty significant for us. .

similarly , james dolan , chief executive officer of cablevision systems , a major cable company , has reportedly stated that "ultimately over the long term i think that the whole video product is eventually going to go over the internet .

i'm not willing to cede that position now , and i've got a lot of customers that buy my video product ... [but] the handwriting is on the wall , particularly when you look at young customers. .

the current statutory framework — which was shaped by negotiations among the many stakeholders present at the time the statutes were being developed — created obligations , prohibitions , privileges , and even rights for those various stakeholders .

industry players have constructed business models based on these .

now , new technologies have spawned entirely new networks , services , and industries that compete with the incumbent stakeholders but do not always easily fit the statutory definitions used to delineate who is subject to / eligible for those obligations , prohibitions , privileges , and rights .

as a result , existing statutory provisions — and the regulations constructed by the fcc and copyright office to implement the provisions — in some cases may no longer be effectively fostering competition , public safety , and other long - standing policy goals for which they were created .

in a technologically dynamic sector , the statutory framework cannot be modified every time there is a significant technological change .

the challenge therefore is to create statutory language that is flexible enough to continue to foster articulated public policy objectives in the face of technological change , without artificially favoring either legacy technology or new technology .

in industries characterized by networks and services provided over those networks , this tends to raise three related types of policy questions .

given that statutory provisions generally must define the services , networks , or entities to which they apply , and technological change may result in some competing services , networks , or entities falling within those definitions while others do not , how can policy makers minimize artificial competitive advantages or disadvantages , especially those that would discourage innovation or efficiency or otherwise undermine public policy goals ? .

as providers deploy new technologies to migrate from legacy networks that are subject to statutory requirements to new networks that are not explicitly subject to statutory requirements , which of those requirements should be applied to the new networks ? .

as some network providers ( typically the largest providers ) migrate from legacy time - division multiplexing ( tdm ) networks to new ( ip ) networks , but other network providers or end users have not made the investments needed to be able to connect with or otherwise utilize the new networks , ( 1 ) what requirements , if any , should be placed on the migrating providers to continue to support their legacy networks , and ( 2 ) what time limits should be placed on the other network providers and end users to take the steps needed for them to connect to the new ip networks ? .

wireless broadband is very spectrum - intensive .

steep projected growth in demand for both mobile and fixed wireless services and other spectrum - using services make efficient spectrum management an increasingly important policy goal .

as never before , there will be costs to society if the statutory framework does not foster efficient spectrum use .

spectrum , by itself , is not of any use .

it has value when technology is applied to it to create services .

but the direction that the applied technology takes will depend on the way spectrum is allocated for use and rules about such use .

for example , since different parts of the spectrum have different signal - carrying characteristics , different equipment must be developed for different portions of the spectrum .

but innovators have little incentive to develop the equipment needed for a previously unused portion of the spectrum until the policy makers have made that portion available to service providers .

as another example , technological development will take a very different path if spectrum users are assigned exclusive licenses to specific spectrum than if spectrum users are required to share spectrum , since these two options create different potential problems of electromagnetic interference .

as a third example , since transmitters are subject to rules about the interference they can create , but receivers are not subject to requirements about their ability to block extraneous transmissions , vendors have placed a lot of effort in developing transmitters that meet those requirements but little or no effort in developing receivers that can block out unwanted signals .

more generally , product development tends to follow the path defined by statutory and regulatory rules .

just as different portions of the spectrum have different characteristics , different technologies that can be applied to spectrum to create services have different characteristics .

for example , "spread spectrum" technology , which underlies wi - fi , spreads a radio signal out over a wide range of frequencies ; this makes the signal both difficult to intercept and less susceptible to interference .

it is an especially effective technology for shared spectrum use , but loses its advantages in an environment of exclusive channel assignments .

in contrast , the technologies being deployed by the cellular wireless broadband network providers in their macro networks create more interference and lend themselves to exclusive channel assignments .

as explained earlier , u.s. wireless broadband service relies heavily on both types of technology .

this suggests that relying on a single way to allocate spectrum — for example , only through auctions for exclusive channel rights or only through rules for shared , unlicensed use — could favor one type of technology over another , thereby artificially cutting off potentially rich avenues for innovation .

in fact , the fcc already employs multiple approaches .

as discussed below , since 1993 it has been authorized by congress to hold spectrum auctions and has held a number of auctions .

but as far back as 1985 , the fcc also has set aside blocks of spectrum for shared use .

recently it has moved toward a hybrid approach to spectrum allocation in the "white spaces" that exist between licensed television broadcasters by creating rules that allow different types of users to share that block of spectrum while protecting broadcasters from interference .

traditionally , spectrum management has included three tasks — allocating blocks of spectrum to different uses , granting individual entities exclusive spectrum licenses for specific radio frequency channels within those spectrum blocks , and setting rules on how licensees may utilize the spectrum channels they are granted , for example , not allowing them to transmit in a fashion that creates electromagnetic interference with any other channel .

to protect against interference , a lot of spectrum was set aside to provide buffers .

these buffers have taken the form of "guard bands" ( unused spectrum channels ) between spectrum blocks and "white spaces" between licensees operating within a channel .

new technological developments , such as network - centric technologies that can turn some types of interference from an insurmountable obstacle into a manageable occurrence , are increasing the productive capacity of fixed amounts of spectrum by allowing shared use of spectrum and reducing the need to set aside buffer spectrum .

with the new technologies , the transmitting and receiving radios of multiple users can be "networked" to jointly move transmissions from one communications node to the next in the same fashion that traffic moves on the internet , reducing or eliminating interference choke points while better utilizing available spectrum .

with the danger of interference reduced , more users can share a given amount of spectrum .

these new technologies already allow for spectrum sharing and , more generally , the more intensive use of existing spectrum , since it potentially allows for the utilization of otherwise unused white spaces and perhaps even guard bands .

but this technology does not work well in narrow spectrum channels .

to bring significant efficiencies , it requires setting aside a large block of spectrum for shared use .

some in the wireless sector , and in particular the large wireless carriers , argue that it is more efficient to give individual licensees blocks of spectrum for their own exclusive use than to require spectrum sharing .

they claim that they — and the financial community — require the certainty associated with exclusivity in order to invest in their networks and that this in turn will generate technological innovation .

but given that there can be benefits from spectrum sharing as well as from license exclusivity , there may be reasons for congress and the fcc to continue to allocate spectrum using both methodologies .

peter rysavy , a longtime wireless industry observer , has identified the potential and the challenges of spectrum sharing: there is no question that spectrum sharing can and will eventually result in more efficient overall use of spectrum .

there are already a number of spectrum sharing solutions in the market that can work under defined circumstances .

but what must be understood is that the spectrum - sharing approaches range from simple to extremely complex , from readily achievable and in use today to extremely difficult with technologies yet to be developed .

the ones being used today solve relatively simple problems , eg , geographic sharing or sharing between two types of fixed systems .

more complex problems , such as how a carrier class mobile technology could share with multiple government systems will take many years to develop , test , and implement in an economically rational manner .

making spectrum sharing a reality will mean identifying what types of systems can be shared , negotiating and stipulating access rights , determining the market for such shared systems , developing specifications and standards to allow sharing including spectrum - coordination systems , modifying existing networks to integrate with the new sharing architectures , developing infrastructure and devices to implement the sharing , certifying equipment using new test procedures and equipment for compliance , and finally enforcing compliance .

this process could easily take ten years or possibly even much longer .

the fcc and the various industry participants undoubtedly will have many policy discussions about the pace at which specific types of spectrum sharing can move forward .

for example , the president's council of advisors on science and technology ( pcast ) appears to be more bullish than mr. rysavy about the advantages of moving to spectrum sharing .

in a recent report , pcast found that clearing and reallocating federal spectrum is not sustainable because of the high cost , lengthy time to implement , and disruption to the federal mission .

instead , pcast concluded "that the norm for spectrum use should be sharing , not exclusivity. .

whatever the outcome of those policy debates , there is widespread recognition that spectrum sharing will become increasingly important over time and that congress should make sure that the statutory framework does not create obstacles to such sharing .

technological innovation and efficiency are important public policy objectives , but there are other policy goals that may not always be consistent with innovation and efficiency .

two of these are likely to be part of the policy debate in any attempt to update the communications statutory framework — budgetary considerations and fairness considerations that typically are raised in the context of grandfather clauses intended to protect certain parties from regulatory changes .

since market mechanisms generally allocate resources to their highest - valued use , spectrum auctions often yield both efficient resource allocation and substantial government revenues .

but as discussed in the earlier section on spectrum management , some public policy objectives are not fostered by market mechanisms and can be better achieved by non - market allocations or by placing partial constraints on the market .

these include the direct allocation of spectrum for public safety uses ; the allocation of spectrum for experimentation , research , and development , typically by creating opportunities for innovators to have access to unlicensed spectrum ; and placing constraints on how much spectrum any bidder can obtain through auction to protect against market foreclosure or to subsidize rural service providers .

statutes intended to foster each of these goals could reduce the potential contribution to the treasury from spectrum auctions .

congress may want to provide guidance to the fcc on how best to weigh the tradeoffs between maximizing auction revenues and meeting these other public policy objectives .

when proposals are made to change statutory or regulatory rules to better meet public policy goals , one associated cost may be the harm that would be suffered by existing providers or consumers who have made business model , investment , or purchasing decisions based on the old regulations .

a frequent way to avoid such harm is to "grandfather" the old regulation for those legacy providers or customers .

but if the proposed change would further a policy goal , then to the extent providers or consumers are excluded from the change , the public benefits from the change will be reduced .

these grandfather clauses , some explicit , some implied , are common in communications statutes and regulations or in how agencies choose to construct new rules .

for example: many of the media ownership rules , such as the newspaper - broadcast cross ownership rule , grandfathered pre - existing cross ownership combinations .

similarly , when making public interest determinations about whether a licensee with a pre - existing combination could transfer that combination to a new entity , the fcc typically has continued to grandfather such combinations and make them permanent .

broadcast satellite carriers are allowed to retransmit the signals of distant television stations affiliated with a particular network to that subset of subscribers who are deemed "unserved" by any local affiliate of that network .

but due to grandfather clauses , there are many situations in which the signal of a local station affiliated to that network is available to subscribers but they nonetheless continue to be considered unserved and are allowed to receive the distant signal .

when the president's council of advisors on science and technology prepared its report on spectrum sharing , and proposed the implementation of receiver management requirements , it explicitly "propose[d] a receiver management framework that does not mandate additional costs on receivers" and "recommend[ed] starting with the smallest plausible incremental step. .

in each of these cases , congress , the fcc , or the obama administration chose to limit the reach of policy change ( as expressed in statutory or regulatory change ) in order to minimize harm to legacy market participants .

as congress considers future statutory changes , however , it is possible that in some situations the overall public interest calculus will not allow for such grandfathering .

