this report is intended to respond to congress's ongoing interest in campaign finance policy following the supreme court's april 2014 mccutcheon decision .

the report relies on a question - and - answer format designed to highlight key information in a brief and accessible way .

this report offers a preliminary analysis of major policy issues and potential implications that appear to be most relevant as the house and senate assess the ruling and consider whether or how to respond .

the report discusses possible implications of the case for campaign fundraising or disclosure to illustrate policy issues that might be relevant for congressional consideration .

this report does not provide a legal analysis of the case or of legal issues that might affect the policy matters discussed here .

other crs products provide additional information about various policy and legal issues .

the parties in mccutcheon and those filing amicus briefs make numerous arguments for and against the existing contribution limits .

this report does not attempt to address all those arguments .

it also does not address various arguments surrounding legal matters in the case , such as which level of constitutional scrutiny courts should apply or whether courts should defer to congress to establish contribution limits .

this report will be updated to reflect major developments and as policy implications become clearer .

mccutcheon v. fec involves a challenge to the aggregate amount ( discussed below ) that an individual can contribute to federal candidates , political parties , and political action committees ( pacs ) .

during the 2012 election cycle , alabama donor shaun mccutcheon wished to contribute more than the existing aggregate limits to candidates and the republican national committee ( rnc ) .

prohibited from making and receiving the contributions , mccutcheon and the rnc filed suit against the federal election commission ( fec ) , which enforces the federal election campaign act ( feca ) contribution limits .

in september 2012 , a three - judge panel of the u.s. district court for the district of columbia upheld the aggregate limits .

through a review process specified in the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) , the case was then appealed to the supreme court .

on october 8 , 2013 , the court heard oral argument .

on april 2 , 2014 , the court issued a plurality opinion striking down the aggregate limits on constitutional grounds .

the decision does not affect base limits ( discussed below ) that individuals may contribute to particular candidates or parties .

instead , mccutcheon permits individuals to give limited contributions to an unlimited number of candidates , political parties , and political action committees .

for example , both before and after mccutcheon , an individual could give a total of $5,200 to a congressional candidate during the 2014 election cycle .

after mccutcheon , that individual contributor can contribute to up to $5,200 to as many candidates as he or she chooses .

before the decision , the aggregate limits would have functionally capped the number of candidates , parties , or pacs a contributor could support .

feca , as amended , specifies two different kinds of contribution limits .

the first are individual limits .

these limits , sometimes also called base limits , place a ceiling on the amount that an individual , party , or pac can contribute to a single candidate , party , or pac during a single election .

second , feca limits the aggregate amount an individual can contribute to all candidates , parties , or pacs .

the aggregate limit on individual contributions appears to be most relevant for mccutcheon .

table 1 below summarizes the relevant individual and aggregate limits for 2013-2014 .

as the table shows , individuals can contribute up to $2,600 per candidate , per election ( for a total of $5,200 for both the primary and general elections , or the complete 2014 election cycle ) ; $5,000 annually to pacs ; and $32,400 annually to national parties .

mccutcheon does not affect these limits .

the aggregate limits set overall caps on the amount an individual can contribute .

for 2013-2014 , pre - mccutcheon , individual contributions could total no more than $123,200 .

of that amount , $48,600 could go to candidates , with the remaining $74,600 to parties and pacs .

the pac limits do not apply to super pacs or other political committees ( i.e. , carey committees ) that can accept unlimited contributions for use in independent expenditures .

as table 1 shows , the plurality decision in mccutcheon invalidated these aggregate limits .

contribution limits have been a hallmark of campaign finance policy and law for decades .

congress established most of the current contribution limits in the 1970s when it enacted and amended feca .

most recently , congress updated all but the pac contribution limits with the 2002 enactment of bcra .

bcra also adjusted most contribution limits for inflation and reaffirmed congressional support for an overall aggregate limit .

contribution limits are generally justified as a way to avoid real or perceived quid pro quo corruption ( eg , "vote - buying" ) .

essentially , congress established the existing individual limits at a threshold at which it believed struck a balance between permitting donors to support their favored candidates while also limiting potential corruption .

support for the aggregate limits generally rests with a concept known as the "anti - circumvention rationale," which holds that an overall limit is necessary to protect the individual limits .

supporters generally argue that if a contributor were permitted to make an unlimited number of contributions , it would make little difference that each individual contribution were capped .

such donors might still enjoy outsized influence in elections and policymaking , therefore potentially corrupting both .

opponents of the aggregate limits contend that the limits cap the amount of political speech or association a contributor can exercise .

as crs has noted elsewhere , appellants ( mccutcheon and the rnc ) in the case argued that unlike base limits , the aggregate contribution limits act as a spending limit by unconstitutionally restricting the number of candidates , parties , and pacs that an individual can support .

more specifically , some contend that the aggregate contribution limits set an arbitrary threshold , beyond which additional contributions allegedly become corrupt .

opponents also generally argue that aggregate contributions , and contributions to parties and pacs generally , carry a lower risk of corruption than contributions to individual candidates .

opponents of the existing limits also suggest that provisions in feca , fec regulations , or both already sufficiently protect against circumvention of the individual contribution limits through limits on coordination , coordinated party expenditures , and earmarking .

finally , some contend that limits on contributions to parties force donors to contribute to arguably less - accountable "outside" groups — which are not subject to limits — such as super pacs or 501 ( c ) organizations .

it is unclear precisely how the campaign environment , and the need for related legislation or oversight , might be affected by the mccutcheon decision .

this section briefly discusses some of the more prominent implications that could arise .

developments thus far suggest that debate will continue about whether existing provisions in law or regulation sufficiently guard against a single contributor amassing potentially corrupting influence or whether new law or regulation is necessary .

for some , existing restrictions on earmarking contributions , and the fact that party committees , joint fundraising committees , or pacs are legally separate entities from candidate campaigns , limit the potential for abuse .

in fact , the plurality opinion in mccutcheon rejects various hypotheticals involving outsized donor influence as "either illegal under current campaign finance laws or implausible. .

for others ( including the mccutcheon dissenting opinion ) , aggregate contributions exceeding current limits could violate the spirit of the individual limits and inherently create the potential for corrupting influence .

those favoring additional regulation might also raise concerns about whether larger aggregate contributions could allow candidates to circumvent the base limits by using joint fundraising committees , leadership pacs , or both .

the debate over contribution limits is unlikely to end even now that the court has decided mccutcheon .

this report has provided a preliminary overview of policy issues that may be relevant as that debate continues in congress and beyond .

the most obvious implications from eliminating the aggregate limits could be for individual campaigns , parties , or pacs that are able to receive contributions which might today be precluded from donors who had already "maxed out. .

scenarios that could magnify individual contributions through contributions to multiple political committees , such as joint fundraising committees , may also develop .

it is important to note that actual donor behavior and fundraising practices will depend heavily on individual preferences and strategic decisions .

