in addition to the senate and house of representatives , the legislative branch bill typically funds joint items , including the joint economic committee , joint committee on taxation , office of the attending physician , and office of congressional accessibility services ; capitol police ; office of compliance ( ooc ) ; congressional budget office ( cbo ) ; architect of the capitol ( aoc ) ; library of congress ( loc ) , including the congressional research service ( crs ) ; government publishing office ( gpo ) ; government accountability office ( gao ) ; and open world leadership center .

 table 1 provides information on the enacted funding levels provided for the legislative branch from fy2008 to fy2019 .

the table includes annual and supplemental appropriations , rescissions , and the fy2013 sequestration .

 figure 1 shows the distribution of budget authority across the legislative branch in fy2019 .

 table 2 provides information on funding levels for the senate , house of representatives , and legislative branch agencies in recent years as well as the requested , house - passed , senate - passed , and enacted levels for fy2019 .

the fy2019 legislative branch budget request of $4.960 billion was submitted on february 12 , 2018 , prior to the enactment of fy2018 funding on march 23 , 2018 .

agency assessments for fy2019 may subsequently have been revised — for example , to account for items funded or not funded in the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act .

subsequent discussions may vary from the levels or language included in the budget request due to this timing .

by law , the president includes the legislative branch request in the annual budget submission without change .

the house passed h.r .

5895 , which contained funding for the legislative branch , on june 8 , 2018 .

the senate passed h.r .

5895 , as amended ( s.amdt .

2910 ) , on june 25 , 2018 .

the senate agreed to the conference report ( h.rept .

115-929 ) on h.r .

5895 on september 12 , 2018 .

the house agreed to the conference report on september 13 , 2018 .

h.r .

5895 was signed into law on september 21 , 2018 ( p.l .

115-244 ; the energy and water , legislative branch , and military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act , 2019 ) .

the president has no formal role in the development of the legislative branch budget request , even though it is included in the president's annual budget request documents .

by long - standing law and practice , the legislative branch request and any supplemental requests are submitted to the president and included in the budget without change .

while the executive branch budget submissions generally involve interaction between an agency and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , the legislative branch requests do not .

the executive branch does not review or maintain documentation in support of the legislative branch requests .

since fy1976 , the legislative branch as a proportion of total discretionary budget authority has averaged approximately 0.40% .

the maximum level , 0.48% , was in fy1995 and the minimum , 0.31% , was in fy2009 .

discretionary budget authority is provided and controlled by the annual appropriations acts .

since fy1976 , the legislative branch as a proportion of total budget authority has averaged 0.17% .

the maximum level , 0.23% , was in fy1977 , and the minimum , 0.11% , was in fy2017 .

total budget authority includes both budget authority controlled by the annual appropriations acts and budget authority controlled by previous laws , including entitlements .

no , salaries for members of congress are neither funded nor increased in the legislative branch bill .

member salaries have been included as mandatory spending since fy1983 , and the amount of potential member pay adjustments is calculated pursuant to the ethics reform act of 1989 , which established a formula based on changes in the employment cost index ( eci ) .

the adjustment automatically takes effect unless ( 1 ) congress statutorily prohibits the adjustment ; ( 2 ) congress statutorily revises the adjustment ; or ( 3 ) the annual base pay adjustment of general schedule ( gs ) federal employees is established at a rate less than the scheduled increase for members , in which case the percentage adjustment for member pay is automatically lowered to match the percentage adjustment in gs base pay .

members of congress last received a pay adjustment in january 2009 .

since then , the compensation for most senators , representatives , delegates , and the resident commissioner from puerto rico has been $174,000 .

the maximum potential january 2019 member pay adjustment was 2.3% , or $4,000 .

the fy2019 act included a provision prohibiting this adjustment .

as in prior years , the member pay adjustment prohibition was included in the legislation as introduced , and no separate votes were held on the pay issue .

although discussion of member pay is often associated with appropriations bills , these bills do not contain language funding or increasing member pay , and a prohibition on the automatic annual member pay adjust ments could be included in any bill , or be introduced as a separate bill .

for a list of the laws that have previously contained provisions prohibiting the annual pay adjustments , see "table 3 .

legislative vehicles used for pay prohibitions , enacted dates , and pay language" in crs report 97-1011 , salaries of members of congress: recent actions and historical tables , by ida a. brudnick .

in contrast , the salaries and benefits for legislative branch employees are provided by the legislative branch appropriations acts , although they generally do not address pay adjustments .

the house and senate both consider funding levels for the legislative branch agencies and joint entities .

by long - standing tradition , however , the house bill does not propose funding levels for senate items , including the account that funds the senate and the senate office buildings account within the architect of the capitol .

similarly , the senate does not comment on house items , including the account that funds the house or the house office buildings account within the architect of the capitol .

the house , senate , and conference reports on legislative branch appropriations bills regularly contain language illustrating the deference of each chamber to the internal practices of the other .

if comparing the house and senate bill totals , or the total provided to the architect of the capitol at different stages of consideration , adjustments may be necessary to address any omissions due to this practice .

