the increasing department of defense ( dod ) emphasis on expanding u.s. partnerships and building partnership capacity with foreign military and other security forces has refocused congressional attention on two long - standing human rights provisions affecting u.s. security assistance policy .

sponsored in the late 1990s by senator patrick leahy ( d - vt ) , and often referred to as the "leahy amendments" or the "leahy laws," one is section 620m of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( faa , p.l .

87-195 , made permanent law by its codification at 22 u.s.c .

2378d ) and the other is a recurring provision in annual defense appropriations .

faa section 620m prohibits the furnishing of assistance authorized by the faa and the arms export control act , as amended ( aeca , p.l .

90-629 ) , to any foreign security force unit that is credibly believed to have committed a gross violation of human rights .

the other provision , inserted annually in dod appropriations legislation , for years prohibited the use of dod funds to support any training program ( as defined by dod ) involving members of a unit of foreign security or police force if the unit had committed a gross violation of human rights .

for fy2014 , the prohibition has been expanded to also include "equipment , or other assistance. .

as two of the many laws that congress has enacted in recent decades to promote respect for human rights , which has become widely recognized as a core u.s. national interest , the leahy laws have been the subject of long - standing debate .

policy makers , practitioners , and advocacy groups continue to deliberate overarching questions regarding their utility and desirability , as well as specific questions regarding their appropriate scope and problems in implementation .

for many , the leahy laws are important u.s. foreign policy tools not only because of their potential to promote human rights but because they may help safeguard the u.s. image abroad by distancing the united states from corrupt or brutal security forces .

some , however , raise concerns that these laws limit the administration's flexibility to balance competing national interests and may constrain the united states' ability to respond to national security needs .

central to this debate are overarching questions that are difficult to answer given the lack of systematic study of leahy law results .

have these laws indeed been effective in promoting human rights ? .

to what extent have these laws impeded or advanced other key u.s. objectives , such as countering terrorism , preventing violence , or stabilizing territory ? .

do the laws lead other nations to choose competitors for foreign influence as the source of military materiel and training ? .

will the united states be able to control down - range effects as it outsources military training through third - party nations ? .

competing perceptions of these overarching issues underlie perspectives on specific proposals for congressional action .

in the 113 th congress , an illustration of the enduring debate surrounding the leahy laws is deliberation on a provision in the senate appropriations committee ( sac ) version of the fy2014 dod appropriations bill ( section 8057 of s. 1429 ) , a modified version of which is now contained in the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( division c , section 8057 , p.l .

113-76 , signed into law january 17 ) .

this provision expanded the scope of the dod leahy law by extending the fy2013 ( and prior fiscal year ) prohibition on training to all dod assistance .

further action in the 113 th congress may occur during consideration of fy2015 foreign aid appropriations , which may include proposals to fund implementation of the laws .

this report provides background on the leahy laws , including a brief history of their legislative development ; an overview guide to the standards and processes used to "vet" — that is , review and clear — foreign military and other security forces for gross violations of human rights ; and a brief review of salient issues regarding the provisions of the laws and their implementation .

two of these issues concern debate over the consistency of the language of the two laws: whether the scope of the dod provision should be expanded or altered to bring it closer to the faa version , and whether the faa and dod "remediation standards" ( the conditions for clearing units found guilty of a gross violations of human rights in order to provide aid ) should be made consistent .

two others concern debate over implementation: whether the resources to conduct vetting are adequate , and whether implementation practices and procedures should be standardized .

several text boxes provide information on security assistance subject to the leahy laws , the types of acts defined as gross violations of human rights , the language of the faa and dod leahy laws and key differences between them , a discussion of the "credible information" standard for denying assistance , and a case study on colombia .

a concluding section offers further observations for congress .

since congress first enacted the two "leahy laws" in the late 1990s , these laws have been regarded as a key element of u.s. human rights policy .

beginning in the 1970s , congress passed many conditions on u.s. assistance to foreign governments seeking to promote respect for human rights .

most were — and continue to be — attached to legislation for an individual country or region .

a major precursor to the leahy laws was the broad legislative provision passed in 1974 , known as "section 502b," which prohibits security assistance to any country found to engage in a "consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. .

this legislation provides the basis for the standard definition of human rights used for u.s. government purposes , including for leahy law vetting , but has been rarely if ever invoked .

in 1997 , congress enacted a condition on counternarcotics ( cn ) assistance similar to the current leahy laws , prohibiting the use of fy1998 state department cn appropriations for foreign security forces where there was credible evidence that a unit had committed gross violations of human rights .

in 1998 , congress passed the first of what are now known as the leahy laws , extending the scope of the cn condition to all assistance provided by foreign operations appropriations .

the expanded provision was thereafter included in annual foreign operations appropriations acts until 2008 , when that condition was codified in permanent law first as faa section 620j , now faa section 620m ( 22 u.s.c .

2378d ) , applying to all assistance authorized by the faa and aeca , unless exempted by a notwithstanding provision .

in 1998 , for fy1999 , congress placed a similar condition in the dod appropriations bill .

this condition prohibited the use of dod funds to train units of foreign military and other security forces if there was credible information that a member of a unit had committed a gross violation of human rights .

 ( unlike the faa version , the dod leahy law , as contained in dod fy2013 and prior dod appropriations , pertained only to training , but not to any other form of assistance and activities — such as equipment , support services , grants , loans and cash transfers , and exercises — that might be provided under a variety of dod authorities. ) .

dod defines military training of foreign personnel as the "instruction of foreign security force personnel that may result in the improvement of their capabilities. .

this condition has been retained in all subsequent dod appropriations legislation , with two changes .

in 2000 , the reference to a "member" of a unit was deleted , and in 2013 the words "or police" were added .

in 2011 , congress amended the faa provision ( and renumbered it as section 620m of the faa ) with three word changes to align it more closely with the dod language .

first , the requirement invoking "gross violations" of human rights was changed from the plural to the singular "a gross violation" of human rights .

second , congress modified the standard to resume aid to require that the government take "effective steps" ( rather than "effective measures" ) to bring responsible members of the foreign security unit to justice .

finally , the standard of proof was changed from "credible evidence" to "credible information," a term that expresses congress's intent that the standard not require a level of substantiation that would be admissible in a u.s. court .

congress also added seven procedural requirements to the provision .

in january 2014 , congress expanded the scope of the dod provision , making it equivalent in scope to the faa provision .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , contains a provision extending the fy2013 ( and earlier ) prohibition on any support for training where a gross violation of human rights occurred to "any training , equipment , or other assistance for the members of a unit of a foreign security force if the secretary of defense has credible information that the unit has committed a gross violation of human rights. .

an exception is made for disaster and humanitarian assistance .

depending on the legal interpretation , this provision applies to many of the dod programs and activities conducted with foreign military and other security forces under a wide variety of dod authorities .

these may include counternarcotics , coalition , and logistics support and assistance , including equipment ; services such as transportation and logistics , maintenance and operation of equipment ; and grants and loans to procure goods and services in support of security forces , as well as cash transfers of funds .

they may also include some types of military - to - military contacts , including advising and mentoring .

not all military activities with foreign forces would necessarily constitute assistance , however .

as contained in p.l .

113-76 , the expanded provision would not apply to dod - funded foreign disaster assistance and other humanitarian assistance , where the ultimate beneficiaries are foreign populations but where u.s. military personnel often work with or support foreign military or other security forces in delivering assistance .

the state department and u.s. embassies worldwide have developed a system that seeks to ensure that no applicable state department assistance or dod - funded training is provided to units or individuals in foreign security forces who have committed any gross violations of human rights .

this procedure , designed to comply with the leahy laws , is known as "vetting" or "leahy vetting. .

primarily a state department responsibility with input from other agencies , leahy vetting is a multi - step process that involves staff at u.s. embassies abroad ; the state department bureau for democracy , human rights , and labor ( drl ) in washington , dc , which is the lead state department bureau for vetting ; state department regional bureaus ; and other government agencies as required .

the state department policy provides for two separate processes , one for training and one for equipment and other non - training assistance .

for dod and state department - funded training ( and in some cases the provision of equipment related to training ) , the process has evolved from a "cable - based" system when the state department began to vet foreign security forces in 1997 to a computerized process through the international vetting and security tracking ( invest ) system .

gradually put in place between april 2010 and february 2011 , invest is the current official system for leahy vetting for training .

at some posts invest is also used for equipment provided in conjunction with training , but this is not mandatory .

for state department - funded equipment and other non - training assistance , the state department generally approves potential recipients through a memorandum and clearance process generated by the bureau of political - military affairs at the time funding is allocated to beneficiary countries .

 ( the gao recommended in november 2011 that the state department vet individuals and units receiving equipment through the invest system , but the state department has not developed such a policy .

in some cases , however , equipment and non - training assistance is vetted through invest even though this is not mandatory. ) .

under the invest system , the state department to date has vetted approximately 400,000 "candidates" for training , a figure that includes both individuals and units .

since its adoption , invest has averaged about 130,000 discrete new vettings a year , and the pace seems to be increasing .

in fy2012 , the state department reported vetting nearly 165,000 individuals and units .

according to some vetters , the 2011 amendments to the faa leahy law requiring that , in the case of individual training candidates , the candidate's unit as well as the individual candidate be vetted each time the candidate is named as a potential recipient of assistance have increased their work load .

in some embassies , however , vetters had already interpreted the vetting requirements to cover both individuals and their units .

the leahy laws raise many potential policy questions .

at the broadest level , questions remain about the extent to which the promotion of human rights abroad and the pursuit of other u.s. national security objectives are mutually reinforcing and the circumstances in which they might diverge .

more narrowly , some in congress question whether the leahy laws should be further modified and how implementation of those laws might be improved .

the following discussion first addresses questions of law: specifically , should the faa and dod remediation standards and other remaining differences be made consistent , and should implementation practices be standardized ? .

it then discusses questions of implementation , specifically resource availability and standardization .

it concludes with a discussion of the possible challenges presented by congress's recent expansion of the scope of the dod law .

more than a decade after the passage of the leahy laws , their implementation remains a work in progress , and overarching questions on their utility and desirability persist .

congress continues to deliberate whether and how to strengthen their application , as represented by recent debate over expanding the scope of the dod law through the omnibus fy2014 appropriations bill ( p.l .

113-76 ) , and by proposals to increase available resources , such as the one contained in the senate appropriations committee version of state department and foreign operations appropriations bill ( s. 1372 ) but not in p.l .

113-76 .

many may judge that an expansion of the scope of the dod law , which may require extensive additional vetting , could also require substantial new resources .

given that foreign aid appropriations have declined in recent years , an important issue for consideration of fy2015 foreign operations appropriations may be whether existing leahy vetting requirements receive sufficient funds to be carried out effectively .

in hearings and other consideration of the fy2015 budget , congress may wish to question the quality and effectiveness of leahy law vetting , and request information about current state department and dod efforts to improve procedures , practices , and standards .

congress may wish to be informed of new technologies and methodologies that may require additional resources but could improve data collection as well as the monitoring and assessment of the activities of foreign units .

a related question is whether and how to establish metrics or compile standardized narratives ; although such measures could involve extra costs , they might provide greater insight to the leahy laws' utility in advancing foreign policy goals and national security interests .

evolving global conditions and circumstances may warrant ongoing consideration of when and how the leahy law provisions should be applied .

one national security trend raising questions about the utility of the leahy provisions is the "outsourcing" of u.s. military training — with the united states funding other military forces to train third parties .

and , as the united states faces competition in the international security arena in developing relationships with foreign militaries , congress may wish to stay apprised of whether the leahy laws are a significant factor leading some foreign militaries to choose other countries as providers of military training and equipment .

in addressing the overarching issues of utility and desirability , congress may wish to question the obama administration about the laws' effectiveness .

some questions may target potential indicators of success .

for example: where has the application of the leahy laws resulted in the united states withholding assistance from units and individuals credibly believed to have committed gross violations of human rights ? .

how have the human rights practices of partner nation security forces improved as a result of the application of the leahy laws ? .

do foreign governments and populations view the united states more favorably as a result of the leahy laws ? .

other questions may target possible instances of negative effects: where has application of the leahy vetting process precluded or significantly delayed a u.s. engagement that in retrospect would have been important for u.s. national security ? .

to what extent might such engagement have been possible if different standards or procedures were in place ? .

congress may wish to address such questions to the state department and dod in hearings , or request that they be examined in the context of the obama administration's ongoing review mandated by its april 5 , 2013 , presidential policy decision ( ppd ) 23 , u.s. security assistance policy , which identifies promoting universal values , including respect for human rights , as a goal .

