nearly all major roads and bridges in the united states are part of the federal - aid highway system and are therefore eligible for assistance from the emergency relief program ( er ) of the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) .

er assistance is restricted to roads and bridges on the federal - aid highway system , which essentially includes all public roads not functionally classified as either local or rural minor collectors .

for disaster - damaged roads that are not federal - aid highways , states may request reimbursement for emergency road repairs from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

fema may also allow limited funding under its public assistance program for certain activities that are not eligible for er funds , such as snow removal and related operating costs during extreme snowfalls .

this report describes fhwa assistance for the repair and reconstruction of highways and bridges damaged by disasters ( such as hurricane sandy in 2012 ) or catastrophic failures ( such as the collapse of the skagit river bridge in washington state in 2013 ) .

it begins with a brief discussion of the legislative origins of federal assistance , and then addresses eligibility issues and program operation .

for 80 years , federal aid has been available for the emergency repair and restoration of disaster - damaged roads .

the first legislation authorizing such use of federal funds was the hayden - cartwright act of 1934 ( p.l .

73-393 ) .

this act , however , provided no separate funds , and states subject to disasters had to divert their regularly apportioned federal highway funds from other uses to disaster repairs .

the federal - aid highway and highway revenue act of 1956 ( 70 stat .

374 and 70 stat .

387 ) was the first act that authorized separate funds for the er program .

from 1956 through 1978 , funding for the program was drawn 40% from the treasury's general fund revenues and 60% from the highway trust fund ( htf ) .

the htf is supported primarily by taxes paid by highway users , mainly on gasoline and diesel fuel .

starting in 1979 , the emergency relief program was funded 100% from the htf .

late in 2005 , congress began appropriating monies from the general fund to supplement the $100 million permanent authorization from the htf .

on december 4 , 2015 , the er program was reauthorized through fy2020 in the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) .

the er program provides funds for the repair and reconstruction of roads on the federal - aid highway system that have suffered serious damage as a result of either ( 1 ) a natural disaster over a wide area , such as a flood , hurricane , tidal wave , earthquake , tornado , severe storm , or landslide ; or ( 2 ) a catastrophic failure from any external cause ( for example , the collapse of a bridge that is struck by a barge ) .

historically , however , the vast majority of er funds have gone for repair and reconstruction following natural disasters .

as is true with other fhwa programs , the er program is administered through the state departments of transportation in close coordination with fhwa's division offices in each state .

although er is a federal program , the decision to seek financial assistance under the program is made by the state departments of transportation , not by the federal government .

local officials who wish to seek er funding must do so through their state departments of transportation .

they do not deal directly with fhwa .

as state departments of transportation normally deal with fhwa division office staff on many matters , they typically have working relationships that facilitate a quick coordinated response to disasters .

in 2007 , the government accountability office ( gao ) expressed concern about the financial sustainability of the er program .

its report found that the "scope of eligible activities funded by the er program has expanded in recent years with congressional or fhwa waivers of eligibility or changes in definitions," and also that fhwa was not recapturing all unused program funds allocated to states , so that states with immediate disaster needs had to wait for funding , while states with no current disaster needs retained their allocations .

a 2011 gao report acknowledged that fhwa had made progress in withdrawing some of the unobligated funds , but found that fhwa lacked information to verify whether additional unused allocations were still needed .

the report noted that some er projects "have grown in scope beyond the program's goal of restoring damaged facilities to predisaster conditions," and that missing or incomplete documentation in project files left the basis on which fhwa made eligibility determinations unclear .

more recently , a 2013 gao report found that fhwa officials in some states were reluctant to recoup funds from inactive er highway projects over concerns about "harming their partnership with the state. .

in addition , "fhwa has shown a lack of independence in decisions , putting its partners' interests above federal interests," gao said .

since the release of the report , legal and procedural changes have mitigated some of gao's concerns .

states' applications for er funding must now include a comprehensive list of all eligible project sites and repair costs by not later than two years after the event .

the definition of "comparable facility" has broadened and clarified the nonbetterment repairs that are eligible for er funding .

fhwa has updated the emergency relief manual to clarify eligibility and procedural issues .

the implementation of these changes may be of oversight interest to congress .

the fhwa emergency relief manual describes the "quick release" method for developing and processing a state request for er funding as a method that "provides limited , initial er funds for large disasters quickly .

quick release funds are intended as a 'down payment' to immediately provide funds for emergency operations until the standard application may be submitted and approved. .

for example , on may 19 , 2017 , $1.25 million was released to provide for repairs to flood - damaged roads in idaho , and on may 9 , 2017 , $3 million was released for emergency repairs to flood - damaged roads and bridges in missouri .

on april 6 , 2017 , fhwa allocated $768 million of er funds nationwide .

this includes $670 million to the states and $98 million to the office of federal lands highways .

the state of colorado received the most , $124 million , including the largest single allocation , of $112 million , for road damage caused by the september 11 , 2013 , flooding .

california was allocated $92.5 million for a variety of weather and fire disasters .

the disaster relief appropriations act of 2013 included a provision that the secretary of transportation could obligate more than $100 million , but not more than $500 million , to a single natural disaster event in a state for er funding arising from highway damage caused in 2012 by hurricane sandy .

table 1 presents the allocations of er funding attributable to that event .

section 5324 of map - 21 created a new program for public transportation similar in intent to fhwa's er program .

in the past , disaster funding for damage to public transportation facilities or operations has been funded through fema or through appropriations targeted to transit needs and administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) following a specific disaster .

the fledgling program is to help states and transit agencies cover operating and capital costs incurred due to damage as a result of disasters and emergencies .

eligible projects and activities include capital projects and activities for protecting , repairing , and replacing public transportation equipment and facilities ; and operating costs to cover evacuation activities , rescue operations , and temporary transit service , or the reestablishing , expanding , or relocating of transit route service before , during , or after an emergency event .

the program does not have a permanent annual authorization .

all funds are authorized on a "such sums as necessary" basis and require an appropriation to be made available .

the secretary of transportation determines the terms and conditions for grants under the program .

operating costs are eligible for reimbursement for one year beginning on the date a disaster is declared , although the secretary may extend that period to two years after determining a compelling need .

grants may only be made for expenses that are not reimbursed by fema .

the resilience of u.s. highway and public transportation infrastructure has been a growing issue both within the context of broad concerns about the impacts of climate change as well as regional concerns such as fears of an earthquake generating a tsunami in the cascadia subduction zone , off the pacific northwest coast .

the existing programs are primarily reactive programs .

resilience measures on damaged facilities are eligible for er funding if they are consistent with current standards and are not considered betterments or would save the program money in the long run .

the current program does not allow expenditure of emergency relief funds to improve the resilience of facilities not damaged by a natural disaster or catastrophic event .

states may , however , use their regularly apportioned federal - aid funds for resilience projects on undamaged facilities .

if it wished , congress could encourage attention to surface transportation infrastructure resilience in a number of ways , including the following: retaining the current programmatic structure , but broadening "betterment" eligibilities to allow for more funding to resilience measures than allowed under current law .

congress could provide additional funds to facilitate increased resilience measures following disasters , through the appropriations process .

expanding the resilience mission and funding of the two existing emergency relief programs .

the mission could , for example , be expanded to more fully cover climate change risk to undamaged surface transportation infrastructure .

the additional amounts could be made available in the annual or supplemental appropriations bills as needed .

creating a stand - alone program dedicated to preventive retrofitting or rebuilding of at - risk road and transit infrastructure .

the program could be authorized permanently or as part of the normal surface transportation authorization process .

encouraging the states to use their federal formula funds for resilience efforts by providing an increased federal share for resilience projects .

