medicaid is a joint federal - state program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports ( ltss ) , to a diverse low - income population , including children , pregnant women , adults , individuals with disabilities , and people aged 65 and older .

in fy2014 , medicaid is estimated to have provided health care services to 65 million individuals at a total cost of $498 billion , with the federal government paying $303 billion of that total .

medicaid is an important health care safety net for low - income populations , with approximately 18% of the u.s. population enrolled in medicaid in calendar year ( cy ) 2013 .

for some types of services , medicaid is a significant payer .

for instance , in cy2013 , medicaid accounted for 43% of national spending on ltss , and medicaid pays for almost half of all births in the united states .

medicaid is one of the largest payers in the u.s. health care system , representing 15% of national health care spending in cy2013 ; in that year , private health insurance and medicare accounted for 33% and 20% , respectively .

medicaid was enacted in 1965 as part of the same law that created the medicare program ( the social security amendments of 1965 ; p.l .

89-97 ) .

state participation in medicaid is voluntary , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate .

states are responsible for administering their medicaid programs .

medicaid is financed jointly by the federal government and the states .

federal medicaid spending is an entitlement , with total expenditures dependent on state policy decisions and use of services by enrollees .

states must follow broad federal rules to receive federal matching funds , but they have flexibility to design their own versions of medicaid within the federal statute's basic framework .

this flexibility results in variability across state medicaid programs .

each state has a medicaid state plan that describes how the state will administer its medicaid program .

states submit these medicaid state plans to the federal centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) for approval .

medicaid was designed to provide coverage to groups with a wide range of health care needs that historically were excluded from the private health insurance market ( eg , individuals with disabilities who require ltss or indigent populations in geographic locations where access to providers is limited ) .

because of the diversity of the populations that medicaid serves , medicaid offers some benefits that typically are not covered by major insurance plans offered in the private market ( eg , nursing facility care or early and periodic screening , diagnosis , and treatment [epsdt] services ) .

medicaid also pays for medicare premiums and / or cost sharing for low - income seniors and individuals with disabilities , who are eligible for both programs and referred to as dual - eligible beneficiaries .

for other medicaid enrollees , out - of - pocket costs generally are nominal , which may not be the case with most employer - sponsored insurance or coverage through health insurance exchanges ( also referred to as marketplaces ) .

the medicaid program pays for special classes of providers , such as federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) , rural health clinics ( rhcs ) , and indian health service ( ihs ) facilities that provide health care services to populations in areas where access to traditional physician care may be limited .

since its inception , the medicaid program has expanded in a number of different directions .

federal laws have changed virtually every aspect of the program , affecting eligibility , benefits , beneficiary cost sharing , and fraud and abuse protections , among others .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 as amended ) is the most recent federal law to make fundamental revisions to the medicaid program , including a substantial expansion of medicaid eligibility that began in 2014 .

the aca likely will broaden medicaid's role in providing health care coverage to the u.s. population and increase the likelihood that , going forward , congress's attention to health policy issues will involve medicaid .

the aca was designed to reduce the number of u.s. citizens without health insurance by preserving the existing system of employer - based health insurance , making changes to the individual insurance market , and expanding coverage to the uninsured through medicaid and health insurance exchanges .

under the aca , medicaid and the health insurance exchanges are envisioned to work in tandem to provide a continuous source of subsidized coverage for lower - income individuals and families .

medicaid agencies are required to coordinate with the health insurance exchanges to educate people about new health insurance options and assist them in navigating the enrollment process .

this report describes the basic elements of medicaid , focusing on who is eligible , what services are covered , how enrollees share in the cost of care , how the program is financed , and how providers are paid .

the report also explains waivers , program integrity activities , and the dual - eligible population .

in addition , the report addresses the following selected issues: the aca medicaid expansion , the impact of the aca health insurance annual fee on medicaid , and the aca maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement with respect to medicaid eligibility .

eligibility for medicaid is determined by both federal and state law , whereby states set individual eligibility criteria within federal standards .

individuals must meet both categorical ( eg , elderly , individuals with disabilities , children , pregnant women , parents , certain non - elderly childless adults ) and financial ( i.e. , income and sometimes assets limits ) criteria .

in addition , individuals need to meet federal and state requirements regarding residency , immigration status , and documentation of u.s. citizenship .

some eligibility groups are mandatory , meaning all states with a medicaid program must cover them ; others are optional .

states are permitted to apply to cms for a waiver of federal law to expand health coverage beyond the mandatory and optional groups listed in federal statute ( see the " medicaid program waivers " section for more information ) .

if a state participates in medicaid , the following are examples of groups that must be provided medicaid coverage: low - income families that meet the financial requirements ( based on family size ) of the former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) cash assistance program ; pregnant women and children through the age of 18 with family income at or below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) ; low - income individuals who are aged 65 and older , or who are blind , or who are under the age of 65 and disabled who qualify for cash assistance under the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program ; recipients of adoption assistance and foster care ( who are under the age of 18 ) under title iv – e of the social security act ; certain individuals who age out of foster care , up to the age of 26 , and do not qualify under other mandatory groups noted above ; and certain groups of legal permanent resident immigrants ( eg , refugees for the first 7 years after entry into the united states ; asylees for the first 7 years after asylum is granted ; lawful permanent aliens with 40 quarters of creditable coverage under social security ; immigrants who are honorably discharged u.s. military veterans ) who meet all other financial and categorical medicaid eligibility requirements .

examples of groups to which states may provide medicaid include pregnant women and infants with family income between 133% and 185% of fpl ; certain individuals who qualify for nursing facility or other institutional care and have incomes up to 300% of ssi benefit level , referred to as the 300 percent rule ; medically needy individuals who are members of one of the broad categories of medicaid covered groups ( i.e. , are aged , have a disability , or are in families with children ) and have high medical expense , but have income that exceed the applicable income requirements ; working people with disabilities ; and non - elderly adults who otherwise are not eligible for medicaid with income at or below 133% of fpl ( i.e. , the aca medicaid expansion ) .

 ( for more information about the aca medicaid expansion , see " aca medicaid expansion ." ) .

medicaid coverage includes a wide variety of preventive , primary , and acute care services as well as ltss ( see " long - term services and supports " for more information about ltss ) .

not everyone enrolled in medicaid has access to the same set of services .

different eligibility classifications determine available benefits .

federal law provides two primary benefit packages for state medicaid programs: ( 1 ) traditional benefits and ( 2 ) alternative benefit plans ( abps ) .

each of these packages is summarized in table 1 .

for the medically needy subgroup , states may offer a more restrictive benefit package than is available to other enrollees .

in addition , states can use waiver authority ( eg , section 1115 of the social security act ) to tailor benefit packages to specified medicaid subgroups ( see " medicaid program waivers " for more information about section 1115 waivers ) .

federal statutes and regulations address the circumstances under which enrollees may share in the costs of medicaid , both in terms of participation - related cost sharing ( eg , monthly premiums ) and point - of - service cost sharing ( eg , co - payments [i.e. , flat dollar amounts paid directly to providers for services rendered] ) .

states can require certain beneficiaries to share in the cost of medicaid services , but there are limits on ( 1 ) the amounts that states can impose , ( 2 ) the beneficiary groups that can be required to pay , and ( 3 ) the services for which cost sharing can be charged .

in general , premiums and enrollment fees often are prohibited .

however , premiums may be imposed on certain enrollees , such as individuals with incomes above 150% of fpl , certain working individuals with disabilities , and certain children with disabilities .

states can impose cost sharing , such as co - payments , coinsurance , deductibles , and other similar charges , on most medicaid - covered benefits up to federal limits that vary by income .

some subgroups of beneficiaries are exempt from cost sharing ( eg , children under 18 years of age and pregnant women ) .

the aggregate cap on all out - of - pocket cost sharing is generally up to 5% of monthly or quarterly household income .

in general , benefits are made available to medicaid enrollees via two service delivery systems: fee - for - service or managed care .

under the fee - for - service delivery system , health care providers are paid by the state medicaid program for each service provided to a medicaid enrollee .

under the managed care delivery system , medicaid enrollees get most or all of their services through an organization under contract with the state .

states traditionally have used the fee - for - service service delivery model for medicaid , but since the 1990s , the share of medicaid enrollees covered by the managed care model has increased dramatically .

in fy2011 , about 72% of medicaid enrollees were covered by some form of managed care and all but four states ( alaska , idaho , new hampshire , and wyoming ) used managed care coverage to some extent .

there are three types of medicaid managed care: managed care organizations ( mcos ) — states contract with mcos to provide a comprehensive package of benefits to certain medicaid enrollees .

states usually pay the mcos on a capitated basis , which means the states prospectively pay the mcos a fixed monthly rate per enrollee to provide or arrange for most health care services .

mcos then pay providers for services to enrollees .

primary care case management ( pccm ) — states contract with primary care providers to provide case management services to medicaid enrollees .

typically , under pccm , the primary care provider receives a monthly case management fee per enrollee for coordination of care , but the provider continues to receive fee - for - service payments for the medical care services utilized by medicaid enrollees .

limited benefit plans — these plans look like mcos in that states usually contract with a plan and pay it on a capitated basis .

the difference is that limited benefit plans provide only one or two medicaid services ( eg , behavioral health or dental services ) .

while managed care has been used largely for healthier medicaid subgroups ( i.e. , children and parents ) , some states are turning to this type of service delivery model for the elderly and individuals with disabilities .

in addition to these two main types of service delivery models , some states use alternative models , such as premium assistance and health savings accounts .

some states are using these alternative models for their aca medicaid expansion .

for example , arkansas uses premium assistance through the private option for the aca medicaid expansion and michigan uses health savings accounts .

the federal government and the states jointly finance medicaid .

the federal government reimburses states for a portion ( i.e. , the federal share ) of each state's medicaid program costs .

because federal medicaid funding is an open - ended entitlement to states , there is no upper limit or cap on the amount of federal medicaid funds a state may receive .

in fy2014 , medicaid expenditures totaled $498 billion .

the federal share totaled $303 billion and the state share was $195 billion .

for the most part , states establish their own payment rates for medicaid providers .

federal statute requires that these rates be sufficient to enlist enough providers so that covered benefits will be available to medicaid enrollees at least to the same extent they are available to the general population in the same geographic area .

low medicaid physician payment rates in many states and their impact on provider participation have been perennial concerns for policymakers .

still , during the most recent recession , which ended in 2009 , many states reduced medicaid provider payment rates due to budget pressures .

however , over the past couple years , more states have been enhancing rather than reducing provider rates overall due to improvements in state finances .

the aca required that medicaid payment rates for certain primary care services be raised to what medicare pays for these services for cy2013 and cy2014 .

the federal government picked up the entire cost of that increase in primary care rates ( i.e. , the difference between medicare payment rates and the existing medicaid payment rates as of july 1 , 2009 ) for those two years .

while the aca requirement and the enhanced federal funding have expired , one survey found that 15 states planned to continue the higher payment rates at least partially , 24 states did not plan to continue the higher rates , and the remaining states had not made a decision at the time the survey was conducted .

in some cases , states make supplemental payments to medicaid providers that are separate from , and in addition to , the standard payment rates for services rendered to medicaid enrollees .

often , providers receive supplemental payments in a lump sum .

states are permitted to make supplemental payments to providers , but federal regulations specify upper payment limit ( upls ) , which prohibit using federal matching funds for medicaid fee - for - service payments in excess of what would have been paid under medicare payment principles .

the institutions subject to the upl requirement are hospitals ( separated into inpatient services and outpatient services ) , nursing facilities , intermediate care facilities for the intellectually disabled , and freestanding nonhospital clinics .

medicaid dsh payments are one type of supplemental payment , and federal statute requires that states make medicaid dsh payments to hospitals treating large numbers of low - income patients .

in fy2014 , federal dsh allotments totaled $11.7 billion .

the aca made aggregate reductions in medicaid dsh allotments for fy2014 through fy2020 , but multiple subsequent laws have amended these reductions .

under current law , the aggregate reductions to the medicaid dsh allotments are to impact fy2018 through fy2025 and in fy2026 states' dsh allotments are to rebound to their pre - reduced levels with the annual inflation adjustments for fy2018 to fy2025 .

the social security act authorizes several waiver and demonstration authorities to provide states with the flexibility to operate their medicaid programs .

each waiver authority has a distinct purpose and specific requirements .

under the various waiver authorities , states may try new or different approaches to the delivery of health care services or adapt their programs to the special needs of particular geographic areas or groups of medicaid enrollees .

the primary medicaid waiver authorities include the following: section 1115 research and demonstration projects — under section 1115 of the social security act , the secretary of hhs may waive medicaid requirements contained in section 1902 ( including but not limited to what is known as freedom of choice of provider , comparability of services , and statewideness ) .

states use this waiver authority to change eligibility criteria to offer coverage to new groups of people , to provide services that are not otherwise covered , to offer different service packages or a combination of services in different parts of the state , to cap program enrollment , and to implement innovative service delivery systems , among other purposes .

section 1915 ( b ) managed care / freedom of choice waivers — section 1915 ( b ) of the social security act permits states to establish mandatory managed care programs or otherwise limit enrollees' choice of providers .

section 1915 ( c ) home - and community - based services ( hcbs ) waivers — section 1915 ( c ) authorizes the secretary of hhs to waive certain requirements of medicaid law , allowing states to cover a broad range of hcbs ( including services not available under the medicaid state plan ) for certain persons with ltss needs .

specifically , under section 1915 ( c ) states can waive rules regarding statewideness and comparability of services .

states also may apply certain income counting rules to persons in hcbs waivers that allow an individual who otherwise might not qualify to be eligible for medicaid .

section 1915 ( b ) / ( c ) waivers — section 1915 ( b ) and ( c ) waivers allow states to provide hcbs to disabled and elderly populations in a managed care setting or within a limited pool of providers .

states must apply for each waiver authority concurrently and comply with the individual requirements of each waiver .

states often operate multiple waiver programs with their state plans .

key characteristics of these primary medicaid waiver authorities compared with state plan requirements are summarized in table 3 .

the statutory requirements that may be waived under each type of waiver are different , but all types of waivers are time limited and approvals are subject to reporting and evaluation requirements .

in addition , all types of waivers must comply with various financing requirements ( eg , budget neutrality , cost - effectiveness , or cost - neutrality ) .

program integrity initiatives are designed to combat fraud , waste , and abuse in the medicaid program .

some oversight efforts focus on preventing fraud and abuse through effective program management , while others focus on addressing problems after they occur through investigations , recoveries , and enforcement activities .

areas such as eligibility determination have multiple program integrity initiatives , whereas other areas , such as managed care , have received comparatively little attention in the past .

multiple agencies at the federal and state levels are involved in program integrity .

the federal agencies are cms , the office of the inspector general for the department of hhs , the department of justice , and the government accountability office .

the state agencies involved with program integrity activities include the state medicaid agencies and the federally required medicaid fraud control units ( mfcus ) .

coordination of medicaid program integrity activities can be a problem because there are so many agencies working on such initiatives and each state develops its own approach to program integrity .

the federal government and states contribute equally to fund most medicaid activities to combat waste , fraud , and abuse , although for some activities the federal government provides additional funds through enhanced fmap rates .

as mentioned earlier , all states receive the same fmap rate for administrative expenditures , including most program integrity activities , which generally is 50% .

states receive higher fmap rates for selected administrative activities , such as 90% for the startup of mfcus and 75% for ongoing mfcu operation .

the aca included some provisions to increase uniformity among medicare , medicaid , and chip program integrity activities .

for instance , the aca introduced additional provider screening requirements that are applicable to medicare , medicaid , and chip .

the aca also created an integrated medicare and medicaid data repository to enhance program integrity data sharing among federal and state agencies and law - enforcement officials .

moreover , the aca established a recovery audit contractor ( rac ) requirement for medicaid , under which state medicaid agencies contract with an rac to identify and recover overpayments and identify underpayments .

currently , the medicaid program is dealing with several major issues , which mostly stem from the implementation of the aca .

first , the aca medicaid expansion began on january 1 , 2014 .

since the expansion is optional for states , some states are implementing the expansion , some are still deciding , and others have chosen not to implement the expansion .

second , the coordination of care for dual - eligible beneficiaries is a focus of federal and state policymakers .

third , a new aca health insurance annual fee may increase medicaid expenditures through higher medicaid mco rates .

finally , the aca included a medicaid maintenance of effort ( moe ) provision , which expired on january 1 , 2014 , for adults but continues until september 30 , 2019 for children .

for more information on medicaid , the following crs reports may be of interest .

crs report r42640 , medicaid financing and expenditures crs report r43656 , traditional benefits and alternative benefit plans under medicaid crs report r43328 , medicaid coverage of long - term services and supports crs report r43778 , medicaid prescription drug pricing and policy crs report r43564 , the aca medicaid expansion crs report r43850 , out - of - pocket costs for medicaid beneficiaries: in brief crs report r41210 , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) provisions in aca: summary and timeline crs report r42865 , medicaid disproportionate share hospital payments crs report r43847 , medicaid's federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) , fy2016 appendix a .

state medicaid and chip income eligibility standards table a - 1 depicts the modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) - based eligibility levels for medicaid as of january 1 , 2015 , based on findings from a 50-state survey .

the table expresses these standards as a percentage of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

appendix b. state - by - state medicaid data table b - 1 provides the most recent available data for state - by - state medicaid enrollment , expenditures ( including both the federal and state shares ) , and federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rates .

