the indian health service ( ihs ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is the lead federal agency charged with improving the health of american indians and alaska natives .

the federal government considers its provision of these health services to be based on its trust responsibility for indian tribes , a responsibility derived from federal statutes , treaties , court decisions , executive actions , and the constitution ( which assigns authority over indian relations to congress ) .

congress is seen to have a moral obligation , not a legal one , to provide indian health care .

congress has reaffirmed its obligation to provide care to american indians and alaska natives in the reauthorization of indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) , which is the major legislation authorizing most of ihs's activities .

ihcia stated that "it is the policy of the nation , in fulfillment of its special trust responsibilities and legal obligations to indians to ensure the highest possible health status for indians and urban indians and to provide all the resources necessary to effect that policy...." ihs provides health services to approximately 2.2 million american indians or alaska natives who are members of 566 federally recognized tribes .

the agency provides services directly or through contracts or compacts with indian tribes ( its ) or tribal organizations ( tos ) under the authority of the indian self determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) .

ihs also provides grants to urban indian organizations ( uios ) , under the authority of ihcia title v , to operate health service programs .

more than half of all federally recognized tribes operate facilities or health programs , and nearly 40% of ihs's budget appropriation is administered by tribes .

ihs's fy2016 appropriation is $4.8 billion .

ihs also receives a separate direct appropriation to support special diabetes programs and supplements its appropriation with funds from collections for care provided to american indians and alaska natives enrolled in insurance programs .

in total , ihs's fy2016 estimated program level funding ( its appropriation , plus diabetes funding , and funds from collections ) is $6.1 billion .

ihs does not offer a standard set of medical benefits or services at all its facilities ; rather available services vary by facility .

these services are provided free to eligible american indians and alaska natives ( also called ihs beneficiaries ) regardless of their ability to pay .

in general , ihs facilities provide health and health education services that focus on primary and preventive care .

these services are available through a system of facilities operated by the ihs , an it , a to , or a uio .

these facilities are also referred to collectively as "i / t / u. .

 ( ihs / tribal / urban ) .

they are referred to collectively as ihs - funded facilities in this report .

ihs services are available to members of its who reside on reservations and in non - reservation areas of those counties that overlap or abut reservations , and in some urban areas with a significant american indian / alaska native population .

not all american indians and alaska natives receive services from ihs , but more than half ( 59% ) who are eligible do .

those eligible for ihs may choose not to receive care at ihs - funded facilities because they are geographically inaccessible , because needed services are not available , or for other reasons .

this report provides an overview of the ihs and the population it serves .

specifically , the report describes the ihs's service population , the agency's organization , the type of facilities that ihs operates and funds , and some specific ihs programs that focus on reducing rates of common health conditions among ihs beneficiaries .

the report also describes some other ihs supported activities such as those to construct new facilities , increase the ihs workforce , and support contracts with its and tos entered into under isdeaa authority .

the report also describes ihs's authorizing legislation and the congressional committees that exercise jurisdiction over the agency .

the report concludes with two appendices .

appendix a discusses how different federal agencies estimate the size of the american indian and alaska native population .

appendix b is a timeline that provides a brief history of the federal government's provision of health services to american indians and alaska natives .

the ihs user population differs from the self - identified american indian and alaska native population because not all self - identified american indians and alaska natives are eligible for or use ihs services .

specifically , more people self - identify as being american indian / alaska native than are eligible for or receive services at ihs .

this section discusses ihs eligibility ( including the broader service population ) and how this differs from the self - identified american indian and alaska native population .

it also discusses ihs's actual user population and how this differs from the ihs eligible population .

in addition , appendix a includes information about how various federal agencies estimate the american indian and alaska native population .

the ihs health care delivery system serves federal reservations , indian communities in oklahoma and california , and indian , eskimo ( inuit and yupik ) , and aleut communities in alaska .

the system is organized into area offices , which are then further subdivided into service units .

service units may contain one or more facilities and may serve one or more tribes ( see text box ) .

in fy2016 , there are 12 area offices and 168 local service units .

as shown in figure 1 , the 12 area offices generally cover one or more states with the exception of the alaska area office , which organizes services exclusively in alaska .

in contrast , the nashville area office is responsible for ihs - funded facilities for states on the east coast , in louisiana , and in parts of texas .

ihs - funded health care is provided in facilities administered through area offices and service units .

the 170 service units and specific health facilities may be managed either by the ihs directly , or by its , tos , and consortia through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts negotiated with the ihs under the authority of the isdeaa .

its and tos have taken over from ihs the responsibility for operating many service units and health facilities .

more than half of all federally recognized tribes operate facilities or health programs and approximately 40% of ihs's total appropriation is administered by tribes .

there are some geographic patterns in the location of tribally - operated programs , with certain areas having all or almost all facilities and programs operated by tribes .

for example , the alaska , california , and nashville areas have few ihs - operated programs .

accordingly , these area offices are smaller because more funds have been provided to its or tos to operate facilities and programs .

in contrast , the great plains and billings areas have more facilities operated by the ihs .

in these areas there are relatively few tribally - operated programs , and area offices are larger than those in areas with more tribally - operated programs .

the size of the ihs user population also differs by area ; more than one - third of all ihs users live in two areas: oklahoma city ( kansas , oklahoma , and part of texas ) and navajo ( northwestern new mexico , southeastern utah , and northeastern arizona , excluding the hopi reservation ) .

the ihs system is a mostly rural outpatient system focused on primary care .

the system consists primarily of five types of facilities: ( 1 ) hospitals , ( 2 ) health centers , ( 3 ) health stations , ( 4 ) alaska village clinics , and ( 5 ) youth regional treatment centers .

its and tos may also operate other types of facilities or programs that exclusively focus on behavioral health concerns ( such as alcohol and substance abuse ) .

this section briefly describes these five types of facilities .

as discussed above , the services available at uios differ from those generally available at facilities operated by the ihs , its , and tos .

uios and the services they provide are discussed separately below .

 ( see report section " urban indian health programs ." ) .

ihs health services are provided directly by ihs - funded facilities ( called direct services ) or are provided indirectly under contracts with outside providers ( called purchased / referred care services ) .

this section provides an overview of services provided directly by ihs - funded facilities .

this section also provides an overview of ihs's authority to collect reimbursements from federal health care programs and how these reimbursements are used to increase available health services .

the section concludes with a discussion of services provided indirectly under contracts to ihs beneficiaries .

in addition to the activities discussed above , ihs funds a number of activities related to its role as a provider of health services .

these include efforts to recruit and retain a skilled health workforce and to support the overhead and expenses associated with contracts and compacts that the ihs enters into with its and tos to provide services .

the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia , p.l .

94-437 , as amended ) is the major authorizing legislation for the ihs .

it was preceded by several laws that included more general authorization for federal indian programs .

this section briefly describes several of these laws beginning from oldest to the most recent .

see also appendix b for a timeline of when these laws were enacted .

a number of congressional committees exercise jurisdiction over legislation affecting the ihs , including its appropriations .

these various committees are described in table 2 below .

in general , legislation amending an existing statute is likely to be referred to the committees that exercised jurisdiction over the original legislation .

ihcia included authorization for participation in medicare , medicaid , and chip .

as such , the committees that have oversight over these programs have been involved in the ihcia reauthorization .

in addition , these committees have oversight over legislation that affects ihs beneficiary participation in these programs and the ability of ihs - funded facilities to receive reimbursements from these programs .

ihs provides health care to american indians and alaska natives who live on or near indian reservations or in alaska native villages .

although ihs services are available free of charge to all eligible beneficiaries , not all eligible individuals choose to receive care at an ihs - funded facility .

this may occur because facilities are geographically inconvenient or because needed services are unavailable .

ihs focuses on primary and preventive services , so some services may not be available .

despite this , ihs has attempted to expand services by partnering with local providers , by using technology and paraprofessionals to expand the services that the agency can provide at its facilities , and by preventing disease and encouraging healthy behaviors to reduce the need for expensive health services .

the american indian and alaska native population there is no uniform definition of the american indian and alaska native population .

rather , federal agencies use different definitions of this population .

the indian health service ( ihs ) service population data are based on u.s. census bureau data , which use self - identification as american indian / alaska native by race , not tribal membership .

beginning with the 2000 census , respondents were permitted to identify as members of more than one race or ethnic group .

consequently , some individuals who might have previously self - identified as another race , beginning in 2000 , were allowed to also identify as american indian or alaska natives .

as such , the number of american indians and alaska natives identified increased between the 1990 and 2000 censuses beyond what would have been expected due to population growth alone .

the population also increased between 2000 and 2010 censuses .

census 2010 found that 3.7 million people identified themselves as being american indian / alaska native alone and 1.5 million identified as being american indian / alaska native and another race , for a total of 5.2 million people , or a 21% increase from census 2000 .

tribes vary on their definitions of membership ; some tribes may reserve membership for those whose parents were both members , while other tribes may trace membership to a grandparent or parent who is a member .

thus , in some cases , tribal members could be counted by the census as american indian or alaska native and a member of another race .

conversely , some individuals identifying as multiple races in the census may not be tribal members .

given this and the fact that not all tribes are federally recognized , not all american indian / alaska natives ( either alone or in combination with another race ) counted by the census are eligible for ihs services .

despite the limitations of the census data , ihs uses census data to estimate its eligible population .

in addition to imprecise estimates of the eligible population , ihs also estimates its "user population," based on registered american indian / alaska native patients who used ihs - funded services at least once in the most recent three years .

this figure , estimated at 1.6 million in 2014 is lower than the eligible population because not all eligible american indian / alaska natives received ihs services during the reference period .

the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) within the department of the interior also collects data on its service population , but uses a different definition than both ihs and the census bureau .

bia data are based on estimates received from bia agencies and federally recognized tribes , but these estimates are not based on actual censuses and cover only persons on or near reservations .

the bia also lists tribes' reports of their enrollment totals , but the bia conducts no census to confirm these figures , and its publication does not show whether the enrollees enumerated live on or near reservations or inside or outside ihs service areas .

in addition to these limitations , available bia data are dated because the agency has not published data since 2013 .

table a - 1 compares recent ihs , bia , and census population figures .

measuring the urban indian population determining the urban indian population eligible for urban indian health program services is equally inexact .

urban indian organizations ( uios ) serve a wider range of eligible persons , including members of terminated or state - recognized tribes and their children and grandchildren ( see report section " urban indian health programs " ) .

they are not , however , authorized to serve anyone who merely identifies themselves as racially american indian or alaska native .

bia figures for service population and tribal enrollment do not help determine the urban uio population , because the bia data are not broken down by urban or metropolitan residence , nor do they cover terminated or state - recognized tribes .

nor is an answer provided by census bureau data on american indians / alaska natives , since , although the data are broken down by urban , metropolitan , city , and other types of residence , they are still , as noted above , based on self - identification by race , not on tribal membership , whether in federal , state , or terminated tribes .

ihs figures for urban indian populations are based on these census data .

while ihs , census , and bia figures for indians , whether resident in urban areas or not , may not be definitive for the ihs - eligible population , they provide useful approximations of the population that ihs serves .

census data suggest that most american indians / alaska natives live outside reservations and other census - identified indian areas , that the movement out of these areas is many decades old , and that a majority of census - identified indians live in census - identified urban areas .

many urban areas are within ihs service delivery areas , so further analysis may be needed to determine what proportion of census - identified urban indians are eligible for general ihs services .

brief history of federal involvement in indian health the following timeline ( see figure b - 1 and figure b - 2 ) presents a brief overview of federal involvement in indian health .

federal involvement began as infectious disease control ( eg , smallpox vaccines ) , but grew over time to encompass more services and eventually evolved into the modern day ihs .

federal involvement in indian health is rooted in treaties between indian tribes and the federal government .

over time , federal involvement has been formalized in legislation .

the timeline below presents some selected events both indian health specific and some related historical events to provide context .

the timeline is followed by a more detailed list of sources .

timeline sources dix , mim and yvette roubideaux ( ed ) promises to keep: public health policy for american indians and alaska natives in the 21 st century , ed .

 ( washington , dc: american public health association , 2001 ) .

kappler , charles j. , comp .

indian affairs: laws and treaties , 7 vols .

 ( washington: gpo , 1904-[1979] ) .

pfefferbaum , betty , et al .

"learning how to heal: an analysis of the history , policy , and framework of indian health care," american indian law review , vol .

20 , no .

2 , 1995-1996 , pp .

365-397 .

prucha , francis paul .

the great father: the united states government and the american indians ( lincoln: university of nebraska press , 1984 ) .

schmeckebier , laurence f. the office of indian affairs: its history , activities , and organization ( baltimore: johns hopkins press , 1927 ) .

stuart , paul .

nations within a nation , historical statistics of american indians ( new york , greenwood press , 1987 ) .

u.s. american indian policy review commission , task force six: indian health , report on indian health .

final report to the american indian policy review commission , july 1976 ( washington: gpo , 1978 ) .

u.s. congress .

house of representatives .

committee on energy and commerce .

subcommittee on health and the environment .

indian health care: an overview of the federal government's role , 98th cong. , 2nd sess .

h.prt .

98-y , april 1984 ( washington: gpo , 1984 ) .

crs report r41630 , the indian health care improvement act reauthorization and extension as enacted by the aca: detailed summary and timeline .

crs report r41152 , indian health care: impact of the affordable care act ( aca ) .

