monthly social security payments for retired workers , disabled workers , and all other beneficiaries are generally increased annually by a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) that is based on the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) .

the cola applies beginning with the second year that a person is eligible to receive benefits .

the first - year benefit is based on a formula that is linked to overall wage growth .

under current law , the cola equals the percentage increase in the average cpi - w from the third quarter of the base year ( the last year for which a cola was applied ) to the third quarter of the current year .

the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) generally releases the september cpi - w by mid - october , and the social security administration ( ssa ) then computes and announces the cola .

the cola becomes effective in december of the current year and is payable in january of the following year .

social security payments always reflect the benefits due for the preceding month .

for example , the payment that a beneficiary received in january 2015 reflected the benefit for december 2014 .

since 1975 , a cola has been paid in every year except 2010 and 2011 .

because the average inflation as measured by the cpi - w for the third quarter of 2015 as compared with 2014 was negative ( - 0.4% ) , the ssa has announced there will be no cola for 2016 .

a cola of 1.7% was payable in january 2015 .

inflation is generally measured by computing the increase in the cost of the goods that an average person purchases .

the cpi - w is an estimate of the average change in prices of the goods and services purchased by households whose income comes primarily from a clerical or wage occupation .

in general , bls measures the price change of each item in the "basket" of goods , and then computes overall inflation , weighting each of those price changes by the item's share of spending .

the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) is more broadly used than the cpi - w. bls uses the same price data and methodology to compute the cpi - w and the cpi - u , but the cpi - u is based on the expenditures of about 87% of the population , whereas the cpi - w reflects expenditures of about 32% of the population .

bls introduced the cpi - u in 1978 and renamed the existing inflation measure the cpi - w .

the cpi - w continues to be used for the social security cola even though it measures the inflation facing a population — urban wage earners and clerical workers — that by definition are employed , unlike most social security beneficiaries .

however , the two measures tend to track each other closely .

this section discusses issues that may inform the debate about whether to base the social security cola on either the c - cpi - u or the cpi - e instead of the cpi - w .

it first discusses how the cumulative impact of such a change would grow as individuals aged and how social security becomes an increasingly important source of income for older beneficiaries .

it then discusses the projected impact on social security's overall finances of a change in the cola .

the president's 2014 budget proposed basing the social security cola on the c - cpi - u , but it would also shelter older beneficiaries from the full effect of that change .

that proposal was not included in either of the two subsequent proposed budgets .

in 2010 , similar proposals were made by the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform ( chaired by former senator alan simpson and erskine bowles , hereinafter the "fiscal commission" ) and the bipartisan policy center ( chaired by former senator pete domenici and alice rivlin ) .

colas need not be linked directly to any measure of inflation .

another option would be to have colas be greater than inflation , for example by linking them to wage growth , which is on average higher than price inflation .

currently , initial retirement benefits , which workers can claim beginning at age 62 , are linked to wage growth through the age of 60 .

because colas are linked to prices , retirees do not share in any of the increase in the purchasing power of wages that occurs after they are 60 years old .

in isolation , such a change would increase social security spending , which would ultimately have to be offset either by an increase in taxes or a reduction in initial benefits .

under current law , all beneficiaries receive the same cola ( i.e. , the percentage increase ) , but some proposals would means - test colas .

people with more income or higher benefit levels would receive a lower cola than people with lower income or benefits .

other social security provisions affected by the social security cola computation the social security cola affects other provisions of the social security program .

by law , if there is no change over the relevant measuring period in the cpi - w , and consequently no cola , there can be no change in the following program parameters: the taxable wage base , which is the amount of covered wages subject to the social security payroll tax .

the taxable wage base is $118,500 in 2015 .

exempt wage and salary amounts under the retirement earnings test , which reduces the monthly benefit of social security beneficiaries who are below the full retirement age and have earnings that exceed an annual threshold .

the exempt amounts are $15,720 for workers under full retirement age in 2015 and $41,880 for workers who reach their full retirement age in 2015 .

substantial gainful activity ( sga ) amounts for blind individuals who receive social security disability benefits .

the threshold for these individuals is $1,820 in 2015 .

 ( the sga amount for nonblind individuals may increase even when there is no cola. ) .

these program elements are adjusted annually based on the increase in the national average wage index only if there is a cola .

as a result , these program elements remained at their 2009 levels in 2010 and 2011 , but they were adjusted upwards in subsequent years , when colas were paid .

likewise , these program elements will remain at their 2015 levels in january 2016 .

other programs affected by the social security cola computation beneficiaries of other programs are also affected by the absence of a social security cola , including low - income elderly and disabled persons , veterans , and federal civil service annuitants .

as a result , beneficiaries of the programs listed below did not receive colas in january 2010 and january 2011 and will not receive a cola in 2016 .

the social security cola triggers an increase in benefits paid under supplemental security income ( ssi ) , veterans' pension benefit programs , and railroad retirement board ( rrb ) programs .

the absence of a cola increase may impact certain medicare part b enrollees .

most medicare part b enrollees have their part b premiums withheld from their monthly social security benefits .

for these individuals , a hold - harmless provision in the social security act ( §1839 ( f ) ) ensures that their benefits will not decrease as a result of an increase in the part b premium .

in most years , the hold - harmless provision has little impact ; however , in a year in which there is a 0% social security cola and a part b premium increase , such as happened in 2010 and 2011 , the hold - harmless provision may apply to a much larger number of people .

as a result of a 0% social security cola in 2016 , an estimated 70% of medicare beneficiaries would be protected by this provision in the event of an increase in the part b premium , and their 2016 premiums would be the same as in 2015 .

however , about 30% of beneficiaries are not protected by this provision .

this includes higher - income enrollees , new medicare part b enrollees , individuals who do not receive social security benefits , and low - income enrollees whose premiums are paid by medicaid .

to ensure that the part b program has sufficient income from premiums and general revenue contributions , the premiums paid by those not held harmless may be significantly higher than if the hold harmless provision were not in effect .

colas under the following programs are not triggered by the social security cola , but they use the same measurement period and formula for computing colas as the social security program: civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and military retirement system .

the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) uses the same measurement period for computing its cola as the social security program , although a modified formula is used to limit the cola .

benefits paid to disabled veterans and to survivors of certain service members and veterans under the following programs are not automatically indexed for inflation .

however , congress enacts legislation each year to provide a cola equal to the social security cola for veterans' disability compensation and dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) for survivors .

