in recent years a subject of continuing interest to senators has been the length of time taken for lower federal court nominations to receive senate confirmation .

senate debate often has concerned whether a president's judicial nominees , relative to the nominees of other recent presidents , encountered more difficulty or had to wait longer before receiving consideration by the senate judiciary committee or up - or - down floor votes on confirmation .

of related concern to the senate have been recent increases in the number and percentage of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary and the effect of delays in the processing of judicial nominations on filling such vacancies .

this report seeks to inform the current debate in three ways: first , by providing an overview of the time taken by the senate during recent presidencies to confirm u.s. circuit and district court nominees ; second , by identifying potential consequences of a protracted confirmation process for such nominees ; and third , by identifying policy options the senate might consider to shorten the length of time from nomination to confirmation for u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

it is comprised of four sections: a first section provides background information related to u.s. circuit and district courts , the two types of lower federal courts to which a president frequently makes nominations .

a second section provides the average and median lengths of time from nomination to confirmation for circuit and district court nominees of the five most recent presidents ( i.e. , presidents reagan to obama ) .

the average and median waiting times from nomination to confirmation , the section concludes , generally increased from one presidency to the next for both circuit and district court nominees .

this section also discusses the adoption of a new standing order in the 113 th congress that might serve to facilitate negotiations arranging for floor consideration of district court nominees ( and , thus , might also shorten the length of time district court nominees wait to have their nominations considered by the full senate ) .

a third section identifies possible consequences of the relatively longer periods of time lower federal court nominees have waited , once nominated , to be confirmed by the senate .

a fourth section identifies and analyzes three policy options the senate might consider in order to shorten the time from nomination to confirmation for at least some circuit and district court nominees .

this report does not take the position that all judicial nominations should be processed relatively quickly by the senate .

there might be instances in which heightened scrutiny of u.s. circuit and district court nominees by the senate is warranted , leading to relatively long waiting times from nomination to confirmation for these nominees .

additionally , given that there are no minimal qualifications or term limits for article iii judges , some senators might argue that the emphasis of the confirmation process should be to avoid "rubber stamping" judicial nominations submitted by the president , even if , presumably , such deliberate processing by the senate leads to longer wait times for nominees to be confirmed .

article iii , section i of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

along with the supreme court , some other courts that constitute article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

as mentioned above , this report concerns nominations to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts ( including the territorial district courts ) .

outside the report's scope are nominations to the u.s. supreme court and the occasional nominations that presidents make to the nine - member u.s. court of international trade .

this section provides statistics related to the length of time it has taken for circuit and district court nominees , once nominated by the president , to be confirmed by the senate .

figure 1 tracks by president , from reagan to obama , the mean ( average ) and median number of days from nomination to confirmation for all circuit and district court nominees confirmed during a president's tenure in office ( whether one or two terms ) .

in general , the average and median time from nomination to confirmation has increased during each presidency since president reagan .

if a nominee was nominated more than once by a president , prior to the nominee's eventual confirmation by the senate , the first date on which he or she was nominated was used to calculate the days elapsed from nomination to confirmation .

note that the average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation can reflect various factors , including opposition by the minority party in the senate , committee and floor scheduling decisions unrelated to partisan opposition to the nomination , and delays in receiving requested background information from nominees .

in recent years , scholars and others concerned with the judicial appointment process have identified possible consequences of relatively long waiting times from nomination to confirmation experienced by judicial nominees .

five of the more notable possible consequences are discussed below .

this section discusses three proposals to shorten the amount of time , generally , from nomination to confirmation for u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

these proposals are not mutually exclusive and any policy adopted by the senate to shorten the length of time from nomination to confirmation for judicial nominees might incorporate elements of more than one of the proposals .

as the scope of this report includes only the time from nomination to confirmation , this section does not include proposals that have been offered to reform or change the pre - nomination stage of the judicial confirmation process .

this section , furthermore , does not provide an exhaustive list or description of potential policies that might be adopted by the senate to shorten the time from nomination to confirmation for lower federal court nominees .

the senate , if it determines that the lengthening judicial confirmation process is a problem , might consider various policy options to shorten the process .

the senate , for example , could create time frames for one or more stages of the confirmation process by establishing deadlines for acting on a nomination .

such time frames might have the effect of shortening the confirmation process for judicial nominees as well as standardizing ( as much as possible ) the process across presidencies .

some potential drawbacks of using time frames include the issue of enforcement ( i.e. , what happens if a time frame is not followed ? ) .

as well as giving the president greater leverage or influence in the selection of judicial nominees .

the senate might also fast - track certain nominations .

some nominations , for example , might be classified as "privileged" nominations and , thus , be acted upon by the senate in a relatively expedited manner .

such privileged nominations might include u.s. district court nominations for vacancies considered judicial emergencies and / or nominations considered uncontroversial .

there might , however , be some drawbacks to fast - tracking some nominations , including the concern of some members in preserving the role of the judiciary committee in having its say on every judicial nomination submitted by the president .

finally , the senate might treat district court nominations differently than circuit court nominations by streamlining the judiciary committee questionnaire for district court nominees , eliminating routine committee hearings for district court nominees , and expediting floor consideration of district court nominees by adopting an amendment to senate rules that would ensure a vote on such nominations shortly after being reported by the judiciary committee .

while treating district court nominations differently than circuit court nominations might make sense given differences in the nature of the work done by trial judges versus appellate judges , senators might , for various reasons , be reluctant to change the process for district court nominees ( eg , senators might consider routine hearings for district court nominees as valuable in assessing nominees' professional competence or temperament ) .

