native americans living on reservations or other tribal lands are more likely to experience poor housing conditions , such as living in housing that is physically substandard or overcrowded , than the population as a whole .

one reason for this is that a disproportionate number of native americans are low - income , making it difficult to afford suitable housing .

additionally , native americans who live on reservations or in other tribal areas face housing issues that do not generally apply to the rest of the country , such as the legal status of trust land and the implications that has for mortgage lending .

recognizing the singular challenges in providing affordable housing for native americans in tribal areas , and the need for such housing , in the 1960s the federal government began to implement specific housing programs for native americans that were separate from other affordable housing programs .

questions about whether these programs were meeting their goals , and whether they were running efficiently , persisted for several decades .

in 1996 , congress passed the native american housing assistance and self - determination act ( nahasda ) .

the law reorganized several existing federal housing assistance programs for native americans into a single block grant program .

in addition to providing funding for affordable housing for native americans , the law focused on self - determination for tribes , giving tribes broad authority to choose how to use the affordable housing funds they receive under nahasda .

the block grant program authorized under nahasda provides funding to tribes and alaska native villages for affordable housing activities that benefit low - income native americans living in tribal areas .

a separate block grant program , established later by an amendment to nahasda , makes funding available for housing for low - income native hawaiians who are eligible to live on the hawaiian home lands .

nahasda also authorizes a loan guarantee program to help tribes and alaska native villages access financing for affordable housing activities and authorizes funding for training and technical assistance .

this report provides some brief background on native american housing issues and the system of federal housing assistance for native americans prior to nahasda .

it then describes the programs authorized by nahasda: the native american housing block grant , the title vi loan guarantee program , and the native hawaiian housing block grant , as well as funding for training and technical assistance .

it concludes with a discussion of historical funding levels for nahasda programs and tribes' uses of nahasda funds .

the federal government currently recognizes over 550 native american tribes and alaska native villages across the united states .

these tribes and alaska native villages vary widely in terms of size , population , geography , history , and culture .

the size and surroundings of tribes' reservations and other tribal lands are also very different .

for example , some reservations are very large while others are quite small — the largest is over 16 million acres , while the smallest reservations encompass fewer than 1,000 acres — and some tribes do not have reservations at all .

many reservations are located in remote rural areas , while some are located closer to urban areas .

according to the u.s. census , more than 5 million individuals identified as american indian or alaska natives ( aian ) in 2010 .

of this number , nearly 3 million individuals identified themselves solely as american indians or alaska natives , while an additional 2 million identified as aian in combination with another race .

not everyone who identifies as aian is a member of a federally recognized tribe or alaska native village .

some individuals who identify as aian may not be formally enrolled members of any tribe , and some may be enrolled members of state recognized tribes or other tribes not formally recognized by the federal government .

furthermore , many people who identify as aian do not live on or near reservations or in other tribal areas .

of those who identified as aian alone , about one - third lived in tribal areas ( such as on reservations or on off - reservation trust lands ) in 2010 , according to the census .

this report describes the main federal housing program for members of federally recognized tribes and alaska native villages who are living on tribal lands or in nearby areas .

native americans who do not live in tribal areas are potentially eligible for the same federal housing programs as the rest of the population .

certain issues impact housing and housing programs in tribal areas differently than the rest of the country .

the special nature of the relationship between the federal government and federally recognized tribes has implications for native american housing and housing programs .

furthermore , the restricted legal status of tribal lands has implications for financing housing in these areas .

finally , while economic conditions and the quality of the housing stock vary by tribe , housing conditions in tribal areas generally tend to be worse than in other areas .

the federal government has had a long - standing policy of promoting access to decent and affordable housing for all americans .

the housing act of 1949 included a goal of "a decent home and a suitable living environment for every american family. .

however , native americans living on reservations or other tribal lands generally had little access to the affordable housing programs established by the federal government until the early 1960s .

at that time , the government began to recognize that native americans largely lacked access to existing affordable housing programs and took steps to provide affordable housing funding explicitly for native americans .

in 1961 , tribal governments were first recognized as eligible to receive funding under the public housing program , which had been established by the housing act of 1937 and was administered at the time by the public housing administration .

this recognition allowed tribes to establish indian housing authorities ( ihas ) , similar to local public housing authorities ( phas ) , to administer federal housing assistance programs authorized under the 1937 law .

in 1962 , the public housing administration established the mutual help homeownership opportunity program to provide funds to ihas to help native americans achieve home ownership through a lease - purchase program .

both the public housing program and the mutual help program were administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) after that department was established in 1965 , and these two programs provided the bulk of housing assistance to native americans until nahasda reorganized the federal government's native american housing programs into today's block grant system .

also in 1965 , the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) within the department of the interior established the housing improvement program ( hip ) .

through hip , the bia provides grants to assist the least well - off native americans with repairing severely inadequate housing .

the bia was authorized to establish various assistance programs for native americans by the snyder act of 1921 .

however , while it used this authority to establish other types of programs for native americans , it did not create a specific housing program for native americans until it created hip .

in the mid - 1970s , the government began to recognize that simply extending existing programs to tribal areas was not always effective , given some of the unique circumstances related to housing on tribal lands .

despite the availability of a number of affordable housing programs in tribal areas , poor housing conditions in tribal areas persisted .

in 1978 , a report from the general accounting office ( gao ) noted that , despite the fact that hud , bia , and the farmers home administration administered several programs that could help provide affordable housing for native americans , these programs had "not been effective in providing the number of units necessary to keep pace with the increasing need for decent , safe , and sanitary indian housing. .

the report noted that hud's programs were generally designed for more urban areas , and tended to be less effective on reservations located in more rural areas .

federal agencies began to make efforts to make housing programs more targeted to the specific circumstances of native americans living in tribal areas .

around this time , hud created a separate office of indian housing to administer the agency's native american housing programs , which were previously operated as part of the public housing program .

in 1976 , regulations governing native american housing assistance were published separately from the public housing regulations .

federal efforts to improve housing conditions in tribal areas continued during the 1980s and early 1990s .

in 1983 , congress authorized a program to allow the federal housing administration ( fha ) to insure home mortgages made on tribal lands .

this program was intended to address issues related to the lack of availability of mortgage credit on tribal lands and to encourage lenders to offer mortgages in these areas .

in 1988 , congress passed the indian housing act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-358 ) , which separated native american housing assistance from the existing public housing program in law and specified that future amendments to the public housing program would not apply to the native american program ( although existing requirements of the public housing program did continue to apply ) .

the law also codified the mutual help homeownership opportunity program .

in 1992 , congress authorized another loan guarantee program , the section 184 program , to encourage mortgage lending on tribal lands by allowing hud to guarantee certain home mortgages in tribal areas .

by the early 1990s , tribes were eligible to receive funding through at least 14 hud programs , each of which had its own eligibility criteria and program requirements .

these included programs specifically for tribes , such as mutual help , the indian public housing program , and programs to provide loan guarantees on tribal lands such as the section 184 program .

it also included other , broader hud programs for which tribes were eligible to receive funds , often through a set - aside of funding from the larger program .

however , taken together , these programs were generally seen as inadequate to address the persistent housing needs and unique circumstances of native americans living on tribal lands .

furthermore , these programs generally did not recognize the principle of tribal self - determination .

in 1996 , congress enacted the native american housing assistance and self - determination act ( p.l .

104-330 ) .

the law represented a major reorganization of federal native american housing assistance , consolidating most of the federal housing funding that previously had been provided to tribes under hud programs into a single block grant that provides funds to eligible tribes based on a formula .

each year , congress appropriates funding to hud for nahasda programs during the annual appropriations process .

funding for nahasda programs is appropriated to two accounts: the native american housing block grant account and the native hawaiian housing block grant account .

funding for all nahasda programs , except for the native hawaiian housing block grant , is appropriated to the native american housing block grant account .

nahbgs themselves make up the bulk of the funding each year , but the account also includes funding to cover the costs of the title vi loan guarantee program and funding for training and technical assistance .

in addition , appropriations laws include a limit on the dollar amount of loans that hud can insure under the title vi program during the fiscal year .

since the account was first funded , in nominal ( non - inflation - adjusted ) terms , total funding has ranged from a low of $600 million ( in fy1998 , the first year of funding ) to a high of $700 million ( in fy2010 ) , with appropriations in most years falling somewhere in between .

table 1 shows the funding level for each program funded within the nahbg account , as well as overall account - level funding , for each year from fy2003 to fy2015 .

 table 2 shows the annual funding levels for the native hawaiian housing block grant program in each year since it was first funded in fy2002 .

prior to fy2006 , nhhbg funding was appropriated within the community development fund account within hud .

since fy2006 , nhhbg funding has been appropriated in its own account .

the nhhbg account generally includes a set - aside of funds to be used for training and technical assistance , and this amount has been relatively steady over the years .

in fy2015 , $9 million was appropriated to the account , including $300,000 for training and technical assistance .

as described , tribes can use nahbg funds for a wide variety of affordable housing activities that benefit low - income tribal members .

in general , tribes rehabilitate more units with nahbg funds than they build or acquire , and tribes are more likely to use funds for owner - occupied housing than for rental housing .

between fy2008 and fy2014 , hud reports that a total of over 44,000 units of housing were built , acquired , or rehabilitated using nahbg funds .

on average , tribes used nahbg funds to build , acquire , or rehabilitate between 5,000 and 8,000 units per year .

as figure 2 shows , rehabilitation of housing units is more common than building or acquiring units .

in fy2014 , about 4,000 units were rehabilitated using nahbg funds , compared to nearly 1,000 units built or acquired .

hud estimates that over 100,000 housing units have been built , acquired , or rehabilitated with nahbg funds since the program began .

of this total , over 35,000 units have been built or acquired , and over 70,000 have been substantially rehabilitated .

until recently , hud did not systematically collect information on the number of units that benefited from nahbg funds in ways other than construction , acquisition , or rehabilitation , such as through the use of rental assistance or down payment assistance programs .

hud has begun collecting more data on other eligible activities with the revised ihp / apr form that it began using in fy2012 , suggesting that more data on these uses of nahbg funds might be available in the future .

a 2009 evaluation of the nahbg program conducted for hud provided some estimates on the number of households or units that were assisted through other types of activities over the course of a single year .

the evaluation estimated , on the basis of interviews with selected tribes , that tribes had used nahbg funds to assist a total of about 1,000 households with down payment assistance , about 8,500 households through various rental assistance programs , and about 5,000 households with emergency assistance with making rent , mortgage , or utility payments during the most recent program year .

tribes had also provided ongoing maintenance or operating assistance during the year to about 5,000 rental units that had been developed using nahbg funds .

in addition to developing and maintaining new units and providing other types of housing assistance , tribes also currently continue to maintain about 31,000 existing low - rent public housing units and close to 12,000 mutual help units that were developed prior to nahasda .

in general , many tribes choose to use nahasda funds to develop more new owner - occupied units rather than rental units .

for example , gao found that , between fy2003 and fy2008 , tribes used nahbg funds to build , acquire , or rehabilitate nearly four times as many homeownership units as rental units .

specifically , as figure 3 shows , tribes assisted 40,000 homeownership units using nahbg funds during this time period , compared to just over 10,000 rental units .

one reason that tribes give for assisting more homeownership units than rental units is the ongoing cost to tribes of maintaining and operating rental units built with nahasda funds .

ongoing maintenance of rental units is expensive for tribes and tdhes , while the maintenance and other costs of owner - occupied housing become the responsibility of the homeowner rather than remaining the responsibility of the tribe .

every federally recognized tribe and the five state recognized tribes that were grandfathered in under nahasda are eligible to receive a formula allocation of nahbg funds .

each year , hud runs the nahbg formula to determine how much each tribe is eligible to receive under the formula ( a tribe's formula allocation ) .

however , the number and size of grants actually made can differ from the number and size of these formula allocations for several reasons .

one reason that the number and size of formula allocations may differ from the number and size of grants made is that several tribes might select the same tdhe to administer their funds , resulting in those tribes' formula allocations being combined into a single grant to that tdhe .

this means that there are fewer grants made than formula allocations , and the average grant amount is generally higher than the average formula allocation .

another reason that the number of grants might differ from the number of formula allocations is that some tribes that are eligible for formula allocations may not receive a grant in a given year .

this could occur because a tribe has elected not to take its formula allocation , because it did not submit an indian housing plan or that plan was not approved by hud , or for other reasons .

this section describes the formula allocation amounts , rather than grant amounts , for fy2015 .

in fy2015 , hud announced formula allocations totaling over $650 million in nahbg funds for 586 tribes and alaska native villages .

the amounts of the individual formula allocations ranged from just over $50,000 ( many tribes and alaska native villages ) to nearly $84 million ( the navajo housing authority ) .

the $84 million awarded to the navajo housing authority was nearly three times larger than the next highest formula allocation amount ( nearly $29 million to the cherokee nation ) .

the mean formula allocation was about $1.1 million , while the median formula allocation was nearly $270,000 .

over 370 tribes or alaska native villages had allocations of less than $500,000 ; of these , over 150 had allocations of less than $100,000 .

about 140 recipients had allocations of more than $1 million ; of these , 20 had allocations of at least $5 million , and eight had allocations of $10 million or more .

figure 4 summarizes how many of the 586 formula allocations to tribes and alaska native villages in fy2015 fell within certain dollar ranges .

tribes can leverage their nahbg funds — that is , use the funds they receive through the program to attract additional funds from other sources — or otherwise combine nahbg funds with other funding streams to develop affordable housing .

the title vi program is an example of leveraging , because it allows tribes to use their nahbg funds to help them obtain additional financing from private sources .

leveraging of hud funding was allowed prior to nahasda , but was not common , and some tribes have identified the ability to leverage funds as a major benefit of nahasda .

however , hud has suggested that the ability of some tribes to leverage nahbg funds using title vi is limited because tribes can only borrow up to five times the need portion of their nahbg formula allocations .

leveraging or otherwise combining funds from multiple sources might be particularly important for tribes who receive relatively small grants under the nahbg , since those grants alone might not be enough to undertake some larger - scale housing projects .

for example , a tribe that receives an allocation of $50,000 is unlikely to be able to construct or acquire new housing units with its nahbg funding alone , and may have to focus on other , lower - cost affordable housing activities unless it is able to combine its nahbg funding with funding from other sources .

however , smaller tribes might be less likely than larger tribes to have the capacity to seek out or administer funding from additional sources .

other sources of funds available to tribes can include other federal programs , as well as state , local , tribal , or private funds .

some examples of other federal sources of funding for housing might include other hud programs , the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) administered by the department of the treasury , or housing programs administered by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

tribes might also be able to access funding for related projects , such as infrastructure needed to support housing development , from agencies including the bia , usda , or the indian health service ( ihs ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

while combining funds from multiple sources can make it easier for tribes to address a wider range of housing needs , it also means that tribes have to comply with multiple programs' requirements .

this can lead to challenges for tribes in leveraging nahbg funding , including additional expense or time devoted to complying with multiple programs' requirements .

data from the decennial census are used for many aspects of the nahbg formula .

some issues have arisen related to the use of these data to calculate formula allocations .

first , some tribes have argued that other sources , such as tribal enrollment or survey data , would more accurately identify the population that nahasda is intended to serve than the census data .

second , since 2000 , the census has allowed respondents to identify themselves as belonging to more than one race , leading to questions about whether the nahbg formula should take into account only those who identify solely as american indians or alaska natives , or those who also identify as american indian or alaska native in combination with another race .

this appendix provides a brief overview of these two issues .

in general , tribes have indicated that they wish to come to a consensus about formula issues among themselves through the negotiated rulemaking process , rather than having hud or congress make decisions on how to handle these issues .

tribes have previously discussed these issues in negotiated rulemaking , but have not come to a consensus regarding any changes to date .

using census data to calculate the need portion of the formula the nahasda regulations , as agreed upon in negotiated rulemaking , specify that the data source used to calculate the need portion of the formula must be data that are "collected in a uniform manner and that can be confirmed and verified for all aian [american indian and alaska native] households and persons living in an identified area. .

the regulations also specify that , initially , the data source used would be decennial census data .

hud has continued to use census data to calculate the need portion of the formula grant amounts for the nahbg , including data on the number of american indian or alaska native ( aian ) households .

there has been disagreement among tribes on whether census data are the best data for hud to use to allocate nahbg funding .

some tribes believe that it is the most uniform , verifiable source of data available , and therefore is the fairest way to allocate funding among tribes .

other tribes , however , argue that census data may not be representative of the population that nahasda is meant to serve .

nahasda provides funds to tribes to provide affordable housing to people who are members of federally recognized ( or a small number of state recognized ) tribes and are living in a tribe's formula area .

however , the census counts include anyone who identifies as american indian or alaska native , whether or not they are enrolled members of such a tribe .

some of the people who identify as aian in the census might not be enrolled tribal members at all , or they might be members of tribes that are not eligible under nahasda ( such as state recognized tribes , or canadian or south american tribes ) .

therefore , some tribes have argued that census data do not provide an accurate count of the tribal population , as opposed to the overall aian population , and have suggested that tribes should have the option of using alternative data sources that better reflect the population that nahasda is intended to serve .

they also argue that using the reported aian numbers in the census rather than data that count enrolled tribal members effectively distributes nahbg funds based on the number of people who identify with a specific racial group rather than based on their political status as tribal members .

some possible alternative data sources that could be used include tribal enrollment data , tribal censuses , or data collected by other federal agencies .

many tribes have argued that one or more of these sources might more accurately reflect the tribal population .

furthermore , tribes have pointed out that , as sovereign nations , they choose the conditions of tribal membership ; therefore , they argue that they should be allowed to choose the best data to measure their own tribal populations .

other tribes have opposed using data sources other than the census , arguing that the census data are the only available data that are collected in a "uniform" and "verifiable" manner across tribes , as required by the regulations .

these tribes note that existing alternative data sources each have drawbacks .

for example , some data might not be collected by all tribes , or the data that are produced might not be standardized or verified across tribes .

these tribes argue that it would be expensive and burdensome to require all tribes to adopt a single new data source , particularly if it required tribes to begin collecting data that they do not collect currently .

they also express concerns that allowing tribes to each use different data sources could be cumbersome , and that this approach could lead to delays in funds being awarded while hud verified the accuracy of many different data sources .

the 2008 reauthorization of nahasda included a provision directing the secretary of hud to contract with an organization to carry out a study of data sources , including sources other than the census , that could be used to evaluate native american housing needs for the purposes of the formula .

the law authorized appropriations to carry out the study , but no funds have been appropriated , and the study has not been carried out .

"single - race" and "multi - race" census data beginning in 2000 , census respondents have had the option of identifying themselves as belonging to more than one race .

the nahasda statute and regulations do not specify whether hud should use data related only to the number of individuals who identify solely as american indian or alaska native ( "single - race data" ) , or if it should also include the number who identify as american indian or alaska native in combination with another race ( "multi - race data" ) .

for the fy2004 formula allocations , hud chose to use the total number of individuals who identified as american indian or alaska native , regardless of whether they also identified with another race .

hud said that it made this decision because it believed it to be the most inclusive of all native americans living in a tribe's formula area .

however , many tribes disagreed with both this decision itself and with hud's decision to use the multi - race data without consulting tribes through negotiated rulemaking or a notice and comment period .

since fy2006 , annual appropriations acts have directed hud to calculate the formula both ways for each tribe — that is , using the single - race data and the multi - race data — and to award each tribe the larger of the two grant amounts .

tribes have not reached a consensus about the single - race and multi - race data through negotiated rulemaking .

in 2006 , at congress's direction , hud solicited comments on its use of multi - race data in the nahbg formula .

many tribes argued against using the multi - race data , maintaining that the single - race data are a better approximation of the tribal population that nahasda is intended to serve .

these tribes raised concerns that those who identify as aian under the multi - race data might be less likely to be enrolled tribal members or less likely to live on reservations , and that using the multi - race data could therefore shift nahasda funding away from tribal members living on traditional reservations towards tribes that have more urban areas included in their formula areas .

although many tribes are in favor of using the single - race data , there are some tribes that favor using the multi - race data .

these tribes argue that there are tribal members who identify as belonging to multiple races , and that using only the single - race data would therefore exclude these tribal members .

these tribes argue that using the multi - race data is a better reflection of the total population that they serve .

