a national security letter ( nsl ) is roughly comparable to an administrative subpoena .

an nsl needs no prior judicial approval .

intelligence agencies issue them for intelligence gathering purposes to telephone companies , internet service providers , consumer credit reporting agencies , banks , and other financial institutions , directing the recipients to turn over certain customer records and similar information .

the 111 th and 112 th congresses as well as the 113 th congress saw a number of proposals to amend nsl authority .

none were enacted .

in the 112 th congress , they were closely associated with the scheduled expiration of various provisions of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) .

in the 113 th congress , they were often grouped with legislation that addressed the exercise of fisa authority .

the house passed such a bill , h.r .

3361 , and many of its features were included in s. 2685 .

s. 2685 , however , failed to secure the three - fifths vote necessary for cloture .

congress took no final action on s. 2685 , h.r .

3361 , or any other nsl proposal prior to adjournment .

prior to the usa patriot act , the nsl statutes were four .

one , 18 u.s.c .

2709 , obligated communications providers to supply certain customer information upon the written request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) or a senior fbi headquarters official .

when customer identity , length of service , and toll records were sought , the letters had to certify ( 1 ) that the information was relevant to a foreign counterintelligence investigation and ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe the information pertained to a foreign power or its agents .

when only customer identity and length of service records ( but not toll records ) were sought , the letters had to certify ( 1 ) again that the information was relevant to a foreign counterintelligence investigation , but ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe that the customer information pertained to use of the provider's facilities to communicate with foreign powers , their agents , or those engaged in international terrorism or criminal clandestine intelligence activities .

in like manner a second statute , section 1114 ( a ) ( 5 ) of the right to financial privacy act , obligated financial institutions to provide the fbi with customers' financial records upon written certification of the fbi director or his designee ( 1 ) that the records were sought for foreign counterintelligence purposes and ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe that the records were those of a foreign power or its agents .

and so it was with a third , section 626 of the fair credit report act , which obligated consumer credit reporting agencies to provide customer identification , and the names and addresses of financial institutions at which a designated consumer maintained accounts .

here too , the obligation was triggered by written certification of the fbi director or his designee ( 1 ) that the information was necessary for a foreign counterintelligence investigation , and ( 2 ) that specific and articulable facts gave reason to believe that the consumer was either a foreign power , a foreign official , or the agent of a foreign power and was engaged in international terrorism or criminal clandestine intelligence activities .

the fourth , section 802 of the national security act , was a bit different .

it reached a wider range of potential recipients at the demand of a large group of federal officials , but for a more limited purpose .

it rested the obligation to provide consumer reports , together with financial information and records , upon consumer reporting agencies , financial agencies , and financial institutions , or holding companies .

the requirement was triggered by the certification of senior officials of law enforcement and intelligence agencies , but confined to information pertaining to federal employees with access to classified information and being sought for clearance purposes and inquiries into past or potential security leaks .

bills in 113 th congress that would have amended the nsl statutes and related provisions proposed adjustments in four areas: ( 1 ) the grounds for issuing an nsl ; ( 2 ) confidentiality requirements , enforcement , and judicial review ; ( 3 ) reports and audits ; and ( 4 ) sunset and repeal .

some were focused on a single category ; others were more comprehensive .

* * * ( a ) .... ( 5 ) ( a ) financial institutions , and officers , employees , and agents thereof , shall comply with a request for a customer's or entity's financial records made pursuant to this subsection by the federal bureau of investigation when the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( or the director's designee ) certifies in writing to the financial institution that such records are sought for foreign counter intelligence purposes and that there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the customer or entity whose records are sought is a foreign power or the agents of a foreign power as defined in section 1801 of title 50 .

 ( b ) the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information obtained pursuant to this paragraph only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( c ) on a semiannual basis the attorney general shall fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate concerning all requests made pursuant to this paragraph .

 ( d ) no financial institution , or officer , employee , or agent of such institution , shall disclose to any person that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to a customer's or entity's financial records under this paragraph .

* * * ( a ) ... ( 5 ) ( a ) financial institutions , and officers , employees , and agents thereof , shall comply with a request for a customer's or entity's financial records made pursuant to this subsection by the federal bureau of investigation when the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( or the director's designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director ) certifies in writing to the financial institution that such records are sought for foreign counter intelligence purposes to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ( b ) the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information obtained pursuant to this paragraph only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( c ) on the dates provided in section 415b of title 50 , the attorney general shall fully inform the congressional intelligence committees ( as defined in section 401a of title 50 ) concerning all requests made pursuant to this paragraph .

 ( d ) prohibition of certain disclosure. — ( i ) if the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director , certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no financial institution , or officer , employee , or agent of such institution , shall disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to a customer's or entity's financial records under subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( ii ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under clause ( i ) .

 ( iii ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such persons of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under clause ( i ) .

 ( iv ) at the request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation or the designee of the director , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the director or such designee the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the director or such designee of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request for financial records under subparagraph ( a ) .

 ( a ) identity of financial institutions notwithstanding section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish to the federal bureau of investigation the names and addresses of all financial institutions ( as that term is defined in section 3401 of title 12 ) at which a consumer maintains or has maintained an account , to the extent that information is in the files of the agency , when presented with a written request for that information , signed by the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or the director's designee , which certifies compliance with this section .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing that — ( 1 ) such information is necessary for the conduct of an authorized foreign counterintelligence investigation ; and ( 2 ) there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the consumer — ( a ) is a foreign power ( as defined in section 1801 of title 50 ) or a person who is not a united states person ( as defined in such section 1801 of title 50 ) and is an official of a foreign power ; or ( b ) is an agent of a foreign power and is engaging or has engaged in an act of international terrorism ( as that term is defined in section 1801 ( c ) of title 50 ) or clandestine intelligence activities that involve or may involve a violation of criminal statutes of the united states .

 ( b ) identifying information notwithstanding the provisions of section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish identifying information respecting a consumer , limited to name , address , former addresses , places of employment , or former places of employment , to the federal bureau of investigation when presented with a written request , signed by the director or the director's designee , which certifies compliance with this subsection .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing that — ( 1 ) such information is necessary to the conduct of an authorized counterintelligence investigation ; and ( 2 ) there is information giving reason to believe that the consumer has been , or is about to be , in contact with a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power ( as defined in section 1801 of title 50 ) .

* * .

 ( a ) identity of financial institutions notwithstanding section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish to the federal bureau of investigation the names and addresses of all financial institutions ( as that term is defined in section 3401 of title 12 ) at which a consumer maintains or has maintained an account , to the extent that information is in the files of the agency , when presented with a written request for that information , signed by the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or the director's designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge of a bureau field office designated by the director , which certifies compliance with this section .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing , that such information is sought for the conduct of an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ( b ) identifying information notwithstanding the provisions of section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish identifying information respecting a consumer , limited to name , address , former addresses , places of employment , or former places of employment , to the federal bureau of investigation when presented with a written request , signed by the director or the director's designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge of a bureau field office designated by the director , which certifies compliance with this subsection .

the director or the director's designee may make such a certification only if the director or the director's designee has determined in writing that such information is sought for the conduct of an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

* * .

 ( a ) duty to provide. — a wire or electronic communication service provider shall comply with a request for subscriber information and toll billing records information , or electronic communication transactional records in its custody or possession made by the director of the federal bureau of investigation under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) required certification. — the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director , may — ( 1 ) request the name , address , length of service , and local and long distance toll billing records of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that — ( a ) the name , address , length of service , and toll billing records sought are relevant to an authorized foreign counterintelligence investigation ; and ( b ) there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the person or entity to whom the information sought pertains is a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power as defined in section 101 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 ( 50 u.s.c .

1801 ) ; and ( 2 ) request the name , address , and length of service of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that — ( a ) the information sought is relevant to an authorized foreign counterintelligence investigation ; and ( b ) there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that communication facilities registered in the name of the person or entity have been used , through the services of such provider , in communications with — ( i ) an individual who is engaging or has engaged in international terrorism as defined in section 101 ( c ) of the foreign intelligence surveillance act or clandestine intelligence activities that involve or may involve a violation of the criminal statutes of the united states ; or ( ii ) a foreign power or agent of a foreign power under circumstances giving reason to believe that the communication concerned international terrorism as defined in section 101 ( c ) of the foreign intelligence surveillance act or clandestine intelligence activities that involve or may involve a violation of the criminal statutes of the united states .

 ( c ) prohibition of certain disclosure. — no wire or electronic communication service provider , or officer , employee , or agent thereof , shall disclose to any person that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to information or records under this section .

 ( d ) dissemination by bureau. — the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information and records obtained under this section only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( e ) requirement that certain congressional bodies be informed. — on a semiannual basis the director of the federal bureau of investigation shall fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate , and the committee on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary of the senate , concerning all requests made under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( a ) duty to provide. — a wire or electronic communication service provider shall comply with a request for subscriber information and toll billing records information , or electronic communication transactional records in its custody or possession made by the director of the federal bureau of investigation under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) required certification. — the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director , may — ( 1 ) request the name , address , length of service , and local and long distance toll billing records of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that the name , address , length of service , and toll billing records sought are relevant to an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely on the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states ; and ( 2 ) request the name , address , and length of service of a person or entity if the director ( or his designee ) certifies in writing to the wire or electronic communication service provider to which the request is made that the information sought is relevant to an authorized investigation to protect against international terrorism or clandestine intelligence activities , provided that such an investigation of a united states person is not conducted solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states .

 ( c ) prohibition of certain disclosure. — ( 1 ) if the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or his designee in a position not lower than deputy assistant director at bureau headquarters or a special agent in charge in a bureau field office designated by the director , certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no wire or electronic communications service provider , or officer , employee , or agent thereof , shall disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access to information or records under this section .

 ( 2 ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such person of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) at the request of the director of the federal bureau of investigation or the designee of the director , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the director or such designee the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the director or such designee of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request under subsection ( a ) .

 ( d ) dissemination by bureau. — the federal bureau of investigation may disseminate information and records obtained under this section only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligence collection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation , and , with respect to dissemination to an agency of the united states , only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorized responsibilities of such agency .

 ( e ) requirement that certain congressional bodies be informed. — on a semiannual basis the director of the federal bureau of investigation shall fully inform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate , and the committee on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary of the senate , concerning all requests made under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( f ) libraries. — a library ( as that term is defined in section 213 ( 1 ) of the library services and technology act ( 20 u.s.c .

9122 ( 1 ) ) , the services of which include access to the internet , books , journals , magazines , newspapers , or other similar forms of communication in print or digitally by patrons for their use , review , examination , or circulation , is not a wire or electronic communication service provider for purposes of this section , unless the library is providing the services defined in section 2510 ( 15 ) ( "electronic communication service" ) of this title .

none .

this section was created by the usa patriot act , effective october 26 , 2001 .

 ( a ) disclosure notwithstanding section 1681b of this title or any other provision of this subchapter , a consumer reporting agency shall furnish a consumer report of a consumer and all other information in a consumer's file to a government agency authorized to conduct investigations of , or intelligence or counterintelligence activities or analysis related to , international terrorism when presented with a written certification by such government agency that such information is necessary for the agency's conduct or such investigation , activity or analysis .

 ( b ) form of certification the certification described in subsection ( a ) of this section shall be signed by a supervisory official designated by the head of a federal agency or an officer of a federal agency whose appointment to office is required to be made by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate .

 ( c ) confidentiality ( 1 ) if the head of a government agency authorized to conduct investigations of intelligence or counterintelligence activities or analysis related to international terrorism , or his designee , certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no consumer reporting agency or officer , employee , or agent of such consumer reporting agency , shall disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) , or specify in any consumer report , that a government agency has sought or obtained access to information under subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( 2 ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to any attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such persons of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) at the request of the authorized government agency , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the requesting official of the authorized government agency the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the requesting official of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request for information under subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( d ) rule of construction nothing in section 1681u of this title shall be construed to limit the authority of the director of the federal bureau of investigation under this section .

 ( e ) safe harbor notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter , any consumer reporting agency or agent or employee thereof making disclosure of consumer reports or other information pursuant to this section in good - faith reliance upon a certification of a government agency pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be liable to any person for such disclosure under this subchapter , the constitution of any state , or any law or regulation of any state or any political subdivision of any state .

 ( f ) reports to congress ( 1 ) on a semi - annual basis , the attorney general shall fully inform the committee on the judiciary , the committee on financial services , and the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary , the committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , and the select committee on intelligence of the senate concerning all requests made pursuant to subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( 2 ) in the case of the semiannual reports required to be submitted under paragraph ( 1 ) to the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate , the submittal dates for such reports shall be as provided in section 415b of title 50 .

 ( a ) generally ( 1 ) any authorized investigative agency may request from any financial agency , financial institution , or holding company , or from any consumer reporting agency , such financial records , other financial information , and consumer reports as may be necessary in order to conduct any authorized law enforcement investigation , counterintelligence inquiry , or security determination .

any authorized investigative agency may also request records maintained by any commercial entity within the united states pertaining to travel by an employee in the executive branch of government outside the united states .

 ( 2 ) requests may be made under this section where — ( a ) the records sought pertain to a person who is or was an employee in the executive branch of government required by the president in an executive order or regulation , as a condition of access to classified information , to provide consent , during a background investigation and for such time as access to the information is maintained , and for a period of not more than three years thereafter , permitting access to financial records , other financial information , consumer reports , and travel records ; and ( b ) ( i ) there are reasonable grounds to believe , based on credible information , that the person is , or may be , disclosing classified information in an unauthorized manner to a foreign power or agent of a foreign power ; ( ii ) information the employing agency deems credible indicates the person has incurred excessive indebtedness or has acquired a level of affluence which cannot be explained by other information known to the agency ; or ( iii ) circumstances indicate the person had the capability and opportunity to disclose classified information which is known to have been lost or compromised to a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

 ( 3 ) each such request — ( a ) shall be accompanied by a written certification signed by the department or agency head or deputy department or agency head concerned , or by a senior official designated for this purpose by the department or agency head concerned ( whose rank shall be no lower than assistant secretary or assistant director ) , and shall certify that — ( i ) the person concerned is or was an employee within the meaning of paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) ; ( ii ) the request is being made pursuant to an authorized inquiry or investigation and is authorized under this section ; and ( iii ) the records or information to be reviewed are records or information which the employee has previously agreed to make available to the authorized investigative agency for review ; ( b ) shall contain a copy of the agreement referred to in subparagraph ( a ) ( iii ) ; ( c ) shall identify specifically or by category the records or information to be reviewed ; and ( d ) shall inform the recipient of the request of the prohibition described in subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) disclosure of requests notwithstanding any other provision of law , no governmental or private entity , or officer , employee , or agent of such entity , may disclose to any person that such entity has received or satisfied a request made by an authorized investigative agency under this section .

* * .

 ( a ) generally ( 1 ) any authorized investigative agency may request from any financial agency , financial institution , or holding company , or from any consumer reporting agency , such financial records , other financial information , and consumer reports as may be necessary in order to conduct any authorized law enforcement investigation , counterintelligence inquiry , or security determination .

any authorized investigative agency may also request records maintained by any commercial entity within the united states pertaining to travel by an employee in the executive branch of government outside the united states .

 ( 2 ) requests may be made under this section where — ( a ) the records sought pertain to a person who is or was an employee in the executive branch of government required by the president in an executive order or regulation , as a condition of access to classified information , to provide consent , during a background investigation and for such time as access to the information is maintained , and for a period of not more than three years thereafter , permitting access to financial records , other financial information , consumer reports , and travel records ; and ( b ) ( i ) there are reasonable grounds to believe , based on credible information , that the person is , or may be , disclosing classified information in an unauthorized manner to a foreign power or agent of a foreign power ; ( ii ) information the employing agency deems credible indicates the person has incurred excessive indebtedness or has acquired a level of affluence which cannot be explained by other information known to the agency ; or ( iii ) circumstances indicate the person had the capability and opportunity to disclose classified information which is known to have been lost or compromised to a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

 ( 3 ) each such request — ( a ) shall be accompanied by a written certification signed by the department or agency head or deputy department or agency head concerned , or by a senior official designated for this purpose by the department or agency head concerned ( whose rank shall be no lower than assistant secretary or assistant director ) , and shall certify that — ( i ) the person concerned is or was an employee within the meaning of paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) ; ( ii ) the request is being made pursuant to an authorized inquiry or investigation and is authorized under this section ; and ( iii ) the records or information to be reviewed are records or information which the employee has previously agreed to make available to the authorized investigative agency for review ; ( b ) shall contain a copy of the agreement referred to in subparagraph ( a ) ( iii ) ; ( c ) shall identify specifically or by category the records or information to be reviewed ; and ( d ) shall inform the recipient of the request of the prohibition described in subsection ( b ) of this section .

 ( b ) prohibition of certain disclosure ( 1 ) if an authorized investigative agency described in subsection ( a ) of this section certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the united states , interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation , interference with diplomatic relations , or danger to the life or physical safety of any person , no governmental or private entity , or officer , employee , or agent of such entity , may disclose to any person ( other than those to whom such disclosure is necessary to comply with the request or an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request ) that such entity has received or satisfied a request made by an authorized investigative agency under this section .

 ( 2 ) the request shall notify the person or entity to whom the request is directed of the nondisclosure requirement under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) any recipient disclosing to those persons necessary to comply with the request or to an attorney to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request shall inform such persons of any applicable nondisclosure requirement .

any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) at the request of the authorized investigative agency , any person making or intending to make a disclosure under this section shall identify to the requesting official of the authorized investigative agency the person to whom such disclosure will be made or to whom such disclosure was made prior to the request , except that nothing in this section shall require a person to inform the requesting official of the identity of an attorney to whom disclosure was made or will be made to obtain legal advice or legal assistance with respect to the request under subsection ( a ) of this section .

* * .

reports on national security letters .

 ( a ) existing reports — any report made to a committee of congress regarding national security letters under section 2709 ( c ) ( 1 ) of title 18 , united states code , sections 626 ( d ) or 627 ( c ) of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681u ( d ) or 1681v ( c ) ) , section 1114 ( a ) ( 3 ) or 1114 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( d ) of the right to financial privacy act ( 12 u.s.c .

3414 ( a ) ( 3 ) or 3414 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( d ) ) , or section 802 ( b ) of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

[3126] ( b ) ) shall also be made to the committees on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the senate .

* * * ( c ) report on requests for national security letters - ( 1 ) in general - in april of each year , the attorney general shall submit to congress an aggregate report setting forth with respect to the preceding year the total number of requests made by the department of justice for information concerning different united states persons under — ( a ) section 2709 of title 18 , united states code ( to access certain communication service provider records ) , excluding the number of requests for subscriber information ; ( b ) section 1114 of the right to financial privacy act ( 12 u.s.c .

3414 ) ( to obtain financial institution customer records ) ; ( c ) section 802 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

[3126] ) ( to obtain financial information , records , and consumer reports ) ; ( d ) section 626 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681u ) ( to obtain certain financial information and consumer reports ) ; and ( e ) section 627 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681v ) ( to obtain credit agency consumer records for counterterrorism investigations ) .

 ( 2 ) unclassified form - the report under this section shall be submitted in unclassified form .

 ( d ) national security letter defined - in this section , the term 'national security letter' means a request for information under one of the following provisions of law: ( 1 ) section 2709 ( a ) of title 18 , united states code ( to access certain communication service provider records ) .

 ( 2 ) section 1114 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) of the right to financial privacy act ( 12 u.s.c .

3414 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) ) ( to obtain financial institution customer records ) .

 ( 3 ) section 802 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

[3162] ) ( to obtain financial information , records , and consumer reports ) .

 ( 4 ) section 626 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681u ) ( to obtain certain financial information and consumer reports ) .

 ( 5 ) section 627 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681v ) ( to obtain credit agency consumer records for counterterrorism investigations ) .

audit of use of national security letters .

 ( a ) audit — the inspector general of the department of justice shall perform an audit of the effectiveness and use , including any improper or illegal use , of national security letters issued by the department of justice .

 ( b ) requirements - the audit required under subsection ( a ) shall include — ( 1 ) an examination of the use of national security letters by the department of justice during calendar years 2003 through 2006 ; ( 2 ) a description of any noteworthy facts or circumstances relating to such use , including any improper or illegal use of such authority ; and ( 3 ) an examination of the effectiveness of national security letters as an investigative tool , including — ( a ) the importance of the information acquired by the department of justice to the intelligence activities of the department of justice or to any other department or agency of the federal government ; ( b ) the manner in which such information is collected , retained , analyzed , and disseminated by the department of justice , including any direct access to such information ( such as access to 'raw data' ) provided to any other department , agency , or instrumentality of federal , state , local , or tribal governments or any private sector entity ; ( c ) whether , and how often , the department of justice utilized such information to produce an analytical intelligence product for distribution within the department of justice , to the intelligence community ( as such term is defined in section 3 ( 4 ) of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

401a ( 4 ) ) ) , or to other federal , state , local , or tribal government departments , agencies , or instrumentalities ; ( d ) whether , and how often , the department of justice provided such information to law enforcement authorities for use in criminal proceedings ; ( e ) with respect to national security letters issued following the date of the enactment of this act , an examination of the number of occasions in which the department of justice , or an officer or employee of the department of justice , issued a national security letter without the certification necessary to require the recipient of such letter to comply with the nondisclosure and confidentiality requirements potentially applicable under law ; and ( f ) the types of electronic communications and transactional information obtained through requests for information under section 2709 of title 18 , united states code , including the types of dialing , routing , addressing , or signaling information obtained , and the procedures the department of justice uses if content information is obtained through the use of such authority .

 ( c ) submission dates - ( 1 ) prior years - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , or upon completion of the audit under this section for calendar years 2003 and 2004 , whichever is earlier , the inspector general of the department of justice shall submit to the committee on the judiciary and the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary and the select committee on intelligence of the senate a report containing the results of the audit conducted under this subsection for calendar years 2003 and 2004 .

 ( 2 ) calendar years 2005 and 2006- not later than december 31 , 2007 , or upon completion of the audit under this subsection for calendar years 2005 and 2006 , whichever is earlier , the inspector general of the department of justice shall submit to the committee on the judiciary and the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary and the select committee on intelligence of the senate a report containing the results of the audit conducted under this subsection for calendar years 2005 and 2006 .

 ( d ) prior notice to attorney general and director of national intelligence ; comments - ( 1 ) notice - not less than 30 days before the submission of a report under subsections ( c ) ( 1 ) or ( c ) ( 2 ) , the inspector general of the department of justice shall provide such report to the attorney general and the director of national intelligence .

 ( 2 ) comments - the attorney general or the director of national intelligence may provide comments to be included in the reports submitted under subsections ( c ) ( 1 ) or ( c ) ( 2 ) as the attorney general or the director of national intelligence may consider necessary .

 ( e ) unclassified form - the reports submitted under subsections ( c ) ( 1 ) or ( c ) ( 2 ) and any comments included under subsection ( d ) ( 2 ) shall be in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex .

 ( f ) minimization procedures feasibility - not later than february 1 , 2007 , or upon completion of review of the report submitted under subsection ( c ) ( 1 ) , whichever is earlier , the attorney general and the director of national intelligence shall jointly submit to the committee on the judiciary and the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the committee on the judiciary and the select committee on intelligence of the senate a report on the feasibility of applying minimization procedures in the context of national security letters to ensure the protection of the constitutional rights of united states persons .

 ( g ) national security letter defined - in this section , the term 'national security letter' means a request for information under one of the following provisions of law: ( 1 ) section 2709 ( a ) of title 18 , united states code ( to access certain communication service provider records ) .

 ( 2 ) section 1114 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) of the right to financial privacy act ( 12 u.s.c .

3414 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) ) ( to obtain financial institution customer records ) .

 ( 3 ) section 802 of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

436 ) ( to obtain financial information , records , and consumer reports ) .

 ( 4 ) section 626 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681u ) ( to obtain certain financial information and consumer reports ) .

 ( 5 ) section 627 of the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681v ) ( to obtain credit agency consumer records for counterterrorism investigations ) .

