the question of legalizing the status of unauthorized aliens in the united states is a key — and controversial — issue in immigration reform .

while recent discussions have focused on legislative proposals that aim to enable a large proportion of the unauthorized population to obtain legal status , for many years narrower bills were regularly introduced in congress to address both the immigration - and education - related circumstances of a subset of unauthorized aliens: individuals brought , as children , to live in the united states by their parents or other adults .

known as the "dream act," these bills have sought to establish a pathway to permanent legal status for these unauthorized childhood arrivals and have historically been less controversial than broader legalization proposals .

the name dream act derives from a bill title , development , relief , and education for alien minors act , but refers more broadly to measures to provide immigration relief to unauthorized students , whether or not particular bills carry that name .

dream act proposals have seen legislative action since the 107 th congress .

in the 107 th and 108 th congresses , for example , the senate judiciary committee reported stand - alone dream act bills .

the 109 th and 110 th congresses saw the introduction of both stand - alone dream act bills and larger immigration reform bills with dream act titles .

dream act legislation introduced and considered in these congresses is the focus of this report .

this legislation serves as a bridge between older and newer versions of the dream act and provides useful background information for analysis of more recent dream act proposals .

unauthorized immigrant children living in the united states are able to receive free public education through high school .

attending college , however , may be more difficult for them because of their unlawful status .

one reason for this is a provision enacted in 1996 as section 505 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) , which discourages states and localities from granting resident unauthorized aliens certain "postsecondary education benefits," commonly interpreted to include in - state tuition rates .

iirira§505 directs that an unauthorized alien shall not be eligible on the basis of residence within a state ( or a political subdivision ) for any postsecondary education benefit unless a citizen or national of the united states is eligible for such a benefit ( in no less an amount , duration , and scope ) without regard to whether the citizen or national is such a resident .

another factor that may make it difficult for some unauthorized immigrants to attend college is that they are not eligible for federal student financial aid under the higher education act ( hea ) of 1965 , as amended .

more broadly , as unauthorized aliens , they typically are unable to work legally and are subject to removal from the united states .

dream act bills introduced in the 109 th and 110 th congresses sought to provide relief to unauthorized alien students with respect to both higher education and immigration status .

these measures generally proposed to repeal the 1996 provision and to enable certain unauthorized students to adjust to legal permanent resident ( lpr ) status .

adjustment of status is the process of becoming an lpr in the united states without having to go abroad to apply for a visa .

for the most part , the dream act bills introduced in the 109 th and 110 th congresses would have enabled eligible unauthorized immigrants to adjust to lpr status through a mechanism in immigration law known as cancellation of removal .

c ancellation of removal is a discretionary form of relief that an alien can apply for while in removal proceedings before an immigration judge .

aliens granted cancellation of removal in removal proceedings are adjusted to lpr status .

under the dream act bills utilizing the cancellation of removal mechanism , an individual could have applied affirmatively for this form of relief without first being placed in removal proceedings .

dream act legislation was introduced in the house and the senate in the 109 th and 110 th congresses , as in earlier congresses .

the senate considered dream act measures in both congresses and , in the 109 th congress , passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill ( s. 2611 ) that included a dream act title .

this bill was not enacted into law , however .

the house did not consider any dream act bills in the 109 th or 110 th congresses .

such measures would again be introduced in the 111 th and subsequent congresses .

