how to share water has long been a complex issue for the u.s. - mexican border region , and it has been the cause of both tension and cooperation in the broader u.s. - mexican relationship .

the two countries share a nearly 2,000-mile border .

multiple rivers cross or form the border at various points .

the principal shared river basins are the colorado river and the rio grande .

this report is a primer on u.s. and mexican water sharing .

it focuses on the sharing of surface waters .

after presenting an introduction to u.s. - mexican water sharing , this report describes the legal obligations and processes under the treaty on utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande ( hereinafter treaty or 1944 water treaty ) .

it then describes developments in the colorado river and rio grande basins .

the 1944 water treaty establishes water allocations for the united states and mexico and creates the current governance framework for the ibwc to resolve disputes arising from the treaty's execution .

in april 1945 , the senate provided its advice and consent to the treaty , subject to certain "understandings. .

similar to treaty reservations and declarations , understandings are interpretative statements made by the senate that clarify or elaborate on provisions in a treaty but do not alter them .

in november 1945 , president truman ratified the 1944 water treaty , subject to the senate's understandings .

as depicted in figure 1 , the colorado river flows through seven u.s. states ( arizona , california , colorado , nevada , new mexico , utah , and wyoming ) and forms the border between the mexican states of baja california norte and sonora , before emptying into the gulf of california ; 97% of the basin is in the united states .

disputes have occurred over the use of the colorado river water supplies for most of the past century .

although many of these disputes have related to state allocations on the u.s. side of the border , issues have also arisen over water quality , availability , and conservation between the united states and mexico .

when the 1944 water treaty was signed , colorado river flows were estimated at some 16.8 million af per year .

recent flows have averaged volumes closer to 14.4 million af annually .

that is , the 1944 water treaty requirement that the united states provide mexico with 1.5 million af annually means that the united states retains roughly 90% of the average flow , but less than originally estimated .

in december 2012 , the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation published a study documenting that the demand for the basin's water in the united states in some years exceeds supply , and that the demand - supply imbalance is anticipated to worsen in coming decades .

while discussion of colorado river water issues within the united states is beyond the scope of this report , concern about meeting future demands in the united states is significant to the context of discussions about the basin's water sharing with mexico .

the following treaty implementation issues in the colorado river basin are discussed in more detail below: salinity , environmental protection , and minute 319 .

for a snapshot of drought conditions in the basin , see the drought monitor maps in appendix .

the rio grande dries up at various points as it travels from colorado to the gulf of mexico .

consequently , what looks like a continuous basin in figure 2 actually operates as two separate binational basins divided into the northwestern el paso - ju치rez rio grande basin from south of elephant butte dam in new mexico past the water withdrawals and return flows of el paso , texas , and ciudad ju치rez , chihuahua ; and the southeastern lower rio grande basin , including its tributaries ( eg , rio conchos ) from fort quitman , texas , to the gulf of mexico .

binational water - sharing agreements differ in the two binational rio grande basins .

in the northwestern el paso - ju치rez basin , the united states is required to deliver water to mexico .

in the southeastern lower rio grande basin , it is largely mexico that is obligated to deliver water to the united states .

a common characteristic of both basins is that the water demands regularly exceed supply ; this imbalance becomes particularly apparent during droughts .

while the northwestern el paso - ju치rez water issues have raised significant local concerns recently , the delivery of water from mexico in the southeastern rio grande basin has received the majority of national media and political attention .

both parts of the rio grande basin can experience multiyear droughts ; see the drought monitor maps in appendix for various snapshots of drought in the basin from 2011 to 2016 .

mexican - u.s. relations generally grew closer during the george w. bush and obama administrations .

water sharing was addressed through technical meetings led by the ibwc and bilateral talks between mexican and u.s. federal government officials ; these meetings and talks were the primary forum for addressing treaty compliance and frustrations of water users in texas with mexico's water delivery regime .

binational cooperation and improved knowledge of the state of border water resources was furthered through data - sharing and joint - research efforts ( eg , aquifer assessments ) .

binational cooperation also was integral to the pulse flow and habitat restoration pilot in the colorado river basin and to the ongoing research and monitoring efforts to document the impacts of the flows .

the binational developments in water sharing in the colorado river basin included greater participation by stakeholders in lower basin states , the private sector , and nongovernmental organization .

it remains uncertain what principles will guide efforts to address water - sharing conflicts and the role of enhanced cooperation ( eg , measures similar to minute 319 ) during the trump administration .

for the colorado river basin , issues before congress may be largely related to oversight of the implementation of minute 319 , as well as developments in negotiations related to the future of minute 319 or its successor ( if any ) .

questions that congress may confront related to water sharing in the rio grande basin include what are the most effective mechanisms and approaches for achieving a mexican water delivery regime that provides more reliability and benefit for texas water stakeholders .

water sharing becomes more complicated during droughts , and both the colorado river and the rio grande basins are prone to multiyear droughts .

the north american drought monitor provides maps created by u.s. , mexican , and canadian experts that synthesize various drought indices and impacts .

figure a - 1 shows the most recent drought monitor available , when this report was published ; figure a - 2 shows the drought monitor in october 2015 and october 2016 .

figure a - 3 shows the evolution of drought conditions from 2011 through 2015 .

for the rio grande , as shown in figure a - 3 , both 2011 and 2012 were marked by dry conditions , resulting from high heat , low precipitation , and low runoff throughout most of the basin .

for the colorado river , dry conditions developed more noticeably in 2012 and persisted in varying degrees through october 2016 .

