the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) of 1978 was the product of sweeping congressional investigation and deliberation prompted by perceived electronic surveillance abuses by the executive branch .

among other things , fisa established the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) to review government applications to conduct electronic surveillance for foreign intelligence purposes and the foreign intelligence surveillance court of review ( fisa court of review ) to review the decisions of the fisc .

in the wake of revelations in june 2013 concerning the scope of orders issued by the fisc , many have questioned the efficacy of the current mechanisms for reviewing the executive branch's intelligence gathering practices .

while some have proposed altering the underlying substantive law that regulates such surveillance , other proposals address the practice and procedures of authorizing such surveillance activities .

this report begins with an overview of both the fisc and the fisa court of review , including the jurisdiction of these courts , how the judges are appointed , and the fisc's practices and procedures for reviewing and issuing surveillance orders .

the report then discusses the scope and underlying legal principles behind congressional regulation of the procedures of the federal courts , and applies those principles with respect to the various proposals to reform the fisa judicial review process .

these reforms include requiring the fisc to hear arguments from "friends of the court" or amici curiae , who would brief the court on the privacy or civil liberty interests implicated by a government application ; mandating that in certain instances the fisc sit en banc — that is , with all 11 fisc judges ; and altering the voting rules of the fisc and fisa court of review .

the creation of the foreign intelligence surveillance courts came about from the confluence of two major legal and political developments in the 1970s .

first , in 1972 , the supreme court suggested in the keith case that while domestic security surveillance must be handled through traditional legal processes , congress could establish a special legal framework for reviewing requests for foreign intelligence surveillance .

second , in 1975 , congress created the senate select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities , commonly known as the "church committee," to review the executive branch's intelligence gathering activities .

the church committee unearthed widespread surveillance of american citizens and recommended tighter controls on intelligence activities .

deliberating in the context of both the keith case and the church committee report , congress enacted fisa in 1978 .

at the heart of fisa is the fisc , a specialized article iii court that is empowered to "hear applications for and grant orders approving" of certain foreign intelligence gathering efforts .

the fisc is wholly unique among federal courts in that its jurisdiction is narrowly tailored ; the selection of its judges deviates from traditional constitutional appointments process ; and its day - to - day operations are conducted almost entirely in secret .

before addressing some of the proposals to alter the current practices and procedures of the fisc and fisa court of review , this section will take a closer look at the current structure and operational processes of these foreign intelligence courts .

several congressional proposals attempting to reform united states foreign intelligence gathering efforts are aimed at changing the underlying practices of the fisc and fisa court of review .

for example , some have suggested either explicitly permitting or mandating that the fisc hear from an amicus curiae or "friend of the court. .

others have proposed mandating en banc panels of the fisc .

still others have suggested altering the voting rules of the fisc in an apparent attempt to create a higher threshold for government surveillance .

before delving into the specific legal questions prompted by such proposals , however , it is important to first explore the underlying legal principles animating the extent to which congress can regulate an article iii court's practices and procedures .

the starting point for that discussion is the nature of a federal court's power , which stems from the constitution , statutory law , and federal common law .

a federal court's power emanates first and foremost from the constitution .

specifically , article iii of the constitution vests the "judicial power" of the united states in the supreme court and any inferior courts established by congress .

supreme court case law has interpreted the judiciary's authority to consist of three primary elements .

first , the judicial power encompasses the power to interpret laws .

as stated in federalist no .

78 and later echoed in marbury v. madison : "the interpretation of the law is the proper and peculiar province of the courts. .

nonetheless , as the supreme court had noted , the judicial branch is not the only branch that interprets the law , as president must necessarily interpret laws in executing them , and congress must necessarily engage in legal interpretation when enacting legislation .

accordingly , there is a second aspect of article iii judicial power , and it centers on when a court exercises the power to say what the law means .

specifically , a federal court exercises its authority in the context of certain "cases" or "controversies. .

the "cases" or "controversies" language of article iii connotes a source of authority for federal courts such that article iii courts are empowered to not "merely ... rule on cases , but to decide them , subject to review only by superior courts in the article iii hierarchy .. .

. .

put another way , the "judicial power" of article iii entails a power to render final , "dispositive judgments" in particular cases and controversies .

third , the structural protections the constitution provides to courts suggest another distinct aspect regarding the federal judicial power .

section one of article iii stipulates that all federal judges in "good behaviour" shall have lifetime tenure and that their salary cannot be diminished within their term of office .

the purpose of these provisions is to ensure that federal courts operate free from interference from the political branches in order to , in the words of alexander hamilton , "secure a steady , upright , and impartial administration of the laws. .

while the constitution provides federal courts the "capacity" to exercise their power in certain cases , an act of congress is "require[d] ... to confer" authority to a given article iii court , meaning that statutory law is another source of a federal court's power .

article i of the constitution provides congress with the discretion to create inferior tribunals to the supreme court .

as a "necessary and proper" function of carrying into execution that power and the "[p]owers vested by [the] constitution" in the judiciary , congress can authorize the courts to "carry[] into execution all the judgments which the judicial department has the power to pronounce. .

in this vein , provisions codified in title 28 of the united states code empower the federal courts to do a host of activities , such as being able to hear disputes based on "federal questions" or assess certain fees to litigants .

in addition to the powers bestowed on federal courts through article iii and certain statutory provisions , the supreme court has long recognized that the federal judiciary retains certain "inherent powers" or "implied powers" that are "necessary to the exercise of all others. .

a federal court's inherent powers are not governed by "rule or statute but by the control necessarily vested in the courts to manage their own affairs so as to achieve the orderly and expeditious disposition of case. .

in some sense , a federal court's inherent power can be conceptualized as a type of federal common law where a judge adopts practices and procedures as a gap - filling measure because the existing statutes and rules are insufficient .

nonetheless , the supreme court has recognized that a court's inherent powers are not exclusively exercised due to oversights by congress or the rulemaking bodies , but instead inhere to broadly allow a federal court to properly function as an institution .

given the three central sources of power for the federal judiciary — the constitution , statutory law , and federal common law — the issue that remains is to what extent can congress restrict or regulate a court's power by prescribing rules of practice and procedure .

as a starting point , the supreme court has recognized that congress has "undoubted power to regulate the practice and procedure of federal courts. .

as chief justice warren noted in hanna v. plumer , the "constitutional provision for a federal court system ( augmented by the necessary and proper clause ) carries with it congressional power to make rules governing the practice and pleading in those courts. .

and , indeed , title 28 includes numerous provisions through which congress mandates how the federal judiciary conducts its business — from how many justices sit on the supreme court , to what constitutes a quorum on the court , to what types of evidence can be admitted into a federal court proceeding , to rules of precedence among federal district court judges .

accordingly , the court has interpreted congress to have the power to promulgate mandatory rules of procedure that article iii courts have "no more discretion to disregard ... than they do to disregard constitutional provisions. .

and congress' power even extends to regulate the inherent powers of a court .

nonetheless , although some have described congress's power over the federal judiciary's practices to be "plenary" in nature , the supreme court has recognized that congress's authority to prescribe procedural rules for federal courts is not absolute .

specifically , congress's power over procedure cannot extend so far as to erode functions of the federal judiciary that are at the heart of the article iii judicial power — namely the ability to independently and impartially resolve a case - or - controversy with finality .

in other words , congress cannot erode the "essential attributes of the judicial power" in the article iii courts .

as a consequence , congress cannot require a court to issue advisory opinions on matters of legal concern , as such a rule would require the judiciary to say what the law is outside of a case - or - controversy .

moreover , the legislature cannot subject a federal judicial opinion to review by a non - article iii body or retroactively command federal courts to reopen their final judgments , as such procedures would prevent an article iii court from ruling with finality and issuing dispositive judgments .

likewise , congress cannot enact laws that erode the decisional or analytical independence of a federal court .

in this regard , the court has struck down congressional enactments that interfere with the judicial decision - making process as to effectively decide the outcome of a given case or essentially plunge the federal judiciary into a political role .

in short , article iii places some limits on congress's relatively broad authority to regulate the practice and procedures of federal courts .

with these principles in mind , this report turns to several proposals attempting to regulate the practice of the fisa courts .

fisa proceedings primarily involve only one party , as the fisc is authorized to issue orders approving of electronic surveillance , certain physical searches , the use of a pen register or a trap and trace device , or the access to certain business records for foreign intelligence and international terrorism investigations upon a proper showing made in an application by a federal officer .

recent controversies over the nature of the government's foreign surveillance activity have prompted the argument that the ex parte nature of the judiciary's review of government surveillance requests under fisa deprives the court from hearing a "researched and informed presentation of an opposing view. .

in this vein , while some have suggested formally establishing an office for a permanent public interest advocate to represent "the interests of those whose rights of privacy or civil liberties might be at stake," others have proposed allowing or even requiring the fisc to , on a temporary or ad hoc basis , hear from certain individuals or interests groups who , as "friends of the court" or amici curiae , would brief the court on the privacy or civil liberty interests implicated by a government application .

proposals purporting to regulate the process by which the fisc hears from amici potentially raise several questions about their legal necessity and the extent to which congress can mandate that a federal court hear from a particular party .

in 2008 , fisa was amended to explicitly permit the fisc , on its own initiative , or upon the request of the government in any proceeding , or a party in a proceeding under § 215 or § 702 , to hold a hearing or rehearing en banc .

an en banc panel consists of all the judges that constitute the fisc .

during debate of the fisa amendments act of 2008 , lawmakers proposed mandating that the fisc sit en banc to make legal immunity determinations regarding telecommunication service providers who allegedly aided the federal government in surveillance gathering activities .

in the wake of recent revelations about the nsa's foreign surveillance practices , at least one commentator has revived the mandatory en banc proposal for certain proceedings before the fisc .

congressionally mandating that the fisc sit en banc prompts questions regarding the constitutionality of such proposals .

before delving into those questions , it is first worth noting the background of en banc proceedings in federal courts .

another suggested procedural change to the fisa judicial review process is to alter the voting rules of the fisc and the fisa court of review .

a judicial voting rule is simply the number of votes required for a court to decide and give precedential effect to a case .

the fisa court accountability act ( h.r .

2586 ) would require that before an en banc panel of the fisc could act , it must have the concurrence of 60% of the sitting judges .

h.r .

2586 would also require that any decision in favor of the government by the three - judge fisa court of review must be made unanimously .

this proposal to statutorily regulate the voting rules of federal courts is not unique .

while it has never directly set the voting rules of the federal courts , congress has established the number of justices that sit on the supreme court and the number that constitute a quorum .

likewise , congress has exercised considerable control over the lower federal courts , such as setting the number of judges that sit on each court of appeals and the number of appeals court judges needed to constitute a quorum .

while congress has made efforts to directly alter the voting rules of the supreme court and the courts of appeals , usually during periods of strong disagreement with the court's rulings , none have been successful .

without congressional regulation , the federal courts have fallen back on the common law simple majority rule .

while congress has significant authority to regulate the practice and procedure of the federal courts , it is unclear whether directly setting the voting rules of a federal court falls within that power .

because congress has never enacted a voting rule for federal courts , neither the supreme court nor the lower federal courts have had the opportunity to address the propriety of such a law .

nonetheless , various arguments have been made that congress lacks the authority to set the voting rules of the supreme court .

for instance , one theory holds that once congress vests the courts with the "judicial power," sets the number of judges on that court , and sets the quorum , congress's authority to regulate the court's procedure terminates , and the court can exercise the power of all similar deliberative bodies to decide cases by a simple majority .

a similar argument has been made that the structure of the constitution itself mandates the common law rule of a bare majority .

one observer contends that congress is powerless to alter the default majority rule that applies in all deliberative bodies in the absence of a specific constitutional provision providing for an alteration of this rule .

for instance , the constitution provides each house of congress the authority to "determine the rules of its proceedings," but does not expressly provide that congress may alter the voting rules of the federal courts .

however , there are several current voting practices that deviate from the bare - majority rule that would undercut this argument .

for instance , congress currently sets the quorum of the supreme court at six , which is greater than the common law rule of a simple majority .

likewise , the court's own implementation of sub - majority rules including the rule of four , which requires only four justices to grant certiorari review , and the "hold rule," which requires only three justices to hold a case , may weaken the argument that the use of simple majorities is constitutionally compelled .

instead of an absolute bar on congressional regulation of the courts' voting rules , a more likely resolution of their constitutionality will turn on the degree of interference they might have on the fisa courts' exercise of the judicial function .

as described above , while congress has considerable authority to regulate the practice and procedure of the federal courts , it may not use this power to erode the core functions of the judiciary .

of particular concern with respect to altering the voting rules is the proposition enunciated in united states v. klein , in which the supreme court refused to give effect to a statute that was said to "prescribe rules of decision to the judicial department of the government in cases pending before it[.] .

although the precise contours of klein 's holding are subject to debate , one generally accepted interpretation is that congress cannot regulate the jurisdiction of the federal courts in an attempt to dictate substantive outcomes .

requiring a 60% , rather than majority , concurrence in the en banc proceeding would not appear to unduly interfere with the essential functions of these courts .

under this proposed rule , if the 60% threshold is not met , the decision below would be affirmed .

with respect to proceedings under section 215 and section 702 , which have recently caused the most concern for congress , this proposal would tilt the scales in favor of affirming the one - judge fisc decision , but on its face would not primarily favor one result over another .

the judges would still be permitted to interpret the law and decide the matter before them free from interference .

and because this rule would primarily have a neutral effect on the fisc's rulings , it may not violate the principles established in klein .

some may argue that this proposal interferes with the fisc's prerogative to set its own rules and adjudicate cases free from congressional interference , but as discussed , congress has wide latitude to set the rules of the federal courts , and this proposed rule appears to fall within that authority .

the requirement of a unanimous vote in the fisa court of review for any decision in favor of the government poses a more serious risk of interfering with the independence of these courts .

the proposal would not apply across the board to all decisions of the court of review , but instead singles out decisions in favor of the government .

as a matter of course , this rule would prevent the court from entering an order in favor of one side even when two thirds of the court agrees with that decision .

if viewed in that light , it could be interpreted as congress seeking to dictate a substantive outcome in violation of klein .

additionally , a broader argument could be made that by preventing the court of review from acting or issuing binding rulings with respect to certain cases , congress is preventing it from acting as a duly constituted court .

while the creation of the court of review was in congress's sole discretion , it could be argued that once it was created , congress cannot deprive it of the core functions of a federal court , including the ability to render final , "dispositive judgments" in cases before it .

however , one may argue that while this rule may make it harder for the government to win on appeal , the proposal does not mandate a particular result and leaves the ultimate decision - making authority with the judges .

ultimately , like the other proposals altering the procedures and operations of the fisa courts , there is little judicial precedent to evaluate measures that would alter the courts' voting rules .

