the chemical industry is one of the united states' largest manufacturing industries , directly employing more than 790,000 workers .

the chemical industry serves both a domestic and a global market , and other industrial sectors rely on chemical products as essential to their business .

the potential harm to public health and the environment from a large release of hazardous chemicals has long concerned congressional policymakers .

accidental chemical releases spurred environmental and other legislative proposals to reduce the risk of chemical accidents in the united states .

while congressional interest in the security of chemical facilities predates the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , they prompted renewed congressional attention to the potential security risks posed by hazardous chemicals .

in 2006 , congress authorized the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

in 2014 , congress reaffirmed this authority with some modifications .

in 2007 , dhs issued interim final regulations establishing risk - based performance standards known as the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) .

these regulations provided a process whereby facilities would submit information and security plans to dhs , dhs would review and approve these plans , facilities would implement them , and dhs would inspect their implementation .

these regulations continue in force so long as they do not conflict with the new statutory authority enacted in 2014 .

the dhs has historically experienced challenges in implementing the cfats regulations .

it has not met its own expected timelines or milestones to begin or complete facility inspections .

as of february 2015 , dhs had inspected and approved 1,526 site security plans , covering approximately 43% of the regulated facilities .

this report provides information regarding the pace of dhs cfats implementation and attempts to identify potential sources of challenges for dhs .

it does not address broader issues related to chemical facility security ; for such information and analysis , see crs report r42918 , chemical facility security: issues and options for the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

in 2006 , congress authorized the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to issue interim final regulations establishing risk - based performance standards for chemical facility security and requiring facilities to develop vulnerability assessments and to develop and implement site security plans .

among other provisions , the statute directs dhs to allow regulated entities to employ combinations of security measures to meet risk - based performance standards , and it specifies that these regulations are to apply only to those chemical facilities that the secretary determines present high levels of security risk .

the law contains a high - level framework for its implementation .

the secretary must review and approve the required vulnerability assessment , site security plan , and its implementation at each facility .

the secretary must audit and inspect chemical facilities and determine regulatory compliance .

if the secretary finds that a facility is not in compliance , the secretary must write to the facility explaining the deficiencies found , provide an opportunity for the facility to consult with the secretary , and issue an order to the facility to comply by a specified date .

if the facility continues to be out of compliance , the secretary may impose a fine and , eventually , order the facility to cease operation .

in 2007 , the dhs issued an interim final rule and created the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) program .

much of the rule arises from the secretary's discretion and dhs interpretation of legislative intent and was not explicitly detailed by the law .

under the interim final rule , the secretary of homeland security determined which chemical facilities must meet regulatory security requirements .

facilities with greater than specified quantities of any of 322 chemicals of interest must submit information to dhs , via a process known as the "top - screen," so that dhs can preliminarily determine each facility's risk status .

only those dhs deems high - risk are subject to the cfats program and regulation .

the dhs assigns all high - risk facilities one of four risk - based tiers .

the dhs established different performance - based requirements for facilities assigned to each risk - based tier .

facilities in higher risk tiers must meet more stringent performance - based requirements ( tier 1 being the most stringent and tier 4 being the least stringent ) .

all high - risk facilities must develop a vulnerability assessment and an effective security plan , submit these documents to dhs , and implement their security plan .

the vulnerability assessment serves two purposes under the interim final rule .

one is to determine or confirm the placement of the facility in a risk - based tier .

the other is to provide a baseline against which to assess the effectiveness of actions identified in the site security plan .

each site security plan must describe how activities in the plan address issues identified in the facility vulnerability assessment .

additionally , the site security plan must address preparations for and deterrents against specific modes of potential terrorist attack , as applicable and identified by dhs .

the site security plan must also describe how the activities taken by the facility meet the risk - based performance standards provided by dhs .

high - risk facilities may develop vulnerability assessments and site security plans using alternative security programs established by a third party , such as an industry organization program , so long as they meet the tiered , performance - based requirements of the interim final rule .

the secretary may disapprove submitted vulnerability assessments or site security plans that fail to meet dhs standards but not on the basis of the presence or absence of a specific measure .

in the case of disapproval , dhs must identify in writing those areas of the assessment and plan that need improvement .

chemical facilities may request further adjudication by dhs of site security plan disapprovals .

once facilities have complied with the regulation by submitting security documentation and receiving approval of their plans , they are to implement their site security plans .

the dhs then monitors facility compliance with these site security plans .

the dhs indicated in 2007 that it would generally require tier 1 and tier 2 facilities to update their top - screen , security vulnerability assessment , and site security plan every two years and tier 3 and tier 4 facilities to do so every three years .

in 2014 , congress provided new authority to dhs to regulate security at chemical facilities .

the reauthorization generally supports the existing regulatory structure and expressly allows dhs to continue using the existing regulations unless they conflict with the new authority .

the new statute also contains provisions , such as an alternative self - certification program , that likely require action on dhs to implement .

the dhs has not yet issued new regulations to implement these provisions .

in effect , the cfats regulation and its underlying statute create a multistep , iterative process of facility information submission followed by dhs approval .

each step is iterative since both the facility , which may revise its submissions , and dhs , which may disapprove the submitted documents , may cause the other participant to repeat the information exchange .

see figure 1 .

facilities possessing a chemical of interest in quantities above the screening threshold quantity submit a top screen .

top screen results assist the cfats program in determining whether a facility presents a high - level security risk .

after processing a top screen , the cfats program assigns the facility a preliminary tier or determines that the facility does not meet the criteria for cfats regulation .

when a facility receives a preliminary tier assignment notification , it must prepare and submit a security vulnerability assessment ( sva ) to dhs .

after reviewing the sva , the cfats program determines a facility's final tier assignment or that the facility is not high - risk .

when the facility receives a final tier assignment , it must develop and submit a site security plan ( ssp ) to dhs .

the infrastructure security compliance division ( iscd ) in the dhs national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) reviews the ssp to preliminarily determine if it satisfies the applicable risk - based performance standards .

this process typically involves discussions between iscd staff and the facility .

it often requires the facility to submit additional information to iscd and revise the ssp before iscd can complete its initial review and issue the facility a letter of authorization for the ssp .

after issuing a letter of authorization , iscd conducts a comprehensive and detailed authorization inspection .

the iscd reviews the inspection results , as well as any further revisions that the facility may make to the ssp .

it then makes a final determination as to whether the facility's ssp satisfies the applicable risk - based performance standards .

if so , iscd issues a letter of approval , and the facility must implement the applicable provisions of the ssp .

if iscd determines that the ssp does not satisfy the applicable risk - based performance standards , iscd may issue a notice of deficiency and require the facility to resubmit a sufficient ssp .

if the facility fails to do so , iscd may disapprove the ssp .

following the authorization inspection , facilities are generally granted an additional 45 days to make any necessary modifications to their ssp .

iscd will then review the resubmitted ssp and make a final determination as to whether the ssp warrants the issuance of a letter of approval .

in some cases , the facility may require a technical consultation and another opportunity to revise its ssp .

over time , the dhs has attempted to develop a consistent nomenclature for its review and inspection process .

the dhs authorizes an ssp ( issuing the facility a letter of authorization ) when the submitted ssp is satisfactory under cfats .

the dhs conducts an authorization inspection of a facility with an authorized ssp to compare the authorized ssp to the conditions of the facility .

following a successful authorization inspection , the dhs approves the ssp ( issuing the facility a letter of approval ) .

at a later date , expected by dhs to be one year after approval of the ssp , the dhs will conduct a compliance inspection of a facility to determine whether the facility has fully implemented its approved ssp .

compliance inspections then occur on a periodic basis depending on the risk tier to which the facility is assigned .

the following sections analyze dhs data to identify underlying challenges for the following steps: the process of dhs assigning a facility to a risk tier ; the rate at which dhs authorizes site security plans ; the rate at which dhs inspects and approves authorized site security plans ; and the occurrence of compliance inspections .

assessing the future performance of the cfats program is challenging since it may or may not be similar to the program's past performance .

many external and internal events could dramatically affect program performance .

in addition , while the cfats program has been in place since 2007 , significant reforms began in 2012 , changing how dhs implemented the program .

the data on performance since those reforms are relatively sparse compared with the program's overall duration .

increased efficiencies on the part of the dhs or more effective compliance by regulated facilities could change program performance .

any assessment of the cfats program is based on the significant assumption that insight about future performance can be informed by analysis of past performance .

even if this assumption is incorrect , however , an analysis based on it may still help to identify potential issues with respect to current agency implementation .

the cfats program has historically not met dhs - established deadlines for securing high - risk chemical facilities .

that said , dhs has now authorized ssps for almost all facilities receiving a final tier assignment , but authorizing facilities without a final tier assignment will take an unknown amount of time .

at the current level of performance , it will likely take approximately two more years to inspect already authorized facilities and approve the ssps .

this conclusion does not consider the impact of compliance inspections , which have only recently begun .

several factors contribute to this conclusion .

approximately 25% of facilities regulated under cfats remain in a state of preliminary risk - tier assignment .

 , as described by dhs , this places those facilities at an early stage of review and compliance .

without an effective mechanism for reducing the number of preliminarily tiered facilities , hundreds of high - risk facilities will be in the ssp authorization and approval portion of the regulation rather than in the ssp implementation and compliance portion .

the dhs has acknowledged this effect in the short term by changing its target metric from approval of all tier 1 facility ssps by the end of fy2013 to approval of over 90% of tier 1 and tier 2 facilities with authorized ssps by the end of fy2014 .

the dhs appears to have met this new target .

the cfats system as a whole appears to operate more slowly than would be necessary to process all regulated facilities within the compliance inspection timeframe established in the cfats regulation .

the most obvious factor reducing throughput appears to be the rate of authorization inspection .

the dhs continues to authorize ssps at a rate equal to or greater than the number of authorization inspections conducted .

since the number of ssps approved is less than the number of authorization inspections , it appears that multiple inspections are necessary to approve some facilities .

therefore , the rate at which authorization inspections need to be conducted limits the rate of overall compliance with the cfats program .

analysis of the available data indicates that during some time periods , the number of authorization inspections exceeds the number of ssp approvals , while during other periods , the opposite is true .

this suggests that in addition to the time necessary to perform an authorization inspection , time is required for approval of the ssps .

if so , increasing the number of authorization inspections alone may reveal a secondary capacity gap in the rate at which dhs can process ssp approvals .

the fact that ssp authorizations and authorization inspections roughly parallel each other suggests that dhs does not have significant additional capacity in its authorization inspection process .

if the authorization inspection process had additional capacity , the number of authorization inspections would not be limited by the number of authorized ssps and would equal or surpass that number , assuming that some facilities require multiple authorization inspections prior to ssp approval .

increasing authorization inspection capacity might serve to highlight other potential issues within the cfats process , such as delays in processing information from authorization inspections and issuing letters of approval .

inspection capacity might be increased by employing more inspectors or by process improvements allowing for more inspections done by the same number of inspectors .

once compliance inspections start in earnest , the lack of additional inspection capacity may lead to further challenges .

the same inspector cadre is responsible for both compliance inspections and authorization inspections .

increasing the required number of inspections by beginning compliance inspections could reduce the availability of staff for completing authorization inspections .

because dhs has set a short interval for top - screen resubmission ( every two years for tier 1 and tier 2 and every three years for tier 3 and tier 4 ) it appears necessary for initial submissions from regulated facilities to be processed within that time frame .

if not , a significant backlog of activity seems likely given the current rates of inspection and approval .

as stated above , to process all facilities within the time frame of resubmission , dhs would need to perform 108 inspections per month , higher than the current authorization inspection rate , to avoid developing a backlog relative to facility resubmissions .

should dhs not require all facilities to resubmit updated svas and ssps , this may allow dhs to have a lower inspection rate without developing such a backlog .

as dhs makes progress in approving ssps and as it begins to gather experience in compliance inspections , it may become possible to project future performance with greater confidence .

