immigration reform was a key issue in the first session of the 113 th congress .

the senate passed the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , a comprehensive immigration reform bill that includes provisions on border security , interior enforcement , employment eligibility verification and worksite enforcement , legalization of unauthorized aliens , immigrant visas , nonimmigrant visas , and humanitarian admissions .

taking a different approach to immigration reform , the house acted on a set of immigration bills that separately address many of the same areas of immigration policy .

house committees reported or ordered to be reported immigration bills on border security ( h.r .

1417 ) ; interior enforcement ( h.r .

2278 ) ; employment eligibility verification and worksite enforcement ( h.r .

1772 ) ; and immigrant and nonimmigrant visas ( h.r .

2131 , h.r .

1773 ) .

the house and senate also acted on other pieces of immigration - related legislation .

among these , the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-4 ) includes provisions on noncitizen victims of domestic abuse or certain other crimes and on victims of human trafficking .

the trafficking provisions address the care and custody of unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) , among other issues .

additionally , in response to the recent surge in arrivals of unaccompanied minors from central america , the house - passed supplemental appropriations bill for 2014 ( h.r .

5230 ) contains uac - related provisions , including language that would change the procedures for screening and processing unaccompanied alien children who arrive at the u.s. border from certain countries .

many other uac - related bills were introduced in the 113 th congress but have not seen legislative action .

in addition to p.l .

113-4 , the 113 th congress enacted multiple immigration - related bills .

enacted appropriations measures ( p.l .

113-6 , p.l .

113-76 , and p.l .

113-164 ) variously include policy provisions on temporary nonagricultural workers , refugees , and special immigrants , among other immigration - related issues .

p.l .

113-42 , p.l .

113-66 , and p.l .

113-160 also contain provisions on special immigrants .

p.l .

113-74 concerns international adoption .

p.l .

113-100 concerns inadmissibility to the united states .

this report discusses these and other immigration - related issues that received legislative action or have been of significant congressional interest in the 113 th congress .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is charged with protecting u.s. borders from weapons of mass destruction , terrorists , smugglers , and unauthorized aliens .

border security involves securing the many means by which people and things can enter the country .

operationally , this means controlling the official ports of entry ( poe ) through which legitimate travelers and commerce enter the country , and patrolling the nation's land and maritime borders to prevent illegal entries .

dhs's u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) protects 7,000 miles of u.s. international land borders with mexico and canada and 95,000 miles of coastal shoreline .

at ports of entry , the cbp office of field operations ( ofo ) is responsible for conducting immigration , customs , and agricultural inspections of travelers seeking admission to the united states .

between poes , cbp's u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) is responsible for enforcing immigration law and other federal laws along the border and for preventing unlawful entries into the united states .

according to usbp data , apprehensions of unauthorized migrants have declined since fy2005 , reaching a 40-year low in fy2011 .

although apprehensions remain at historically low levels , there have been increases since fy2011 , driven by increased apprehensions of central american families and unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) at the southwest border ( see " unaccompanied alien children " ) .

border security has been an important issue for the last several congresses .

in recent years , some members of congress have proposed to strengthen border security as part of a "comprehensive immigration reform" bill , while others have argued that congress should not consider other immigration reforms until the border has been secured .

debate in the 113 th congress focused primarily on border security strategy and metrics ; border personnel , equipment , and infrastructure ; improvements to the entry - exit system for tracking aliens' travel into and out of the united states ; and dhs's access to federal lands and authority to waive certain federal laws .

in addition to establishing a comprehensive set of rules governing the admission , continued presence , and departure of foreign nationals , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) establishes an enforcement regime to deter violations of federal immigration law .

some violations are subject to civil monetary penalties ; other violations may be subject to criminal fines and imprisonment ; and still others , if committed by an alien , may be grounds for denying the alien admission into the country , removing the alien from the united states , or making the alien ineligible for certain immigration benefits or relief from removal .

legislative proposals in the 113 th congress , including h.r .

2278 , as ordered to be reported by the house judiciary committee , and senate - passed s. 744 , would modify the ina's enforcement provisions applicable to persons found within the united states ( "interior enforcement" provisions ) .

both bills would heighten criminal penalties associated with violations of federal immigration law and establish new grounds for inadmissibility and deportability .

the bills differ in several important ways , however , with h.r .

2278 generally imposing more significant penalties for immigration - related violations and more stringent requirements relating to the detention and removal of aliens than s. 744 .

h.r .

2278 also contains provisions encouraging states and localities to play a more active role in immigration enforcement .

employment eligibility verification and worksite enforcement ( one component of interior enforcement ) are widely viewed as essential elements of a strategy to reduce unauthorized immigration .

under section 274a of the ina , it is unlawful for an employer to knowingly hire , recruit or refer for a fee , or continue to employ an alien who is not authorized to be so employed .

employers are further required to participate in a paper - based ( i - 9 ) employment eligibility verification system in which they examine documents presented by new hires to verify identity and work eligibility , and to complete and retain i - 9 verification forms .

employers violating prohibitions on unlawful employment may be subject to civil and / or criminal penalties .

enforcement of these provisions , termed "worksite enforcement," is the responsibility of dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

while all employers must meet the i - 9 requirements , they may also elect to participate in the e - verify electronic employment eligibility verification system .

e - verify is administered by dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) .

participants in e - verify electronically verify new hires' employment authorization through social security administration ( ssa ) and , if necessary , dhs databases .

e - verify is a temporary program , currently authorized through september 30 , 2015 .

several bills on electronic employment eligibility verification have been introduced in the 113 th congress .

two measures have seen legislative action .

the house judiciary committee has ordered to be reported the legal workforce act ( h.r .

1772 ) .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , includes provisions on employment eligibility verification and worksite enforcement in title iii .

both bills would amend the ina to permanently authorize a new electronic verification system modeled on e - verify .

under both bills , an employer , after reviewing employee documents evidencing identity and employment authorization and completing a verification form with the employee , would seek confirmation of the employee - provided information through the electronic verification system .

the new electronic verification system proposed in h.r .

1772 would be mandatory for all employers in cases of hiring , recruitment , and referral .

the verification requirements with respect to hiring would be phased in by employer size , with the largest employers ( those with 10,000 or more employees ) required to participate six months after the date of enactment and the smallest employers ( those with less than 20 employees ) required to participate two years after the date of enactment .

the requirements with respect to recruitment and referral would apply one year after the date of enactment .

the bill also would provide for mandatory reverification of workers with temporary work authorization , which would be phased in on the same schedule as the verification requirements for hiring .

special provisions would apply to agriculture ; the hiring , recruitment and referral , and reverification provisions would not apply to agricultural workers until two years after the date of enactment .

prior to these phase - in dates , existing requirements to use e - verify would remain in effect .

h.r .

1772 would require or permit electronic verification in ways not currently allowed under e - verify .

employers could conduct electronic verification after making an offer of employment but before hiring , and could condition a job offer on final verification under the system .

verification of previously hired individuals would be mandatory in some cases ( such as , federal , state , and local government employees ) .

dhs could authorize or direct a critical infrastructure employer to use the system to the extent dhs determines is necessary for critical infrastructure protection .

in addition , employers could verify current employees on a voluntary basis .

h.r .

1772 would significantly increase existing civil and criminal penalties for violations of the revised ina section 274a prohibitions on unauthorized employment and for violations of requirements to conduct verification .

it would establish as violations of the prohibition on unauthorized employment , the failure to seek electronic verification as required or the knowing provision of false information to the electronic system .

h.r .

1772 would provide for the blocking of social security numbers from use in the verification system in cases of misuse and in other specified circumstances .

it also would enable individuals to limit use of their social security numbers or other information for verification purposes .

in addition , h.r .

1772 includes language to expressly preempt any state or local law that relates to the hiring , employment , or verification of the employment eligibility of unauthorized aliens .

at the same time , a state or locality could exercise its authority over business licensing and similar laws as a penalty for failure to use the verification system and a state , at its own expense , could enforce the revised ina section 274a provisions , under specified terms .

the bill also would require dhs to establish an office to receive complaints from state and local agencies about potential violations .

among its other provisions , h.r .

1772 would direct dhs to establish an identity authentication employment eligibility pilot program , which would "provide for identity authentication and employment eligibility verification with respect to enrolled new employees. .

the senate bill , as discussed below , would mandate the use of an identity authentication mechanism .

like h.r .

1772 , senate - passed s. 744 would amend the ina to authorize a new electronic verification system ( evs ) modeled on e - verify , through which employers would seek confirmation of employee - provided information .

employers also would be required to use a new identity authentication mechanism to be developed by dhs to verify the identity of each individual an employer seeks to hire .

for certain documents , the mechanism would consist of a "photo tool" to enable an employer to compare the photograph on a document provided by an individual to the original image on that same document .

under s. 744 , the evs would be mandatory for all employers in cases of hiring , recruitment , and referral for a fee .

employers also would have to reverify the employment authorized status of individuals with temporary work authorization .

as under h.r .

1772 , the verification requirements would be phased in , but on a different timetable .

all federal agencies would be required to participate in the evs on the earlier of the date of enactment , to the extent each agency is required to participate in e - verify and as already implemented , or 90 days after the date of enactment .

federal contractors would be required to participate in the evs in accordance with current regulatory requirements to participate in e - verify .

beginning one year after implementing regulations are published , dhs could direct any employer involved in critical infrastructure to participate in the evs to the extent the secretary determines such participation would assist in critical infrastructure protection ; these employers could be required to participate in the evs with respect to newly hired employees as well as current workers .

the phase - in of the evs participation requirements for other employers with respect to newly hired employees and employees with expiring employment authorization documents would begin no later than two years after the publication of implementing regulations ( for employers with more than 5,000 employees ) and would end no later than five years after the publication of implementing regulations ( for the last group , tribal government employers ) .

agricultural employers would be required to participate in the evs no later than four years after regulations are published .

dhs would be directed to develop procedures to provide individuals with direct access to their case histories in the evs , and to notify them of queries and evs responses .

s. 744 would establish processes for an individual to seek administrative review and judicial review of a final nonconfirmation .

the bill would enable individuals to limit the use of their social security numbers or other information for verification purposes .

in addition , s. 744 would provide for regular privacy and accuracy audits and civil rights assessments of the evs .

with respect to enforcement , s. 744 would direct dhs to establish procedures for the filing and investigation of unlawful employment - related complaints by individuals and entities .

like h.r .

1772 , the senate bill would significantly increase existing civil and criminal penalties for violations of the revised ina section 274a prohibitions on unauthorized employment and for violations of requirements to conduct verification .

an employer who hires a worker without using the electronic system when required to do so would be presumed to have violated the section 274a prohibitions on unauthorized employment .

among the new penalties s. 744 would create , dhs would be authorized to establish an "enhanced civil penalty" in cases in which an employer both fails to use the evs and violates a federal , state , or local law on the payment of wages , work hours , or workplace health and safety .

like h.r .

1772 , s. 744 includes language to expressly preempt any state or local law that relates to the hiring , employment , or verification of the employment eligibility of unauthorized aliens , though a state may exercise its authority over business licensing or similar laws to impose penalties for failure to use the federal employment verification system .

unlike h.r .

1772 , however , it does not make provision for state enforcement of the ina section 274a provisions on unauthorized employment .

the department of state ( dos ) and dhs both play key roles in administering the law and policies on the admission of aliens to the united states .

all foreign nationals seeking visas ( see " temporary admissions ," " permanent admissions " ) must undergo admissibility reviews performed by dos consular officers abroad .

these reviews are intended to ensure that applicants are not ineligible for admission to the united states under the grounds for inadmissibility spelled out in ina section 212 .

these criteria include health - related grounds , criminal history , security and terrorist concerns , public charge ( eg , indigence ) , and previous immigration offenses .

consular officers use the consular consolidated database ( ccd ) to screen visa applicants .

records of all visa applications are now automated in the ccd , with some records dating back to the mid - 1990s .

since february 2001 , the ccd has stored photographs of all visa applicants in electronic form , and the ccd has stored 10-finger scans since 2007 .

in addition to indicating the outcome of any prior visa application and comments by consular officers , the system links to other security databases to flag problems that may have an impact on the issuance of the visa .

although dos's consular affairs is responsible for issuing visas , dhs agencies perform related functions .

there was discussion of assigning all visa issuance responsibilities to dhs when the department was being created , but the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa , p.l .

107-296 ) drew on compromise language stating that dhs would issue regulations regarding visa issuances , and that dos would continue to issue visas .

the question of which agency should take the lead in visa issuances continues to be debated .

along these lines , title iv of h.r .

2278 , as ordered to be reported by the house committee on the judiciary , would give the secretary of homeland security "exclusive authority to issue regulations , establish policy , and administer and enforce the provisions of the [ina] and all other immigration or nationality laws relating to the functions of consular officers of the united states in connection with the granting and refusal of a visa. .

the bill would broaden the exception to the confidentiality requirement relating to the sharing of information with foreign governments , including by allowing such sharing for purposes of "determining a person's deportability or eligibility for a visa , admission , or other immigration benefit,'' or any other instance when "the secretary of state determines that it is in the national interest. .

h.r .

2278 would narrow dos's authority to waive personal interviews for visa applicants and would add national security and "high risk of degradation of visa program integrity" as reasons for requiring a personal interview .

the legislation would also give consular officers the authority not to interview visa applicants deemed to be ineligible for the visas they are seeking .

in addition , h.r .

2278 would give dhs the authority to refuse or revoke any visa to any alien or class of aliens if the secretary determines that such refusal or revocation is necessary or advisable in the security interests of the united states .

some in congress have been particularly interested in the visa security program ( vsp ) , which the ice office of international affairs ( oia ) operates in certain high - risk consular posts .

as described by dhs , the vsp sends ice special agents with expertise in immigration law and counterterrorism to foreign consulates , where they perform visa security activities that complement the dos visa screening process .

according to dhs , the vsp provides law enforcement resources not available to consular officers .

one of the major tasks for vsp agents is to screen visa applicants to determine their risk profiles .

gao , however , released an evaluation of the vsp that identified several shortcomings .

in addition to noting that tensions exist between consular officials and vsp agents , gao was especially concerned about the lack of standard operating procedures for vsp agents across the various posts .

most importantly , perhaps , gao stated that ice has not expanded the vsp to key high - risk posts despite well - publicized plans to do so .

h.r .

2278 would seek to expand the vsp by requiring dhs to conduct an on - site review of all visa applications and supporting documentation before adjudication , at the top 30 visa - issuing posts designated jointly by the secretaries of state and homeland security as high - risk posts .

it further would call for expedited clearance and placement of dhs personnel at overseas embassies and consular posts .

nonimmigrants — such as tourists , foreign students , diplomats , temporary workers , cultural exchange participants , or intracompany business personnel — are admitted to the united states for a specific purpose and a temporary period of time .

nonimmigrants are required to leave the country when their visas expire , though certain classes of nonimmigrants are "dual intent," meaning that they may maintain nonimmigrant status while , at the same time , seeking to adjust to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status if they otherwise qualify .

current law describes 24 major nonimmigrant visa categories , and over 70 specific types of nonimmigrant visas , which are often referred to by the letter that denotes their section in the statute , such as h - 2a agricultural workers , f - 1 foreign students , or j - 1 cultural exchange visitors .

immigrants are persons admitted as legal permanent residents of the united states .

under current law , permanent admissions are subject to a complex set of numerical limits and preference categories that give priority for admission on the basis of family relationships , employment , and geographic diversity of sending countries .

these limits include an annual flexible worldwide cap of 675,000 immigrants , plus certain humanitarian admissions .

the ina specifies that each year , countries are held to a numerical limit of 7% of the worldwide level of u.s. immigrant admissions , known as per - country limits .

the pool of people who are eligible to immigrate to the united states as lprs each year typically exceeds the worldwide level set by u.s. immigration law , and as a consequence millions of prospective lprs with approved petitions must wait to receive a numerically limited visa ( commonly referred to as the "backlog" or "queue" ) .

the immediate relatives of u.s. citizens are admitted outside of the numerical limits and are the flexible component of the worldwide cap .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , and h.r .

2131 , as ordered to be reported by the house committee on the judiciary , would revise the numerical limits on legal permanent immigration and would alter the system that allocates the visas .

both bills would eliminate the per - country ceiling for employment - based preferences , and would increase the per - country ceiling for family - based preferences from 7% to 15% .

both bills would also make substantial changes to the allocation of visas to family - based and employment - based lprs and would modify rules for investor visas .

how to address the unauthorized alien population in the united states is a key and controversial issue in comprehensive immigration reform .

there is a fundamental split between those who want to grant legal status to unauthorized aliens in the united states and those who want unauthorized aliens to leave the country .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , proposes to establish legalization programs for certain unauthorized aliens in the united states .

the implementation of certain enforcement provisions under section 3 of s. 744 would serve as pre - conditions for the bill's legalization provisions ( see " border security strategy and metrics " ) .

a general legalization program would initially grant registered provisional immigrant ( rpi ) status , a new legal temporary status , to unauthorized aliens who have been continuously physically present in the united states since december 31 , 2011 , and meet other requirements .

dependent spouses and children of these aliens could be classified as rpi dependents if they have maintained continuous physical presence in the united states since december 31 , 2012 , and meet the other rpi eligibility requirements .

rpis could subsequently apply to adjust to lpr status , subject to specified requirements ; there would be a special pathway to lpr status for rpis who entered the country as children and satisfy criteria under the dream act provisions in s. 744 .

rpis who are not eligible for the dream act pathway would have to adjust to lpr status under the new merit - based track two system of permanent admissions that s. 744 would separately establish ( see " merit - based track two " ) .

a separate legalization program would grant blue card status , another new legal temporary status , to eligible agricultural workers , who could subsequently apply to adjust to lpr status .

the general and agricultural legalization programs and the dream act pathway would each be subject to a different set of requirements , which would variously include employment / education , penalty fees , and payment of federal income taxes .

the time frames for eligibility for lpr status also vary under the general and agricultural legalization programs and the dream act pathway .

the house has not acted on any legislation to establish a general legalization program for unauthorized aliens .

a bill ( h.r .

1773 ) that was ordered to be reported by the house judiciary committee , however , would enable certain unauthorized aliens to obtain legal temporary status .

h.r .

1773 would establish a new h - 2c visa for temporary agricultural workers ( see " agricultural guest workers " ) .

the bill includes provisions to permit aliens who were unlawfully present in the united states on april 25 , 2013 , the day before the bill's date of introduction , to obtain legal temporary status as h - 2c agricultural workers .

the bill would not provide any special pathway to lpr status for h - 2c workers .

a number of bills in the 113 th congress contain provisions amending naturalization , including s. 744 , as passed by the senate , and h.r .

2278 , as ordered to be reported by the house judiciary committee .

generally , s. 744 would expedite and streamline naturalization , while h.r .

2278 would restrict naturalization .

s. 744 would streamline and waive naturalization requirements for certain categories of lprs , including for certain elderly or physically / mentally disabled applicants , employees of certain national security facilities , and widows of u.s. citizen spouses .

in addition , other provisions in s. 744 would ( 1 ) treat u.s. service members who have received combat awards as having satisfied certain naturalization requirements , including good moral character , english / civics knowledge , and honorable service / discharge ; ( 2 ) develop and expand programs for immigrant integration and naturalization education , outreach , and ceremonies ; ( 3 ) exempt certain lprs , who were lawfully present and eligible for work authorization for at least 10 years before becoming lprs , from the usual residence / physical presence in lpr status required for naturalization ; ( 4 ) treat admission and periods in registered provisional immigrant status for dream act beneficiaries as satisfying admission and periods in lpr status required for naturalization ; and ( 5 ) amend automatic naturalization for a child born abroad to require physical presence after a lawful admission , instead of residence as an lpr , and to include a person who no longer has legal status nor is physically present in the united states if s / he would have satisfied amended requirements had they been in effect when the person was originally lawfully admitted .

h.r .

2278 , among other things , would ( 1 ) bar aliens involved in many terrorism or crime - related activities from satisfying the naturalization requirement for good moral character ; ( 2 ) clarify that the list of conduct identified in the ina as barring a finding of good moral character is not exhaustive , and that when considering whether an applicant possesses good moral character , immigration authorities may consider that applicant's conduct at any time ; ( 3 ) bar the naturalization of any alien determined by the secretary of dhs to have been at any time described in the security - related grounds of deportability or inadmissibility ; ( 4 ) bar consideration or approval of naturalization applications while proceedings are pending that could result in the applicant's removal , loss of lpr status , or denaturalization ; ( 5 ) limit judicial review of naturalization delays and denials ; ( 6 ) purport to authorize the attorney general to denaturalize persons who have engaged in specified conduct involving terrorism or support for terrorism , the receipt of military training from a terrorist organization , or activities committed with the purpose of overthrowing or opposing the u.s. government through violence or other unlawful means ; and ( 7 ) strengthen immigration consequences for unlawful procurement of naturalization .

the united states has long held to the general principle that it will not return a foreign national to a country where his or her life or freedom would be threatened .

this principle is embodied in several provisions of the ina , most notably in provisions defining refugees and asylees .

refugees are persons outside their home country who are unable or unwilling to return because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of their ( 1 ) race , ( 2 ) religion , ( 3 ) nationality , ( 4 ) membership in a particular social group , or ( 5 ) political opinion ; under certain conditions , refugees may be persons within their home country who are persecuted or have a well - founded fear of persecution on one of these grounds .

refugees are processed and admitted to the united states from abroad .

foreign nationals may claim asylum in the united states if they demonstrate a well - founded fear that if returned home , they will be persecuted based upon one of the five grounds enumerated above .

they may apply for asylum affirmatively with uscis after arrival into the country , or they may seek asylum defensively before an immigration judge during removal proceedings .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , would increase the flexibility of the ina asylum and refugee provisions in several ways .

for example , s. 744 would repeal a current provision that requires asylum claims to be filed within one year of an alien's arrival in the united states , and would provide for the reconsideration of certain asylum claims that were denied because of the failure to file within one year .

under certain circumstances , a u.s. asylum officer would be authorized to grant asylum to an alien found to have a credible fear of persecution based on an interview during expedited removal rather than referring the alien to an immigration judge .

the bill also would authorize the spouse or child of a refugee or asylee who is admitted to the united states to bring his or her own accompanying child in the same status .

s. 744 would establish requirements for overseas refugee adjudications , including the right to legal counsel ( not at government expense ) , a written record of the decision , and administrative review of a denial .

other refugee - related provisions would authorize the president , based on a recommendation by dos , to designate certain groups of aliens on the basis of humanitarian concerns or national interest , and thereby facilitate the admission of group members as refugees .

in addition , a new category of "stateless persons" would be defined , and such persons would be permitted to apply for conditional lawful status under certain conditions , and to adjust to lpr status after one year under the employment - based preference category for special immigrants .

at the same time , s. 744 includes provisions that would tighten refugee and asylum laws for national security purposes .

specifically , an alien granted refugee status or asylum who returns to his or her country of nationality or habitual residence would have that refugee or asylee status terminated unless the dhs secretary determines that the alien returned for good cause , or another exception applies .

s. 744 also would expand law enforcement and national security checks during the refugee and asylum application process .

 ( see " inadmissibility , deportability , and relief from removal " for a related discussion. ) .

foreign national spouses of u.s. citizens and lprs can acquire legal status through the family - based immigration provisions of the ina .

in general , they must be sponsored by their u.s. citizen or lpr spouses and meet the requirements for lpr status .

the ina also includes provisions to assist foreign national victims of domestic abuse and allow them to self - petition for lpr status independently of their u.s. citizen or lpr relatives .

these provisions , which were initially enacted in the immigration act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-649 ) and the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 , title iv ) , have been periodically reauthorized .

the 2000 reauthorization ( vawa 2000 ) , part of the larger victims of trafficking and violence protection act ( tvpa , p.l .

106-386 ) , created the nonimmigrant u visa for foreign national victims of certain crimes — including domestic abuse — who assist law enforcement to investigate and prosecute such crimes .

successful petitioners for such a visa are classified as u nonimmigrants for up to four years .

program authorizations in vawa expired in 2011 .

efforts to reauthorize the vawa programs in the 113 th congress culminated in the enactment of violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-4 ) .

among its immigration - related provisions , p.l .

113-4 includes "stalking" in the definition of criminal activity covered under the u visa .

it extends vawa coverage to "derivative" children who are included in their parents' petitions and whose parents die during the petition process .

it exempts vawa self - petitioners , u visa petitioners , and battered foreign nationals from being classified as inadmissible for lpr status if their financial circumstances raise concerns over their becoming potential public charges .

it protects u visa petitioners under age 21 and derivative children of adult u visa petitioners from aging out of eligibility if they reach age 21 after filing a u visa petition .

the law also includes a provision that allows dhs to share vawa petition information with other government agencies for national security purposes .

p.l .

113-4 includes additional protections for foreign nationals who intend to marry u.s. citizens and lprs .

these provisions require increased disclosure about u.s. citizen and lpr sponsors and more stringent restrictions for international marriage brokers .

the law requires dhs to provide foreign nationals with information about inconsistent self - disclosures by sponsors regarding past domestic abuse and to conduct more extensive background checks on each u.s. citizen who petitions on behalf of an alien fiancé / fiancée to provide the latter with additional information about potentially abusive relationships .

it prohibits international marriage brokers from marketing information about foreign nationals under age 18 and requires more extensive record - keeping of age - related documentation .

it expands federal criminal penalties for specified marriage broker and other vawa violations .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , also includes several vawa - related provisions .

it would expand the number of u visas from 10,000 to 18,000 annually .

it would grant aging - out protection , deferred status eligibility ( to allow spouses and children of nonimmigrant visa holders to receive independent immigration status ) , and work authorization eligibility to any derivative child on a vawa petition .

it would provide financial relief to vawa petitioners by requiring that dhs grant them work authorization no later than six months following the petition filing date .

it would allow vawa applicants to adjust to lpr status without being subject to the family - based immigration numerical limits .

finally , s. 744 would permit battered immigrants access to public housing .

it is a crime to engage in trafficking in persons ( tip ) for the purposes of commercial exploitation .

tip involves violations of labor , public health , and human rights standards .

the 2000 tvpa created a new visa category for victims of severe forms of trafficking ( t visa ) .

the 2000 act and subsequent reauthorizations also created several grant programs to aid trafficking victims and to train law enforcement to combat tip .

p.l .

113-4 modifies some of the grant programs under the tvpa , expands reporting requirements , creates new criminal penalties for trafficking offenses , modifies the criteria for t visas , and reauthorizes appropriations for fy2014 through fy2017 .

p.l .

113-4 makes it a criminal offense to knowingly destroy , or for a period of more than 48 hours , conceal , remove , confiscate , or possess , another person's passport or immigration or personal identification documents in the course of committing or attempting to commit the offense of fraud in foreign labor contracting or alien smuggling , and allows for civil remedies for personal injuries caused during the commission of most criminal trafficking offenses .

p.l .

113-4 makes the adult or minor children of a beneficiary of derivative t status eligible for t status if it is determined that such a person faces a present danger of retaliation as a result of the trafficking victim's cooperation with law enforcement .

in addition , p.l .

113-4 amends the grant program for state and local law enforcement's anti - trafficking programs that focus on u.s. citizen victims , so that the grants can also be used for anti - trafficking programs for noncitizen victims .

several other bills in the 113 th congress would further amend the tvpa .

h.r .

3610 , as passed by the house , would amend the tvpa to require that , beginning in fy2017 , the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) award grants for a national communication system to help victims of severe forms of trafficking communicate with service providers .

the bill would also require the attorney general to collect and tabulate data on mandatory restitution orders ( the tvpa requires the court to order restitution — to be paid by the defendant to the victim — for any crime of peonage , slavery , or trafficking in persons ) .

h.r .

3530 , as passed by the house , would authorize the attorney general to award grants to an eligible entity to develop , improve , or expand domestic child human trafficking deterrence programs designed to aid victims while investigating and prosecuting the trafficking offenses .

h.r .

5135 , as passed by the house , would require the interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking to produce a report on preventing child trafficking , and would clarify that services for trafficking victims can include housing .

most inhabited u.s. territories , including puerto rico , guam , the virgin islands , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) , are defined by the ina as included in the definition of "united states" for the purpose of federal immigration laws .

the notable exception is american samoa ( including swain's island ) , which has its own sui generis immigration system and whose native residents are non - citizen u.s. nationals under the ina .

american samoans who move to the united states , as this term is defined in the ina , are eligible for expedited naturalization .

in the 113 th congress , several bills would establish specific accommodations for the circumstances and immigration needs of the cnmi .

title vii of p.l .

110-229 made the ina applicable to the cnmi , a u.s. territory in the pacific .

previously , in accordance with an agreement known as the covenant that sets forth the relationship between the cnmi and the united states , the territory had not been subject to u.s. immigration law .

among other provisions , p.l .

110-229 established a transition period for implementing the ina in the cnmi that began on november 28 , 2009 , and is scheduled to end on december 31 , 2014 .

this law aimed , in particular , to provide federal regulation and oversight of the admission of foreign workers to the territory , including by establishing a cnmi - only transitional worker visa .

it also provided for a cnmi - only investor visa for persons who previously had investor permits under the territorial system .

aliens who were not eligible for the transitional foreign worker or investor visas or other visas under federal immigration laws were able to remain in the cnmi on entry permits issued under the former territorial immigration laws until the earlier of the original permit expiration date or november 28 , 2011 .

s. 1237 , as passed by the senate , and h.r .

4296 , as ordered to be reported by the house natural resources committee , would extend the transition period for implementing the ina in the cnmi until december 31 , 2019 .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , would resolve the status of certain long - term foreign residents of the cnmi who were unable to otherwise acquire lpr status under the federal system .

it would authorize admission of these various long - term foreign residents , subject to certain requirements , as immigrants to the cnmi only , and provide a path for most of these cnmi - only residents to adjust later to regular lpr status .

the iraqi special immigrant visa program , which was established by section 1244 of p.l .

110-181 and subsequently amended by p.l .

110-242 , makes iraqi nationals eligible for special immigrant status if they were employed by or on behalf of the u.s. government in iraq for not less than one year during a specified period ; provided documented valuable service to the u.s. government ; and have experienced "an ongoing serious threat as a consequence of the alien's employment by the united states government. .

this program had been capped at 5,000 principal aliens ( excluding spouses and children ) for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012 and allowed for unused visa numbers to be carried forward from one year to the next through fy2013 .

p.l .

113-42 amended the numerical limitations provisions to extend the iraqi special immigrant visa program and provide additional visas .

it set the total number of principal aliens who could be provided special immigrant status under the program for the first three months of fy2014 at the sum of the number of aliens with pending applications on september 30 , 2013 , plus 2,000 .

initial applications for new cases ( subject to the 2,000 limit ) had to be submitted to the dos chief of mission in iraq by december 31 , 2013 .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year , 2014 ( p.l .

113-66 ) rewrites the extension language in p.l .

113-42 to provide for the issuance of no more than 2,500 visas to principal applicants after january 1 , 2014 , and to extend the application deadline to september 30 , 2014 .

p.l .

111-8 established a special immigrant program for afghans modeled on the iraqi program ( see " iraqi special immigrant visa program " ) .

under the program , afghan nationals are eligible for special immigrant status if they were employed by or on behalf of the u.s. government in afghanistan for not less than one year during a specified period ; provided documented valuable service to the u.s. government ; and have experienced "an ongoing serious threat as a consequence of the alien's employment by the united states government. .

the afghan special immigrant program was originally capped at 1,500 principal aliens annually for fy2009 through fy2013 , with a provision to carry forward any unused numbers from one fiscal year to the next .

in the 113 th congress , p.l .

113-76 amended the afghan program's numerical limitation provisions to provide for the granting of special immigrant visas to up to 3,000 principal aliens for fy2014 and to provide for the carry forward and use of any unused balance through the end of fy2015 .

this law required that principal aliens file an application with the chief of mission in afghanistan by september 30 , 2014 .

p.l .

113-160 further amends the numerical limitations provisions under the afghan program to provide that an additional 1,000 principal aliens may be granted special immigrant status by december 31 , 2014 .

the new language requires that principal aliens apply to the chief of mission no later than the same december 31 , 2014 , date .

house - passed h.r .

4435 and senate - reported s. 2410 would make additional changes to the afghan special immigrant program .

h.r .

4435 would replace the numerical limitations language enacted in p.l .

113-160 with new language to provide up to 1,075 afghan special immigrant visas for fy2015 ( in addition to any unused numbers from fy2014 ) .

under this bill , principal aliens would need to apply to the chief of mission by september 30 , 2015 .

s. 2410 , as reported by the senate armed services committee , would provide that for each of fy2014 and fy2015 , up to 4,000 principal aliens could be granted special immigrant visas , with any unused balance carried forward and available through december 31 , 2016 .

principal aliens would need to apply to the chief of mission by december 31 , 2015 .

s. 2410 also would expand eligibility for the afghan special immigrant program .

in addition to aliens employed in afghanistan by or on behalf of the u.s. government , the eligible population would include aliens employed in afghanistan by or on behalf of an organization closely associated with the u.s. mission in afghanistan that has received u.s. government funding through an official contract , award , grant , or cooperative agreement .

the accuracy for adoptees act ( p.l .

113-74 ) amends section 320 of the ina regarding the citizenship of adopted foreign - born children by requiring that all federal documents issued or amended , including a certificate of citizenship , reflect the child's name and date of birth , as shown on state vital records following the adoption or readoption in that state .

in 2012 , ice created the public advocate office "to assist individuals and representatives who have concerns about ice operations and policies in the field. .

the office was created in response to critiques that the agency was unresponsive to the complaints of those who were detained or investigated .

however , some contend that the program is not productive and is not a proper use of ice resources .

p.l .

113-6 , the fy2013 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , stated that no funds under the act could be used to fund the position of public advocate within ice .

nonetheless , some argue that the position of public advocate was simply renamed deputy assistant director of custody programs and community outreach , and that the functions of the disbanded public advocate office are currently being performed under the umbrella of "community outreach. .

h.r .

3732 , as ordered to be reported by the house judiciary committee , would prohibit federal funds from being used to provide funding for the following positions within ice: public advocate ; deputy assistant director of custody programs and community outreach ; or any other position with similar functions .

