a patent is an intellectual property right granted by the federal government to an inventor to exclude others from making , using , or selling the invention for a limited time , in exchange for public disclosure of the invention .

article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the u.s. constitution grants congress the authority to offer this protection to patent holders .

patent infringement is the unauthorized making , using , offering for sale , selling , and importing of a patented invention .

the patent provides the patent holder with the right to protect against such infringement by suing for relief in the appropriate federal court .

such relief may include an injunction to halt the patent infringement or an award of damages to compensate for any harm .

because patents are exclusively governed by federal law , federal district courts have original jurisdiction in all civil cases relating to patents .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit has jurisdiction over appeals from district court decisions .

the amount of patent infringement litigation has substantially increased during the last decade .

some commentators believe that the possibility of a large financial award together with the minimal information required to bring a patent infringement claim has encouraged abuses of the patent system in courts by "patent trolls. .

however , others believe that the information required by the patent infringement complaint is sufficient to provide notice to the defendant of the pending claims , reserving the disclosure of more detailed information for the discovery stage of litigation .

recently introduced patent reform legislation seeks to minimize abuses with , among other provisions , changes to pleading requirements for a patent infringement claim .

this report will discuss the rules and procedure for initiating a patent infringement claim in federal court .

the discussion will focus on the level of detail necessary for a patent infringement complaint .

the report will then conclude with several legislative proposals during the 112 th and 113 th congresses addressing patent infringement pleadings and litigation by "patent trolls. .

patent infringement cases begin with the filing of a complaint by a party seeking relief in federal court .

federal courts follow the federal rules of civil procedure , which dictate the different steps parties must complete in order to move through the litigation process .

rule 8 of the federal rules of civil procedure requires a complaint to contain a statement showing a claim for relief and the grounds for the court's jurisdiction .

the complaint must also contain sufficient information to satisfy rule 12 ( b ) ( 6 ) .

this rule permits defendants to make a motion to dismiss a case if the plaintiff has failed to state a claim , for which relief could be granted , in the complaint .

because litigation is a costly and lengthy process , courts need the ability , in the beginning of the process , to dismiss any frivolous claims that do not have the possibility of resulting in any relief for either party .

for assistance in satisfying these rules , attorneys often rely on the sample forms provided in the appendix of the federal rules of civil procedure as models for their complaints .

form 18 provides a model for a "complaint of patent infringement. .

according to this form , a complaint for patent infringement must include four statements asserting jurisdiction , patent ownership , patent infringement by the defendant , and demand for relief .

form 18 does not demand a specific level of particularity for these statements .

courts have interpreted rule 8 to require complaints to include only "'a short and plain statement of the claim' that will give the defendant fair notice of what the plaintiff's claim is and the grounds upon which it rests" rather than fully developed allegations at this stage of the pleadings .

this approach is described as the "notice pleading" standard , emphasizing the primary purpose of complaints as notifying parties of the general issues of the case .

a "patent troll" is a pejorative term for a "non - practicing entity" ( npe ) or a "patent assertion entity" ( pae ) .

these entities are people or companies that do not develop , manufacture , or sell any product covered by the patents they own .

the business model of a pae instead focuses on buying and asserting patents against companies that have already begun using and developing the patent , often without knowledge of the pae's ownership of the patent .

critics of paes argue that these patent - holders extort the patent system through litigation by extracting licensing fees or damage awards from companies that cannot afford the cost of litigation .

critics also argue that "patent trolling" deters innovation and discourages companies from seeking patents , and thus delivering new products to the market .

however , defendants of paes view this practice as encouraging investment in undercapitalized projects .

commentators have linked paes together with the current patent pleading requirements for a patent infringement claim .

they argue that the minimal information required in a patent infringement complaint encourages paes to initiate "frivolous" lawsuits that otherwise would not survive the initial pleading stage under a more stringent standard .

even though many of the pae infringement lawsuits are ultimately unsuccessful , the costly discovery stages of the lawsuit contribute to the financial burden carried by the defendants of these claims .

moreover , with the threat of costly litigation , defendants are more likely to settle or to enter into an agreement to pay licensing fees .

the 112 th congress passed the leahy - smith america invents act of 2011 ( aia ) , which sought to address the proliferation of paes .

the debate leading to the aia demonstrated growing congressional concern over the high costs of litigation patent disputes initiated by paes and their enforcement of patents .

the aia does not include specific reforms relating to patent pleadings and paes .

however , section 34 of the aia instructs the government accountability office ( gao ) to study the costs , benefits , and consequences of litigation by "non - practicing entities" and "patent assertion entities. .

the gao report , released in august 2013 , analyzes the trends in patent infringement litigation and recommends changes to discovery , such as an e - discovery model to reduce costs , and additional oversight by the u.s. patent office in gathering data about patent enforcement .

during the 113 th congress , congress has introduced several different legislative proposals relating to patent reform .

the following bills specifically target patent troll litigation to curb their prevalence in court .

the saving high - tech innovators from egregious legal disputes ( shield ) act of 2013 , h.r .

845 , proposes a financial deterrence to paes from filing patent infringement complaints .

the shield act would require a court , in an action involving infringement of a patent , to award full litigation costs including attorney's fees to the prevailing party asserting that the patent is not infringed .

the court would award these fees if it determines that the party alleging infringement does not meet one or more of the following conditions: 1 .

the party is the inventor , joint inventor , or the original assignee of the patent ; 2 .

the party can provide evidence of substantial investment made by the party in the exploitation of the patent through production or sale of an item covered by the patent ; or 3 .

the party is an institution of higher education or is a technology transfer organization whose primary purpose is to facilitate commercialization of technology developed by such institution .

these conditions mirror a "negative definition" of a pae .

therefore , a party that does not satisfy any one of the conditions listed above ( i.e. , is a "pae" ) would be liable to the alleged infringer for full litigation costs , if the pae loses the lawsuit .

representative chaffetz , who introduced the bill , explained that this legislation "will curb future abuse by requiring trolls to bear the financial responsibility for failed claims. .

however , some have criticized that the shield act's description of the conditions is too broad and thus does not sufficiently curb pae patent infringement litigation .

one commentator notes that a pae could try to meet any of the conditions to avoid paying litigation costs by becoming a distributor of products .

the innovation act of 2013 , h.r .

3309 , proposes changes to the patent pleading requirements specifically .

the co - sponsors intend the bill to "eliminate the abuses of our patent system [and] discourage frivolous patent litigation" by providing heightened initial pleading requirements for an infringement claim .

under these new requirements , the complaint of a patent infringement would need to: identify each patent allegedly infringed ; identify each claim of each patent that is allegedly infringed ; identify the accused instrumentality that is allegedly infringing with specific name or model number ; describe where each element of each claim is identified within the accused instrumentality and how it corresponds to the functionality of the accused instrumentality ; and describe the direct infringement , person ( s ) involved , and the acts of that person ( s ) involved in inducing that infringement .

these proposed requirements would demand more specific information from the plaintiff than form 18 .

instead of simply identifying the patent and stating a claim of relief , these proposed changes would require the plaintiff to scrutinize and show the relationship between the elements of the patent and the accused instrumentality to demonstrate infringement .

this heightened standard would require the plaintiff to research and provide more information of the alleged infringement that otherwise would have occurred later in the litigation process .

the act also proposes a limitation on discovery beyond the core documents needed for evidence .

these changes would shift the costs to the requesting party as a measure to limit the high costs of discovery for patent infringement claims .

co - sponsors of the bill hope that the heightened pleading requirements would force a plaintiff to consider the alleged infringing instrumentality more carefully and decide whether infringement has occurred before filing the suit .

the changes would also allow courts to dismiss suits prior to expensive discovery .

however , some commentators believe that the heightened pleading requirements would render patent enforcement impractical .

the plaintiff may not have this information available at this stage of litigation as the discovery process typically reveals the information necessary to build a successful infringement claim .

the patent abuse reduction act of 2013 , s. 1013 , proposes changes to pleading requirements in patent infringement cases .

this bill also intends to deter patent infringement litigation by paes with heightened pleading requirements in addition to awarding costs and expenses to the prevailing party .

the bill seeks to curb patent litigation abuse by "deter[ring] patent litigation abusers without prejudicing the rights of responsible intellectual property holders. .

the proposed pleading changes are very similar to those outlined in the innovation act .

however , the patent abuse reduction act also would direct the u.s. supreme court to review and amend form 18 to ensure that it is consistent with the proposed pleading requirements .

the u.s. constitution provides congress with the authority to reform the patent system .

the constitution also specifically grants congress the power to create federal courts , other than the supreme court , and to determine their jurisdiction .

pursuant to this power , congress has the authority to enact changes to judicial processes and procedures .

congress has delegated this authority through such legislation as the rules enabling act of 1934 .

this act authorizes the u.s. supreme court to promulgate rules of procedure , including the federal rules of civil procedure , for federal courts .

however , congress still retains the authority to make any changes to judicial procedural rules such as patent infringement pleadings .

however , members of the judicial branch have raised objections to the patent pleading reforms and have suggested potential separation of powers issues triggered by these proposed changes .

federal circuit judge kathleen o'malley has stated that the patent reform bills "go way beyond where anyone should want congress to tread" by "breaking down the division between the branches of government. .

in a letter to representative conyers , the judicial conference objected to the proposed reforms in the innovation act as undermining "the development of sound rules and practices. .

because of congress's constitutional authority to change judicial rules , these objections reveal more prudential concerns about congress bypassing the "deliberative process congress established in the rules enabling act" and the judicial conference's involvement in the process .

representative goodlatte responded to these objections in an innovation act hearing by emphasizing congressional authority to legislate rules of judicial procedure .

he stressed that the "constitution grants congress the power to create federal courts," therefore congressional authority includes "the prescription of court procedure," including the innovation act's heightened pleading standards .

