the disability insurance portion of the old - age , survivors and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program was enacted in 1956 and provides benefits to disabled workers under the full retirement age ( fra ) in amounts based on an individual's career - average earnings in covered employment .

a statutory formula determines monthly payment levels for social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) .

in addition , the law also eliminates from benefit calculations one year of a ssdi beneficiary's lowest earnings for every five years of earnings ( also known as the one - for - five rule ) , which equates to a maximum of five "disability dropout years" for an individual with 25 or more years of earnings .

by statute , ssa also applies "childcare dropout years" ( cdys ) for years in which a beneficiary has zero earnings due to leaving the workforce to care for an infant child .

the application of cdys is not common , affecting approximately 0.16% of ssdi beneficiaries between 2000 and 2013 .

this report describes how workers become insured for ssdi benefits , how ssdi benefits are calculated , and the use of dropout years in benefit calculations .

ssdi benefits , like those of the old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) program , are meant to replace income from work that is lost by incurring one of the risks the social program insures against .

the ssdi program is financed primarily through a payroll tax levied on workers , their employers , and self - employed individuals in jobs covered by social security .

to be eligible for ssdi benefits , a worker must be ( 1 ) disability insured , and ( 2 ) unable to engage in substantial gainful activity ( sga ) by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months .

generally , the worker must be unable to do any kind of work that exists in the national economy , taking into account age , education , and work experience .

special rules for disability insured status apply to individuals under the age of 31 .

to be fully insured , a worker must have worked a minimum amount of time in employment covered by social security .

generally , an individual must have one quarter of coverage ( also referred to as "credits" ) for each calendar year after the age of 21 up to the year before the individual ( 1 ) reaches the age of 62 , ( 2 ) dies , or ( 3 ) becomes disabled .

a minimum of six quarters is required to become fully insured .

in 2014 , each quarter of coverage requires $1,200 in earnings , which is indexed annually to average wage growth .

workers under the age of 31 need to have credit in one - half of the quarters during the period between when they attained age 21 and when they became disabled .

in addition , a recency of work test requires the worker to have 20 quarters of coverage in the 40 quarters preceding the onset of disability ( generally five years of work in the last 10 ) .

an exception applies to disabled workers under the age of 31 ; these individuals can meet the recency of work test by having credit in at least one - half of the calendar quarters during the period beginning with the quarter after the quarter the individual turned 21 and ending with the quarter that they became disabled .

the recency of work test does not apply to individuals who are blind .

to qualify for benefits , a disabled worker must also be unable to engage in "substantial gainful activity" ( sga ) .

in 2014 , sga is the ability to earn $1,070 in a month .

since july 1999 , the sga amount has been adjusted annually to reflect the growth in average wages .

the ssdi benefit payment is based on a disabled worker's average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) , which is used in the computation of the individual's primary insurance amount ( pia ) .

for ssdi beneficiaries , the initial monthly benefit payment equals the pia .

the aime is calculated as the sum of indexed earnings over the computation period , divided by the number of "computation years" ( in months ) .

the aime is calculated based on an individual's earnings record by indexing — to national average wage growth — the worker's earnings during full calendar years after 1950 and up to the second year prior to the year ( the "indexing year" ) of ssdi eligibility .

earnings in years after the indexing year are not indexed and are counted at their nominal value .

this adjusts a beneficiary's earnings to be comparable to the earnings level in the year he or she became disabled .

the number of computation years used in the aime determination is equal to the number of "elapsed years," minus any dropout years as discussed below .

by statute , the number of elapsed years equals the calendar years after an individual turns age 21 through the year before the individual first becomes eligible for ssdi benefits .

the minimum number of computation years used is two .

the individual's highest ( indexed ) earnings years are used as computation years for the aime calculation .

computation years may include years of zero earnings when the number of computation years is greater than the number of years of earnings ; it is these computation years of zero earnings for which cdys may be applied for eligible individuals .

under current law , ssa will remove up to five of a disabled worker's elapsed years with the lowest earnings in calculating the aime .

also known as the one - for - five ( or one - fifth ) rule , for every five elapsed years of earnings , the lowest year ( s ) of earnings will be dropped , up to a maximum of five total disability dropout years for a worker with 25 or more years of earnings .

this provision reduces the effects of years of lower earnings on a disabled worker's benefit amount .

for example , for a worker who becomes disabled with seven years of work history in covered employment , only the highest six years of earnings will be used for the purposes of aime calculation ( i.e. , applying one disability dropout year ) .

if the worker had 10 years in covered employment , ssa would use the highest eight years of earnings ( i.e. , applying two disability dropout years ) .

in addition , in calculating the aime , disabled workers who receive fewer than three disability dropout years under the one - for - five rule ( as described above ) may be credited with up to two additional dropout years based on the care of a child , for up to a total of three dropout years .

specifically , these "childcare dropout years" ( cdys ; also referred to as caregiving years ) may be credited under two conditions: ( 1 ) the ssdi claimant had a child ( or the child of a spouse ) under the age of three in his or her care for at least nine months throughout a given year , and ( 2 ) the ssdi claimant had no earnings in that year .

in addition , the year selected as a cdy must also be a year that could be selected as a benefit computation year .

the claimant must have a minimum of two computation years .

authorized by the social security disability amendments of 1980 ( p.l .

96-265 ) , the cdy provision became effective july 1981 .

cdys are offset by disability dropout years and can only be credited to eligible ssdi beneficiaries when the number of disability dropout years is less than three .

as presented in table a - 1 , an eligible individual may be credited with one cdy at three elapsed years .

two cdys may be credited at four elapsed years .

at five elapsed years , a disability dropout year may be credited ( in addition to the two cdys ) for three total dropout years .

cdys begin to phase out at 10 elapsed years , as one cdy is replaced with one disability dropout year .

cdys completely phase out at 15 elapsed years as both cdys are replaced with disability dropout years .

a disabled worker's pia is determined by applying a formula to the aime as shown in table 1 .

first , the aime is sectioned into three brackets ( or segments ) of earnings , which are divided by dollar amounts known as bend points .

for 2014 , the bend points are $816 and $4,917 .

three replacement factors — 90% , 32% , and 15% — are applied to the three brackets of aime .

the three products derived from multiplying each replacement factor and bracket of aime are added together .

for a worker who becomes disabled in 2014 , the pia is determined as shown in the example in table 1 .

a disabled worker's benefit is equal to his or her pia .

in addition , a beneficiary's payment increases each year from the year of eligibility to the year of benefit receipt based on the social security cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) .

some 861,396 disabled workers aged 25 to 36 at the time of disability - onset were awarded ssdi benefits between january 2000 and may 2013 .

cdys were applied to 1,336 ( 0.16% ) of these recipients .

during this period , most of these individuals ( 991 or 74.2% ) were credited with one cdy , whereas 339 ( 25.4% ) were credited with two cdys .

as shown in figure a - 1 , the distribution of cdy credits is skewed toward beneficiaries with lower earnings .

during this period , 84.5% of beneficiaries ( 1,129 ) who were credited with cdys had a pia of less than $1,000 .

appendix a. cdy computation chart and graph appendix b .

acronyms used in this crs repor .

