multilateral negotiations regarding iran's nuclear program date back to 2003 after the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) reported on the existence of clandestine nuclear facilities at natanz .

in october of that year , iran concluded an agreement with france , germany , and the united kingdom under which iran temporarily suspended aspects of its nuclear program , including enrichment of uranium , and signed an additional protocol to its iaea safeguards agreement , but also asserted its right to develop nuclear technology .

in january 2006 , tehran announced that it would resume research and development on its centrifuges at natanz .

after that time , iran held multiple rounds of talks with china , france , germany , russia , the united kingdom , and the united states ( collectively known as the p5+1 ) .

the u.n. security council meanwhile adopted several resolutions , the most recent and sweeping of which ( resolution 1929 ) was adopted in june 2010 .

these resolutions required iran to cooperate fully with an ongoing iaea investigation of its nuclear activities , suspend its uranium enrichment program , suspend its construction of a heavy water reactor and related projects , and ratify the additional protocol to its iaea safeguards agreement .

resolution 1929 also required tehran to refrain from "any activity related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons" and to comply with a modified provision ( called code 3.1 ) of iran's subsidiary arrangement to its iaea safeguards agreement .

the resolutions also imposed sanctions on iran .

diplomacy bore fruit after the june 2013 election of iranian president hassan rouhani with the achievement , on november 24 , 2013 , of an interim nuclear accord — the joint plan of action ( jpa ; referred to in international documents as jpoa ) .

the jpa set out an approach toward reaching a long - term comprehensive solution to international concerns regarding iran's nuclear program .

the two sides began implementing the jpa on january 20 , 2014 .

the p5+1 and iran reached a framework of a joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) on april 2 , 2015 , and the jcpoa was finalized on july 14 , 2015 .

with the jpa remaining in effect until the jcpoa entered into implementation , the iaea certified on january 16 , 2016 , that iran had completed its required jcpoa nuclear - related tasks for implementation day .

the united states , the u.n. , and the eu ceased application of most sanctions that day .

since implementation day , the agency has "verified and monitored iran's implementation of its [jcpoa] nuclear - related commitments. .

on november 11 , 2013 , coinciding with concluding the jpa , iran and the iaea signed a joint statement that included a "framework for cooperation" to "strengthen their cooperation and dialogue aimed at ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of iran's nuclear programme through the resolution of all outstanding issues that have not already been resolved by the iaea. .

the agency had long sought to resolve some outstanding questions regarding tehran's nuclear program , some of which concern possible iranian research on nuclear weapons development .

amano issued the iaea's "final assessment on past and present outstanding issues regarding iran's nuclear programme" on december 2 , 2015 .

iran has nuclear programs that could potentially provide tehran with the capability to produce both weapons - grade highly enriched uranium ( heu ) and plutonium — the two types of fissile material used in nuclear weapons .

 ( in addition to the production of weapons - grade nuclear material , a nuclear weapons program requires other key elements , such as warhead design and reliable delivery systems [see appendix b ]. ) .

statements from the u.s. intelligence community indicate that iran has the technological and industrial capacity to produce nuclear weapons at some point , but the u.s. government assesses that tehran has not mastered all of the necessary technologies for building a nuclear weapon .

a november 2007 national intelligence estimate assessed that iran "halted its nuclear weapons program" in 2003 , but the estimate and subsequent statements by the intelligence community also assessed that tehran was keeping open the "option" to develop nuclear weapons .

then - under secretary of state for political affairs wendy sherman explained during an october 3 , 2013 , senate foreign relations committee hearing that iran would need as much as one year to produce a nuclear weapon if the government made the decision to do so .

tehran would have needed two to three months of this time to produce enough weapons - grade heu for a nuclear weapon .

iran's implementation of the jcpoa lengthened the latter timeline to one year , according to february 9 , 2016 , congressional testimony from then - director of national intelligence james clapper .

 ( see " major nuclear provisions of the jcpoa ." ) .

u.s. officials argue that the iaea and / or u.s. intelligence would likely detect an iranian attempt to produce weapons - grade heu with either its safeguarded facilities or clandestine facilities .

regarding the former , clapper testified that the jcpoa has enhanced the transparency of iran's nuclear activities ... [a]s a result , the international community is well postured to quickly detect changes to iran's declared nuclear facilities designed to shorten the time iran would need to produce fissile material .

t he intelligence community assesses that iran is more likely to use clandestine facilities to produce weapons - grade heu , director clapper stated in a march 2015 interview .

u.s. officials have express ed confidence i n the ability of u.s. intelligence to detect iranian covert nuclear facilities and have indicated that iran currently does not appear to have any nuclear facilities of which the united states is unaware .

the jpa , also widely known as the jpoa , essentially froze most aspects of iran's nuclear program to allow time to negotiate the jcpoa .

when the jpa went into effect in january 2014 , iran had enough uranium hexafluoride containing up to 5% uranium - 235 , which , if further enriched , would have yielded enough weapons - grade heu for as many as eight nuclear weapons .

the total amount of iranian leu containing 20% uranium - 235 would , if it had been further enriched , have been sufficient for a nuclear weapon .

after the jpa went into effect , iran either converted much of that material for use as fuel in a research reactor located in tehran ( called the tehran research reactor ) , or prepared it for that purpose .

iran diluted the rest of that stockpile so that it contained no more than 5% uranium - 235 .

tehran's uranium conversion facility is not set up to reconvert the reactor fuel to uranium hexafluoride .

according to a november 14 , 2013 , iaea report , iran had generally stopped expanding its enrichment and heavy water reactor programs during the negotiations leading up to the jpa .

the jpa stated that a jcpoa would include a "mutually defined [iranian] enrichment programme with practical limits and transparency measures to ensure the peaceful nature of the programme. .

specifically , iran and the p5+1 would , in a jcpoa , reach agreement on permanent , comprehensive sanctions relief in exchange for restrictions — "for a period to be agreed upon" — on the "scope and level" of iran's enrichment activities , the capacity and location of iranian enrichment facilities , and the size and composition of tehran's enriched uranium stocks .

p5+1-iran negotiations on a comprehensive settlement began in february 2014 but did not meet july 20 or november 24 deadlines in 2014 .

on november 24 , 2014 , iran and the p5+1 announced their intent to finalize a detailed agreement by june 30 , 2015 , after first attempting to reach an overarching framework and roadmap for the agreement within four months .

the framework accord was agreed on april 2 , 2015 , in lausanne , switzerland .

the parties strived to meet the june 30 deadline because the iran nuclear agreement review act ( p.l .

114-17 ) mandated a 30-day congressional review period for an agreement completed by that date .

however , the jcpoa was not finalized until july 14 , 2015 ; the failure to meet the june 30 deadline triggered a 60-day review period under that act .

the provisions of the jpa remained in effect until the jcpoa was formally "adopted," as discussed below .

the obama administration and the iaea asserted that they put in place measures to vigorously enforce the terms of the agreement .

on september 17 , 2015 , then - secretary of state kerry announced the appointment of ambassador stephen mull as lead coordinator for iran nuclear implementation , leading an interagency effort to ensure that the nuclear steps iran committed to in the jcpoa are fully implemented and verified .

deputy secretary of state john sullivan indicated during a july 17 , 2017 , hearing that mull's position was "under review. .

the position no longer exists ; its functions are now handled by the state department's bureau of international security and nonproliferation .

during the 2016 presidential campaign , donald trump was a vocal critic of the agreement .

at times , he pledged to seek to renegotiate it , to strictly enforce its terms on iran , or to abrogate it outright .

the jcpoa does not contain a provision for any party to end the agreement ; nevertheless , the president could decide to stop implementing some or all of the u.s. commitments in the deal , but doing so leaves open the possibility for the agreement to be implemented by the remaining parties , including iran .

throughout some of its first year , the trump administration indicated support for the agreement .

on february 10 , 2017 , following meetings with the administration focused on the jcpoa , the eu high representative for foreign policy , frederica mogherini , stated that administration officials "reassured" her that the administration intended to fully implement the jcpoa .

however , by the beginning of 2018 , u.s. officials expressed increasing hostility toward the jcpoa .

then - secretary of state rex tillerson told reporters on april 19 , 2017 , that the administration will "review completely the jcpoa itself. .

asserting that "iran's nuclear ambitions are a grave risk to international peace and security," tillerson argued that the "jcpoa fails to achieve the objective of a non - nuclear iran ; it only delays their goal of becoming a nuclear state. .

asked whether the united states should stop fulfilling its jcpoa commitments , tillerson replied , "[w]e just don't see that that's a prudent way to be dealing with iran , certainly not in the context of all of their other disruptive activities. .

trump administration officials argued that iran may pursue nuclear weapons in the future .

trump administration officials stated on july 17 , 2017 , that the administration is "trying to take stronger steps to interpret the agreement more stringently against iran" because the "existing restrictions on the jcpoa were , in our view , inadequately enforced. .

the february 2018 nuclear posture review asserts that "iran's development of increasingly long - range ballistic missile capabilities , and its aggressive strategy and activities to destabilize neighboring governments , raises questions about its long - term commitment to foregoing nuclear weapons capability. .

president trump announced on october 13 , 2017 , that the administration had completed the iran policy review described above .

with respect to the jcpoa , trump announced that the administration would not issue an inara - specified compliance certification , and that he would direct his administration to "work closely with congress and our allies to address the deal's many serious flaws so that the iranian regime can never threaten the world with nuclear weapons. .

secretary tillerson did not address iranian compliance , but he wrote in a letter to congress the same day that he was "unable to certify" that "continued suspension of [u.s.] sanctions" is "appropriate and proportionate to the specific and verifiable measures taken by iran with respect to terminating its illicit nuclear program. .

the withholding of the certification under inara permitted congress to act on legislation , under expedited procedures , reimposing those sanctions that were suspended .

congress did not take such action .

on january 12 , 2018 , president trump stated that "the united states will not again waive sanctions" pursuant to the jcpoa absent "our european allies' agreement to fix the terrible flaws of the iran nuclear deal. .

in this statement , trump also demanded new congressional legislation concerning the jcpoa .

a senior administration official explained the same day that trump "hopes to see an amendment to the iran nuclear agreement review act" which must "demand that iran allow timely , sufficient and immediate inspections at all sites that are requested by international inspectors from the iaea" ; "ensure" that iran does not become capable of producing enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon in less than one year ; allow the united states for an indefinite period of time to reimpose u.s. nuclear sanctions if iran does not comply with these new criteria ; and "state explicitly ... that we view iran's long - range missile programs and nuclear weapons as inseparable and that iran's development and testing of missiles should be subject to severe sanctions. .

congress has not acted on such legislation .

a senior administration official stated on january 12 that the trump administration would "work with our european partners on some kind of follow - on agreement" to the jcpoa to address iran's ballistic missile program , the jcpoa restrictions containing expiration dates , and improved inspections of iran's nuclear program .

u.s. officials subsequently met several times with their counterparts from france , germany , and the united kingdom to discuss trump's demands , but the two sides did not reach agreement on a path forward that was sufficient to satisfy president trump's demands .

on may 8 , president trump , noting that the two sides had been unable to reach an agreement , announced that the united states would no longer participate in the jcpoa and would reimpose sanctions that had been suspended pursuant to the jcpoa .

president trump ordered secretary of state pompeo to "take all appropriate steps to cease the participation of the united states in the jcpoa," and , along with secretary of the treasury steven mnuchin , immediately "begin taking steps to reimpose all united states sanctions lifted or waived in connection" with the agreement .

the united states has notified the other p5+1 states that the united states will no longer attend meetings of the joint commission , the working group concerning the arak reactor , and the procurement working group .

secretary pompeo detailed a new u.s. approach with respect to iran during a may 21 , 2018 , speech as applying "unprecedented financial pressure on the iranian regime," working "with the department of defense and our regional allies to deter iranian aggression," and advocating "tirelessly for the iranian people. .

he asserted that , in exchange for "major changes" in iran's behavior , the united states is "prepared to end the principal components of every one of our sanctions against the regime ... , re - establish full diplomatic and commercial relationships with iran ... , [a]nd support the modernization and reintegration of the iranian economy into the international economic system. .

pompeo listed a number of essential elements for any new agreement: "first , iran must declare to the iaea a full account of the prior military dimensions of its nuclear program , and permanently and verifiably abandon such work in perpetuity .

second , iran must stop enrichment and never pursue plutonium reprocessing .

this includes closing its heavy water reactor .

third , iran must also provide the iaea with unqualified access to all sites throughout the entire country .

iran must end its proliferation of ballistic missiles and halt further launching or development of nuclear - capable missile systems .

iran must release all u.s. citizens , as well as citizens of our partners and allies , each of them detained on spurious charges .

iran must end support to middle east terrorist groups , including lebanese hizballah , hamas , and the palestinian islamic jihad .

iran must respect the sovereignty of the iraqi government and permit the disarming , demobilization , and reintegration of shia militias .

iran must also end its military support for the houthi militia and work toward a peaceful political settlement in yemen .

iran must withdraw all forces under iranian command throughout the entirety of syria .

iran , too , must end support for the taliban and other terrorists in afghanistan and the region , and cease harboring senior al - qaida leaders .

iran , too , must end the irgc [islamic revolutionary guard corps] qods force's support for terrorists and militant partners around the world .

and too , iran must end its threatening behavior against its neighbors — many of whom are u.s. allies .

this certainly includes its threats to destroy israel , and its firing of missiles into saudi arabia and the united arab emirates .

it also includes threats to international shipping and destructive .. .

cyberattacks. .

on may 21 , 2018 , state department director for policy planning hook stated that "the plan is to continue working with our allies , as we have been over the last few months , to create a new security architecture. .

during a july 2 , 2018 , press briefing hook explained that , following trump's may 8 , 2018 , announcement , secretaries pompeo and mnuchin "decided to create joint teams of senior officials to visit every region of the world .

these teams were launched on june 4. .

the united states is "bringing severe economic pressure on iran until the regime changes its destabilizing policies," hook stated .

although hook explained that the administration's policy "is not about changing the regime , it is about changing the behavior of the leadership in iran," most observers assert that it would be inconceivable for the current regime in iran to change its behavior to comport with the requirements outlined by secretary pompeo .

pompeo himself stated during a june 22 television interview that , if iran were to "ramp up" work on its nuclear program , "the wrath of the entire world will fall upon" the government , explaining that "wrath" referred to "moral opprobrium and economic power," rather than military action .

the u.s. exit from the jcpoa attracted broad criticism among the other parties to the jcpoa .

the other jcpoa parties assert that unilateral u.s. reimposition of sanctions appears to violate the jcpoa .

the agreement requires that a noncompliance notification to the u.n. security council , which would be necessary to trigger the reimposition of u.n. sanctions , be accompanied by "a description of the good - faith efforts the participant made to exhaust the dispute resolution process specified in this jcpoa. .

the agreement also states that the p5+1 and iran "commit to implement this jcpoa in good faith and in a constructive atmosphere , based on mutual respect , and to refrain from any action inconsistent with the letter , spirit and intent of this jcpoa that would undermine its successful implementation. .

whether this course of action violates unscr 2231 is unclear .

u.s. officials have argued that the jcpoa is not legally binding .

but a european union official told crs in a november 30 , 2016 , email that "the commitments under the jcpoa have been given legally binding effect through unsc resolution 2231 ( 2015 ) . .

other p5+1 countries immediately reiterated their support for the jcpoa and announced that they intend to fulfill their jcpoa commitments and protect their companies from the effects of any u.s. - imposed sanctions .

in a joint statement , france , germany , and the united kingdom declared their intention to remain party to the jcpoa and to "work with all the remaining parties" to the deal to ensure that iran continues to receive "the continuing economic benefits ... linked to the agreement. .

eu high representative mogherini stated that , if "iran continues to implement its nuclear related commitments ... the european union will remain committed to the continued full and effective implementation" of the agreement .

iranian officials have repeatedly stated that tehran would fulfill its jcpoa commitments , as long as the united states did , and repeatedly have rejected renegotiating the jcpoa or negotiating a new agreement such as the sort described by u.s. officials .

however , zarif has asserted that iran "is fully prepared to return to the pre - jcpoa situation or even [to conditions] more robust than that if the us reneges on its promises to the extent that the jcpoa's continuation harms our national interests," iranian foreign minister javad zarif asserted the previous month .

deputy foreign minister seyed abbas araqchi claimed that iran "will be able to reach the industrial enrichment phase in less than two years" ; other iranian officials have asserted that the country can rapidly reconstitute its fissile material production capability .

iranian officials have described a number of possible responses to a u.s. decision to reimpose u.s. sanctions , including resuming uranium enrichment , referring the matter to the joint commission , decreasing cooperation with the iaea , and withdrawing from the npt .

these responses do not include the possible iranian development of nuclear weapons , iranian officials have said .

asked on april 21 if iran will continue to meet its jcpoa obligations if all p5+1 parties except for the united states continue to uphold their obligations , zarif replied , "i believe that's highly unlikely," adding that it is important for iran receive the benefits of the agreement .

and there is no way that iran would do a one - sided implementation of the agreement .

and it would require a major effort because right now , with the united states ostensibly in the agreement , a lot has been lacking in terms of iran benefiting from the deal .

following trump's may 8 announcement , iranian officials rejected negotiating any new agreements .

in a may 10 , 2018 , letter to u.n. secretary general antónio guterres , foreign minister zarif wrote that "[i]f jcpoa is to survive , the remaining jcpoa participants and the international community need to fully ensure that iran is compensated unconditionally through appropriate national , regional and global measures," adding that iran has decided to resort to the jcpoa mechanism in good faith to find solutions in order to rectify the united states' multiple cases of significant non - performance and its unlawful withdrawal , and to determine whether and how the remaining jcpoa participants and other economic partners can ensure the full benefits that the iranian people are entitled to derive from this global diplomatic achievement .

supreme leader khamene'i stated on may 23 that iran will only continue to participate in the jcpoa if europe provides "concrete guarantees" that it maintains iran's existing revenue stream from oil sales to the eu countries .

he also demanded that europe not to raise the issues of iran's missiles programs or regional influence , and added that "iran has the right to resume its nuclear activities. .

president rouhani expressed a similar view in a july 4 speech .

according to iranian officials , tehran has begun preparations for expanding its uranium enrichment program , albeit within the parameters of the jcpoa for the time being .

spokesman of the atomic energy organization of iran ( aeoi ) behrouz kamalvandi stated on june 5 that the organization "will start the process of boosting the capacity of the country's uranium enrichment," by increasing iran's capacity to produce uranium hexafluoride .

on june 27 , 2018 , iran's official news agency announced that iran has resumed operations at its uranium conversion facility , which iran has used to produce this material .

kamalvandi also explained that iran would begin the process of "manufacturing and assembly of centrifuge rotors," which are critical components of such machines .

iran "will begin building a centrifuge rotor plant," he noted .

in addition , aeoi head ali akbar salehi stated that tehran will begin using an "advanced centrifuge assembly centre in the natanz nuclear facility," which iran had not disclosed publicly .

kamalvandi noted that iran would continue to operate within the constraints of its jcpoa commitments , but added that , should the jcpoa collapse , iran would produce centrifuges beyond those constraints .

as noted , iran remains subject to its obligations pursuant to the jcpoa and resolution 2231 and could be subject to the reimposition of multilateral sanctions if tehran violates these obligations .

following the initial reactions to the u.s. exit from the accord , iran and the other parties began negotiations on concrete steps that would continue to provide iran with the economic benefits of the jcpoa .

on may 16 , 2018 , in an apparent effort to meet iran's demands for remaining in the agreement , the eu announced "practical measures" for continued implementation of the jcpoa , including the following: maintaining and deepening economic relations with iran ; the continued sale of iran's oil and gas condensate petroleum products and petrochemicals and related transfers ; effective banking transactions with iran ; continued sea , land , air , and rail transportation relations with iran ; provision of export credit and special provisions in financial banking to facilitate economic and financial cooperation and trade and investment ; further memoranda of understanding and contracts between european companies and iranian counterparts ; further investments in iran ; and the protection of european union economic operators and ensuring legal certainty ; and finally further development of a transparent , rules - based business environment in iran .

several multilateral meetings since the u.s. exit have not produced a firm iranian commitment to the jcpoa .

at iran's request , the joint commission held meetings , attended by all of the jcpoa parties except for the united states , on may 25 and july 6 .

at the conclusion of the july 6 meeting , the joint commission participants reaffirmed their commitment to the eu "practical measures" enumerated above .

however , president rouhani reacted to the pledges by saying that "unfortunately , the eu's package of proposals lacked an operational solution and a specific method for cooperation. .

rouhani's reaction likely reflected a lack of confidence that eu and other countries can counter the effects of a steady stream of announcements by eu , japanese , south korean , and indian companies that they are leaving the iran market rather than face the risk of reimposed u.s. sanctions .

the corporate announcements are the result , at least in part , of trump administration official statements that the administration plans to fully enforce reimposed sanctions and will likely deny requests by companies and their governments for waivers or exemptions to the u.s. sanctions .

the issue of efforts by eu and other countries to preserve the economic benefits of the jcpoa is analyzed in: crs report rs20871 , iran sanctions , by kenneth katzman , and crs in focus if10916 , efforts to preserve economic benefits of the iran nuclear deal , by cathleen d. cimino - isaacs , kenneth katzman , and derek e. mix .

appendix a .

chart on the jcpoa appendix b .

nuclear weapons development an effective nuclear weapons capability has three major elements: producing fissile material in sufficient quantity and quality for a nuclear explosive device ; designing and weaponizing a survivable nuclear warhead ; and producing an effective means for delivering the weapon , such as a ballistic missile .

the u.s. government assesses that , although iran could eventually produce nuclear weapons , it has not yet decided to do so and has not mastered all of the necessary technologies for building a nuclear weapon .

tehran had a nuclear weapons program but halted it in 2003 , according to u.s. government estimates .

before the jcoa took effect , then - under secretary of state for political affairs wendy sherman explained during an october 3 , 2013 , senate foreign relations committee hearing that iran would have needed as much as one year to produce a nuclear weapon if the government made the decision to do so .

this estimate took into account the amount of time that iran would have needed to produce a sufficient amount of weapons - grade highly enriched uranium ( heu ) , which is widely regarded as the most difficult task in building nuclear weapons , as well as to develop the other components necessary for a nuclear weapon .

this estimate did not include the time that iran would need to be able to render a nuclear weapon deliverable by a ballistic missile .

then - secretary of defense leon panetta stated in january 2012 that iran would have needed "possibly ... one to two years in order to put [a nuclear weapon] on a deliverable vehicle of some sort. .

a senior intelligence official explained during a december 2007 press briefing that the "acquisition of fissile material" was the "governing element in any timelines" regarding iran's production of a "nuclear device. .

however , the estimate articulated by sherman assumed that iran would need two to three months to produce enough weapons - grade heu for a nuclear weapon .

this estimate also apparently assumed that iran would use its declared nuclear facilities to produce fissile material for a weapon .

the other assumptions behind the estimate are not clear .

tehran would probably use covert enrichment facilities to produce fissile material for nuclear weapons — a tactic that would require a longer period of time , according to testimony from then - director of national intelligence james clapper during an april 18 , 2013 , senate armed services committee hearing .

in his february 2016 testimony to congress , director clapper said that we continue to assess that iran's overarching strategic goals of enhancing its security , prestige , and regional influence have led it to pursue capabilities to meet its nuclear energy and technology goals and give it the ability to build missile - deliverable nuclear weapons , if it chooses to do so .

its pursuit of these goals will dictate its level of adherence to the jcpoa over time .

we do not know whether iran will eventually decide to build nuclear weapons .

as noted in the body of this report , u.s. officials have argued that the international atomic energy agency would likely detect an iranian attempt to use its safeguarded facilities to produce weapons - grade heu .

they have also expressed confidence in the united states' ability to detect covert iranian enrichment plants .

