this report discusses the federal regulation of potential "conflicts of interest" which may arise as a result of the personal financial holdings , assets , securities , property , and financial transactions in assets and securities of an official in the executive branch of the federal government .

the principal statutory method of dealing with potential conflicts of interest of an executive branch officer or employee is to require , under 18 u.s.c .

§ 208 , the disqualification ( or "recusal" ) of the officer or employee from participating in any official governmental matter in which that official ( or those persons or entities close enough to the official that their interests may be "imputed" to the official ) has any "financial interest. .

this criminal statute requiring disqualification applies to all officers and employees in the executive branch and independent agencies , but expressly excludes the president and vice president .

there is , it should be noted , no de minimis exception expressly stated in the statute for the value of an asset or ownership interest .

however , regulations may exempt certain categories of investments and interests which are deemed too remote or inconsequential to affect the performance of federal officials' governmental duties , and office of government ethics regulations exempt several such interests in stocks , bonds , and mutual funds .

additionally , executive branch officers or employees may receive an individual written waiver from their employing authority to participate in a matter when the employees' interests are not deemed so substantial as to affect the integrity of the performance of their official duties .

detailed annual public financial disclosure is required for all high - level officials in all three branches of the united states government under the public financial disclosure provisions of the ethics in government act of 1978 , as amended .

such disclosures were intended to serve the purpose of identifying "potential conflicts of interest or situations that might present the appearance of a conflict of interest" for government officials in policy making positions ; to increase public confidence in the integrity of the institutions of government and in those who serve them ; and to deter the ownership of particular assets and interests which may raise conflicts issues for a public official .

under the disclosure law , assets "held for investment or the production of income," such as stocks , stock options , bonds , mutual funds , and other income producing property held by the reporting individual , and the individual's spouse and dependent children , are the types of financial interests that must be disclosed .

although the financial disclosure laws are principally directed at current and existing financial interests , such current interests may also reflect "retain[ed] ties" to a former employer or to former associates of a current executive branch official .

there is no federal statute which expressly implements a general , executive branch - wide requirement for federal officials to divest particular private assets or holdings to resolve likely or potential conflicts of interest with an official's public duties .

however , there are a few instances in which divestiture of an asset or assets may be required .

in some cases , a statutory provision might provide that a director , commissioner , or board member of a particular federal regulatory entity shall have no financial interests in the business , industry , or sector which the agency , bureau , or commission regulates or oversees .

furthermore , an agency may by regulation prohibit or restrict the ownership of certain financial assets or class of assets by its officers and employees where a perceived "conflict of interest" with the agency mission may arise .

in such instances , these statutory and regulatory provisions would not only prohibit the acquisition of such assets , but may also require the divestiture of a particular asset or holding of certain individuals to be appointed to such positions or who are incumbents in such positions .

finally , in reviewing financial holdings of its officers , an agency's ethics officer may recommend ( or require ) divestiture of particular assets of a certain official which , because of the official's duties and responsibilities , may raise substantial conflict issues .

there may be certain statutory provisions , often the organic act establishing an agency , bureau , or commission , which will provide an express prohibition upon the directors or heads of such agency or commission from owning stock or having other such financial interests in businesses or other private entities in the particular industry or field that the agency is to regulate .

for example , federal law provides that "no member of the board of governors of the federal reserve system shall ... hold stock in any bank , banking institution , or trust company.... " with respect to the federal aviation administration , federal law provides that "the administrator and the deputy administrator may not have a pecuniary interest in , or own stock in or bonds of , an aeronautical enterprise , or engage in another business , vocation , or employment. .

federal law provides that no person may be appointed to the national indian gaming commission who has any financial interest in any gaming activity .

the office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement is within the department of interior , and the legislation establishing such office provides that "no employee of the office or any other federal employee performing any function or duty under this chapter shall have a direct or indirect financial interest in underground or surface coal mining operations. .

the head of the transportation security administration is the under secretary of transportation for security , and such person "may not own stock in or bonds of a transportation or security enterprise or an enterprise that makes equipment that could be used for security purposes. .

members of the surface transportation board within the department of transportation may also "not have a pecuniary interest in , hold an official relation to , or own stock in or bonds of , a carrier providing transportation by any mode.... " in addition to statutory provisions , executive agencies are permitted to issue additional and supplemental ethics regulations for their own personnel upon the concurrence and joint issuance of the regulations by the office of government ethics .

agencies may , therefore ̶ by such regulations ̶ prohibit officers and employees of the agency from acquiring , or owning or holding , certain financial interests , assets , and property when the ownership or holding of such interests would , because of the mission of the agency , "cause a reasonable person to question the impartiality and objectivity with which agency programs are administered. .

the broadest regulatory restriction upon the employees of an agency would appear to be that of the securities and exchange commission which prohibits , with some exceptions , officers and employees ( as well as an employee's spouse and dependent children ) from "knowingly purchasing or holding a security or other financial interest in an entity regulated by the commission. .

other examples of agency or departmental - specific restrictions on agency officers and employees ( and in many cases , their spouse and dependent children ) owning particular assets or financial interests of companies and entities directly regulated by or affected by the agency include restrictions on employees of: the bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms ; the office of the comptroller of the currency ; the office of thrift supervision ; federal deposit insurance corporation ; the federal energy regulatory commission ; department of interior ; the farm credit system insurance corporation ; farm credit administration ; the interstate commerce commission ; mine safety and health administration ( department of labor ) ; food and drug administration ( hhs ) ; national institutes of health ( hhs ) ; postal rate commission ; nuclear regulatory commission ; federal railroad administration and federal aviation administration , department of transportation ; environmental protection agency ; board of governors of the federal reserve system ; housing and urban development ; rural development , department of agriculture ; federal mine safety and health review commission ; federal housing finance agency ; and the consumer financial protection bureau .

in reviewing or examining the financial interests and potential conflicts of interest of an executive branch official , the agency - specific regulations or statutory provisions — specifically applicable only to officers and employees of that particular agency , commission , or bureau — which limit or prohibit the acquisition or ownership of a particular category or type of financial asset or financial interest , need to be considered and consulted .

the divestiture of particular assets , properties , or holdings may be required of an individual as a conflict of interest resolution or avoidance mechanism by administrative provisions and review in the executive branch , as well as required by a senate committee or the senate as a whole as a condition of favorable action on a presidential nominee requiring senate confirmation .

with respect to administrative review , as noted above , the principal statutory method of conflict of interest avoidance — concerning particular assets and holdings of a federal official — is to require the disqualification of that official from a governmental matter affecting those financial interests .

under current regulations of the office of government ethics , as part of the ethics review process , an agency may require the divestiture of certain assets of an individual employee where those interests would require the employee's disqualification from matters so central to his or her job that it would impair the employee's ability to perform his or her duties , or where it could adversely affect the agency's mission because another employee could not easily be substituted for the disqualified employee .

such a requirement may be imposed as part of an "ethics agreement" which an appointee or a nominee may make with his or her agency , and approved by the office of government ethics , as a device to provide options and alternatives to avoid conflicts of interest because of the ownership of certain assets and financial instruments .

when divestiture is required for ethics reasons , a current employee should be afforded a "reasonable amount of time" to effectuate the disposal of the asset ; furthermore , it is possible to ameliorate potential unfair tax burdens that may arise because of such required sale of an asset by receiving a certificate of divestiture and postponing capital gains taxes .

in some instances , the establishment of a "qualified blind trust" may be used to ameliorate or avoid conflicts of interest as an alternative to divestiture of conflicting assets .

although generally , the underlying assets in a trust in which one has a beneficial interest must normally be disclosed in annual public financial disclosure reports — and would under conflict of interest law be considered "financial interests" of the employee / beneficiary for disqualification purposes — federal officials may , as a conflict of interest avoidance measure , place certain assets with an independent trustee in what is called a "qualified blind trust. .

the nature of a "blind trust," generally , is such that the official will have no control over , will receive no communications about , and will ( eventually as existing assets are sold and new ones obtained by the trustee ) have no knowledge of the identity of the specific assets held in the trust .

as such , an official will not need to identify and disclose the particular assets in the corpus of a "blind trust" in future financial disclosure reports , and such assets will not be "financial interests" of the employee for disqualification purposes .

the conflict of interest theory under which the blind trust provisions operate is that since the official will not know the identity of the specific assets in the trust , those assets and financial interests could not influence the official decisions and governmental duties of the reporting official , thus avoiding potential conflict of interest problems or appearances .

assets originally placed into the trust by the official will , of course , be known to that official , and therefore will continue to be "financial interests" of the public official for conflict of interest purposes until the trustee notifies the official "that such asset has been disposed of , or has a value of less than $1,000. .

