most recently , the farm bill nutrition programs were reauthorized by the agricultural act of 2014 ( "2014 farm bill" ; p.l .

113-79 ; enacted on february 7 , 2014 ) after related action in the 112 th congress and the 113 th congress .

the "farm bill" is an omnibus bill which reauthorizes dozens of agriculture and agriculture - related statutes and their programs approximately every five years .

since 1973 , the farm bill has included the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ( formerly , food stamp program ) and has come to include certain other ( new and existing ) nutrition programs administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) .

many programs reauthorized by the food , conservation and energy act of 2008 ( or "2008 farm bill" ; p.l .

110-246 ) expired after the end of fy2012 ( september 30 , 2012 ) .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 , enacted on january 2 , 2013 ) included an extension of the 2008 farm bill through september 30 , 2013 , after which , most nutrition programs operated under the authority and funding of fy2014 appropriations ( p.l .

113-76 ) .

this report discusses the nutrition title ( title iv ) of the enacted 2014 farm bill .

as congress formulated the nutrition provisions of the 2014 farm bill , policy makers grappled with the following questions: should the reauthorization of snap continue to be a part of the omnibus farm bill ? .

should provisions be enacted that would reduce spending for snap and if so , by how much ? .

should the recent expiration of a temporary snap benefit increase be considered in deliberations on snap spending levels under the farm bill ? .

should spending reductions be achieved by changes in households' eligibility and benefit amounts ? .

specifically , congress has considered amendments to categorical eligibility rules ; treatment of liheap payments in snap benefit calculation .

should certain populations ( eg , students , ex - offenders , lottery winners ) be disqualified from receiving food assistance ? .

how might changes to retailer and benefit redemption policy have an impact on program integrity and participants' consumption of healthy foods ? .

should more snap participants be required to work ? .

should more snap participants be time - limited off assistance ? .

should snap and the farm bill nutrition programs further promote the purchase of fruits and vegetables , including from local sources ? .

should the farm bill include provisions to increase the funding and capacity of emergency feeding organizations ( eg , food banks and food pantries ) ? .

this report summarizes key snap and other nutrition provisions in the new law and in the 113 th congress's senate and house farm bills .

for more general background on nutrition programs , more detail on certain snap issues , or reports that discuss the entire farm bill ( not only nutrition programs ) , please reference other crs products listed in the text box below .

the law's conference report , h.rept .

113-333 , is also a resource .

first , this report summarizes the enacted law's 113 th congress legislative history .

next , it presents the congressional budget office ( cbo ) cost estimates of the new law's nutrition title as compared to those of the senate and house bills .

finally , the report summarizes the new law and senate and house proposals related to snap ( specifically , length of authorization , eligibility rules [including work - related] , benefit calculation , retailers , and benefit redemption ) ; programs in lieu of snap ( that some territories and tribes operate ) ; commodity distribution programs ( tefap , csfp , and usda commodities in school meals ) ; as well as certain other nutrition - related programs .

appendix a provides a more detailed cbo estimate comparison table , and appendix b includes a side - by - side table of every provision in the nutrition title conference proposals and enacted law .

throughout this report , the portion of the farm bill that includes snap and the other nutrition programs is referred to interchangeably as "title iv" and the "nutrition title. .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) , the enacted 2014 farm bill will reduce spending by approximately $8.0 billion .

during deliberations on the farm bill , cbo prepared estimates of the impact of proposed changes on program spending levels .

table 1 compares cbo cost - estimates ( either increases or decreases in spending from the prior law baseline ) of provisions in the senate proposal , house proposal , and conference report ( now , current law ) .

snap is an open - ended , appropriated mandatory program .

this means that the statute does not specify a particular amount to be appropriated .

instead , the amount required to be spent is determined by various provisions of the law , most notably those pertaining to eligibility rules and benefit calculations , coupled with economic conditions .

the administration estimates the amount needed to be spent each year , and these estimated amounts are then appropriated .

thus , in order to change spending levels for snap ( either increase or decrease ) , congress generally must amend the statutory provisions that affect the program's costs , primarily eligibility and benefit calculation rules .

as table 1 shows , cbo estimated that the 2014 farm bill's nutrition title — which contains snap and non - snap provisions — will result in a net reduction in spending of approximately $8.0 billion over 10 years .

the snap provisions alone are estimated to reduce spending by slightly more than $8.6 billion over 10 years ; certain non - snap provisions are estimated to result in spending increases .

this is compared to the senate bill's $4 billion reduction and the house bill's $39 billion reduction .

the law's nutrition title cost estimate is largely the result of three snap policy decisions: the house's more stringent liheap standard utility allowance language , creating certain work - related pilot projects and related funding , and declining to make changes on snap categorical eligibility .

subsequent sections of this report discuss the changes in policy , including some changes that cbo did not find to have a budgetary impact .

for a more detailed look at the cbo cost estimates , see table a - 1 , which breaks down the cost estimates of the 2014 law and proposals into further detail .

of the programs in title iv , snap accounts for the largest amount of federal funding and also serves the largest number of households .

in fact , like the farm bills before it , the vast majority of the spending authorized by the 2014 farm bill is for snap and related nutrition programs .

according to cbo's baseline , direct spending projections authorized by the nutrition title represent approximately 79% of the 2014 farm bill's direct spending .

snap is an open - ended appropriated entitlement and program benefits are 100% federally funded .

in fy2013 , snap benefits were provided to ( a monthly average of ) 47.6 million individuals at a cost of $79.6 billion ( 96% of which was the cost of the benefits themselves ) .

snap participation ebbs and flows in relation to the nation's economy .

over the period of the 2008 farm bill ( fy2008-fy2012 ) , snap participation and spending rose sharply , a trend widely understood to be both a result of the recession and recovery as well as the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009's snap response to the recession .

effective november 1 , 2013 the arra's snap benefit boost has ended ; for this and other economic reasons , cbo forecasts reductions in snap participation and spending beginning in fy2014 .

this statistical backdrop has affected the congressional debate over reauthorization of snap .

this section of the report highlights snap issues in the new law ( and senate and house proposals to a lesser extent ) .

snap topics are organized into five categories: length of program authorization , eligibility ( categorical , work - related , certain disqualifications ) , benefit calculation , retailers , and other policies .

these are only a portion of the provisions which would affect snap .

for a summary of every snap provision in the new law and the conference proposals , please see table b - 1 through table b - 7 in appendix b .

"programs in lieu of snap" refers to the related programs operated by entities that do not operate snap .

puerto rico , american samoa , and the northern mariana islands do not participate in the snap program .

instead , they receive nutrition assistance block grants , under which they administer a nutrition assistance program with service delivery unique to each territory .

indian tribal organizations may choose to operate the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) instead of having the state offer regular food stamp benefits ; the full cost of benefits and most administrative expenses are covered by the federal government .

funding for territorial nutrition programs and fdpir is included within the account for snap .

by authorizing the appropriations in section 18 ( a ) of the food and nutrition act ( see " snap authorization and appropriations " ) , the 2014 farm bill continues operations for the programs in general .

table b - 8 summarizes the other proposals for these programs .

usda commodity foods are foods purchased by the usda for distribution to usda nutrition programs .

they are not necessarily specific types of food ; the catalog of commodity foods is a wide variety of fruit , vegetable , livestock , dairy — fresh , frozen , and processed foods .

the usda food and nutrition service programs that include usda commodity foods are the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , national school lunch program ( nslp ) , summer food service program ( sfsp ) , and child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) .

many of these programs distribute "entitlement commodities" ( an amount of usda foods to which grantees are entitled by law ) as well as "bonus commodities" ( usda food purchases based on requests from the agricultural producer community ) .

all of the new law and conference proposal provisions that pertain to commodity distribution are summarized in table b - 9 .

the 2014 farm bill's nutrition title contains numerous other new and reauthorized programs and policies .

below are a few highlights , including the reauthorization of programs included in the 2008 farm bill ( eg , senior farmers' market nutrition program , community food projects , and fresh fruit and vegetable program ) , and new mandatory funding that makes federal funding available for snap bonus incentive projects .

while only a select overview is included in the list below , all remaining provisions are summarized in table b - 10 .

senior farmers' market nutrition program : reauthorization .

the new law reauthorizes the senior farmers' market nutrition program , which provides formula grants to participating states to run programs for seniors to redeem vouchers at area farmers' markets , through fy2018 .

funding remains at $20.6 million in mandatory funding per year , transferred from the commodity credit corporation , so appropriations are not required .

the house and senate had proposed reauthorization at $20.6 million , but the house bill had also proposed further amendments to the program , which were not adopted .

namely , the house proposal would have expanded eligibility from "low - income seniors" to "low - income seniors and low - income families who are determined to be at nutritional risk," and a house amendment further specified that 50% of the funding would be for seniors .

fresh fruit and vegetable ( "snack" ) program : pilot project to include frozen , canned , and dried products .

the fresh fruit and vegetable program is permanently authorized and funded by the 2008 farm bill , so there is no need for legislative action to continue operations .

however , the house proposal would have made changes to the program's authorization ; namely , it would have stricken "fresh" from the program's title and authorization and would allow the inclusion of frozen , dried , and canned fruits and vegetables .

instead , the new law includes a pilot project that requires usda to test schools offering frozen , dried , and canned fruits and vegetables in at least five states .

the new law includes $5 million to implement and evaluate this pilot .

community food projects: increased funding , eligibility for gleaners .

since the 1996 farm bill ( p.l .

104-127 ) , the food and nutrition act ( formerly , food stamp act ) has permanently authorized a grant program for eligible nonprofit organizations , in order to improve community access to food .

infrastructure projects are an eligible use of these funds .

grants require 50% in matching funds .

the 2008 farm bill ( and subsequent extensions ) provided $5 million annually in mandatory funding for this purpose .

the 2014 farm bill reauthorized the program , and increased mandatory funding by $4 million each year to a total of $9 million in fy2015 and each fiscal year thereafter .

the new law also included the senate bill's expansions of eligible organizations and purposes , plus added gleaners ( entities that glean fields for food donations to nutrition programs ) as eligible .

the senate bill would have continued to provide the $5 million , and the house would have increased funding to $15 million per year , carving out $5 million of those funds for projects that would incentivize low - income households' fruit and vegetable purchases .

"food insecurity nutrition incentive" grants .

the 2014 farm bill includes a new mandatorily funded grant program to support programs that provide snap households incentives when they purchase healthy foods .

this policy ( under the name hunger - free community incentive grants ) was included in the senate bill but not the house .

like the senate bill , the new law includes $100 million in mandatory funding over five years for these grants .

these competitive grants will be for projects that incentivize snap participants to buy fruits and vegetables .

until this federal funding opportunity , such bonus incentive projects were funded only by non - federal funds .

healthy food financing initiative : streamlined program at usda .

although the administration already provides support to the development of fresh food retailers in underserved communities using a range of existing authorities , the house and senate conference proposals both included a new authorization for a consolidated healthy food financing initiative housed at the usda .

usda would approve a community development financial institution as "national fund manager. .

an annual amount of $125 million would be authorized to be appropriated .

the new law included this language .

appendix a .

detailed cbo cost estimates and all - sections summary detailed cbo cost estimates appendix b .

comparison of the enacted 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) nutrition title to the nutrition titles of the 2013 conference proposals and prior la .

