naturalization is the process by which an immigrant attains u.s. citizenship after he or she fulfills requirements established by congress and outlined in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

u.s. immigration policy gives all lawful permanent residents who meet the naturalization requirements the opportunity to become citizens .

applying for citizenship is a voluntary act and represents an important milestone for immigrants .

naturalization and citizenship are generally viewed as a measure of immigrants' assimilation and socioeconomic integration to the united states .

the policy manual of u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) states: united states citizenship is a unique bond that unites people around civic ideals and a belief in the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the u.s. constitution .

the promise of citizenship is grounded in the fundamental value that all persons are created equal and serves as a unifying identity to allow persons of all backgrounds , whether native or foreign - born , to have an equal stake in the future of the united states .

naturalization requirements include u.s. residence ( typically five years ) , the possession of good moral character , demonstrated english proficiency , and a basic knowledge of u.s. civics and history .

 ( see " naturalization requirements " below. ) .

practically , naturalized immigrants gain important benefits , including the right to vote , security from deportation , access to certain public - sector jobs , and the ability to travel abroad on a u.s. passport .

u.s. citizens are also advantaged over lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) for sponsoring relatives to immigrate to the united states .

despite the benefits of u.s. citizenship status over lawful permanent residence status , substantial numbers of lprs who are eligible to naturalize have not done so .

congress is currently considering extensive reforms to u.s. immigration laws which , if enacted in some form , could affect naturalization policy and the number of persons who naturalize each year .

the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) passed by the senate in june 27 , 2013 included several naturalization - related provisions .

the bill would grant legal status for many unauthorized aliens currently residing in the united states ; increase the number of lprs admitted under family - and employment - based provisions of the ina ; and ease naturalization requirements for older and disabled lprs .

such provisions would increase the number of immigrants eligible to naturalize .

the house has reported four immigration bills , including h.r .

2278 , the strengthen and fortify enforcement act ( safe act ) , and h.r .

2131 , the supplying knowledge - based immigrants and lifting levels of stem visas act ( skills visa act ) .

these two bills contain provisions that would alter current admission levels of family - and employment - based immigration , as well as naturalization criteria , which , in turn , would alter the number of immigrants eligible to naturalize .

this report reviews the rights and obligations that come with naturalization .

it examines the naturalization process , discusses recent trends regarding who , among the roughly 1 million immigrants entering the united states each year , ultimately becomes a u.s. citizen , and discusses recent naturalization - related policy issues .

while the process of naturalization can be analyzed relative to different legal statuses , the emphasis of this report is limited to the naturalization of lawful permanent residents .

to qualify for u.s. citizenship , lprs must meet four major requirements .

they must be at least 18 years of age ; reside continuously in the united states for five years ( three years for spouses of u.s. citizens ) ; be of good moral character ; demonstrate the ability to read , write , speak , and understand english ; pass an examination on u.s. government and history ; and be willing and able to take the naturalization oath of allegiance .

uscis is responsible for reviewing all naturalization petitions to ensure applicants meet u.s. citizenship eligibility requirements .

this assessment includes security and criminal background checks , a review of the applicant's entire immigration history , an in - person interview ; an english test , and a civics knowledge exam .

petitioners bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that they entered the united states lawfully .

upon approval , they must take an oath of allegiance to the united states and renounce allegiance to any foreign state .

persons whose naturalization applications have been denied may request a hearing before an immigration officer .

in recent years , n - 400 naturalization petitions have accounted for almost 15% of all petitions received and processed by uscis , making it the second most popular immigration petition handled by the agency ( after i - 765 employment authorization petitions ) .

concerns regarding uscis' total petition processing capability sometimes receive attention when events transpire to cause large numbers of foreign nationals to petition for immigration benefits .

if congress does pass major reforms to u.s. immigration laws , such changes could substantially alter the number of legal immigrants admitted each year as well as the legal status of sizeable numbers of foreign - born who reside in the united states .

changes to both of these populations , in turn , could increase considerably the number of uscis n - 400 naturalization petitions filed .

uscis has made substantial efforts in recent years to modernize its business processes .

currently , the agency reports that n - 400 naturalization petition processing times average 4.5 months , well within its goal of no more than six months .

recent evidence of the agency's ability to process sudden large influxes of immigration petitions occurred with the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative that was announced on june 15 , 2012 .

two months later , uscis began accepting daca petitions .

as of august 31 , 2013 , one year later , uscis had received and processed 588,725 petitions .

at the same time , the number of pending uscis petitions since august 2012 has steadily increased , which suggests that resources devoted to processing daca petitions may have slowed processing for other uscis petitions .

uscis currently charges naturalization applicants $680 which includes a $595 application fee and an $85 fee for recording biometric information .

the amount of the naturalization fee raises several issues for congress , including whether it discourages persons from naturalizing due to the expense , and whether it accurately reflects uscis's cost to process naturalization applications .

empirical studies suggest that the volume of naturalization petitions filed may be inversely related to the naturalization fee amount .

graphing the volume of n - 400 naturalization petitions filed each fiscal year against the amount of the naturalization fee in that year ( figure 3 ) suggests that fee increases in 1998 , 2002 , 2004 , and 2007 were preceded by greater petition volume followed in the subsequent year by declining petition volume .

nevertheless , other factors described in " naturalization petition " above also explain application volume increases apart from fee increases .

naturalization fee increases are usually subsumed within across - the - board uscis fee increases for many types of petitions based upon audits of the costs of providing immigration services / benefits .

proponents of fee increases maintain that immigration benefits such as naturalization should be self - financing and that the beneficiaries should bear the full cost of processing a naturalization petition .

yet some question whether fee increases discourage eligible lprs from naturalizing .

others contend that naturalization fees in the united states are substantially higher than comparable citizenship fees in other oecd countries .

since the beginning of operation iraqi freedom in march 2003 , congress has expressed interest in streamlining and expediting naturalizations for military personnel and in providing immigration benefits for their immediate relatives .

the reported deaths in action of noncitizen soldiers drew attention to the immigration laws that grant posthumous citizenship and to the advantages of further expediting naturalization for noncitizens serving in the u.s. military .

legislation has focused on further streamlining procedures or extending immigration benefits to immediate relatives of u.s. service members .

in the 113 th congress , a legislative proposal would make eligible for naturalization any person who serves or has served under honorable conditions as a member of the u.s. armed forces in support of contingency operations in the same way as if the person had served during a period of presidentially - designated military hostilities , among other related provisions .

a current legislative proposal would treat noncitizen u.s. service members who have received combat awards as having satisfied certain naturalization requirements , including good moral character , english / civics knowledge , and honorable service / discharge .

in addition , the proposal would eliminate the ina provision that currently allows a u.s. citizen to renounce citizenship during a time of war if the attorney general approves the renunciation as not contrary to the interest of national defense .

some in congress have expressed interest in facilitating language and civics instruction as a means to promote naturalization .

several federal agencies currently support these objectives .

among these , the uscis office of citizenship provides english and citizenship training directly and through public / private partnerships .

it also funds citizenship preparation services through its citizenship and integration grant program .

the u.s. department of education offers grants to states to improve english skills among adults who are not enrolled in school .

several bills have been introduced that would promote english literacy and civics education for immigrants preparing to naturalize .

a current legislative proposal contains provisions waiving the english and history and civics naturalization requirements for older and disabled individuals .

despite these and other federal adult education programs , as well as programs run by nonprofit organizations , demand for adult english language and civics education services remains high .

findings from the 2003 national assessment of adult literacy and u.s. census data on english language proficiency among the foreign born suggest that more immigrant adults could benefit from english literacy education .

uscis has called for more innovative approaches to increase immigrants' access to quality english learning opportunities as well as adult educators' access to pertinent civics education training .

some have advocated for a white house committee on immigrant integration or the establishment of a foundation affiliated with the uscis that would accept private donations to support programs that help immigrants integrate .

others have also called for a public private partnership to facilitate a more stable stream of private funding for efforts to promote naturalization .

a current legislative proposal would address several of these recommendations .

those opposing such expenditures argue that english language proficiency as well as civics education is the responsibility of immigrant s and not u.s. taxpayer s .

they contend that the acquisition of citizenship is a choice that is not imposed upon lprs who enjoy many of the same benefits of living in the united states as citizens .

many lprs eligible to naturalize , particularly persons age 65 and older , have not done so because of concerns over passing the english and civics naturalization examinations .

in 2008 , uscis revised the naturalization civics exam to make it more conceptual as well as consistent across its 86 district offices , and in 2012 , the pass rate stood at 92% .

nevertheless , uscis application data show increasing numbers of persons submitting uscis form n - 648 medical certification for disability exceptions petitions for exam waivers on the basis of medical conditions .

a current legislative proposal contains provisions that would expand current exemptions from the english and civics exam requirement based on age , physical / mental disability , and years of u.s. residency .

legislative proposals regarding the naturalization oath of allegiance have centered on incorporating into the oath greater emphasis on allegiance to the united states and greater civic responsibility ; emphasizing more publicly visible and patriotically symbolic ceremonies ; and permitting members of congress to administer the oath of allegiance at naturalization ceremonies .

some have proposed that all naturalization ceremonies be conducted solely in english , and that as a requirement for naturalization , a uniform language testing standard require all citizens to read and understand the english language text of the declaration of independence , the u.s. constitution , and the laws of the united states .

concerns about illegal immigration have led some legislators to reexamine the long - established tenet of u.s. citizenship that a person who is born in the united states and subject to its jurisdiction is a citizen of the united states regardless of parental legal status .

this concept of birthright citizenship is codified in the citizenship clause of the fourteenth amendment of the u.s. constitution and section 301 ( a ) of the ina .

while a thorough discussion of birthright citizenship is beyond the scope of this report , recent congresses have seen legislation introduced that would revise or reinterpret the citizenship clause and related citizenship statute .

those favoring a more accessible naturalization process have criticized the existing process on several grounds , notably its current cost ( see " naturalization fees " ) .

some advocates , supporting their arguments with evidence about immigrants' price sensitivity to the cost of naturalization , have proposed reforms centering on making information about fee waivers more widely known and providing more payment options for naturalization fees .

many also characterize the naturalization application forms and instructions as excessively complex and unclear , with potential legal consequences for incorrect responses .

they contend that prospective naturalization petitioners may be deterred from applying , and that simplifying the language in the n - 400 application and instructions would make the naturalization process more accessible .

others raise concerns over the naturalization residency requirements ( see " continuous residence " above ) which disadvantages lprs based overseas for employment .

such individuals must wait until they physically reside in the united states to fulfill the naturalization requirements , prolonging their time required to naturalize .

appendix a .

appendix b .

selected links to naturalization information and application materials naturalization information guide to naturalization http: / / www.uscis.gov / files / article / m - 476.pdf 10 steps to naturalization http: / / www.uscis.gov / uscis / files / m - 1051.pdf i am a permanent resident — how do i apply for u.s .

citizenship ? .

http: / / www.uscis.gov / uscis / resources / b3en.pdf naturalization information for military personnel http: / / www.uscis.gov / files / form / m - 599.pdf uscis policy manual: citizenship and naturalization http: / / www.uscis.gov / policymanual / html / policymanual - volume12.html naturalization application materials n - 400 application and instructions for naturalization http: / / www.uscis.gov / files / form / n - 400.pdf instructions for n - 400 application for naturalization http: / / www.uscis.gov / files / form / n - 400instr.pdf document checklist http: / / www.uscis.gov / files / article / attachments.pdf citizenship resource center http: / / www.uscis.gov / portal / site / uscis / citizenshi .

