coal has long been the major fossil fuel used to produce electricity .

however , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) lists coal - fired electric power plants as one of the largest sources of air pollution in the united states , with greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from burning fossil fuels believed to be the largest contributor to global climate change .

regulations under development at epa would impose new requirements on power plants to control ghg emissions .

first , in september 2013 epa proposed standards for the control of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from new electric generating units burning fossil fuels .

epa has suggested that utilization of carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) is a viable means for new coal - fired power plants to comply with the proposed standards .

but higher efficiency components and processes are unlikely to be sufficient to meet the proposed new plant standards .

as requirements for new sources ( i.e. , new power plants ) , epa's proposed standards do not directly apply to existing power plants currently producing electricity .

epa's proposals for control of ghg emissions from existing power plants are expected by june 2014 , with many options for reducing ghgs under consideration .

epa may target emissions on a state or plant - by - plant basis , with companies likely given choices for compliance , and increasing coal - fired power plant ( cfpp ) efficiency may be one of those choices .

improving the efficiency of existing coal plants could potentially result in significant reductions of co 2 emissions per unit of electricity produced .

however , certain modifications to power plants to increase power output can potentially increase pollutant emissions , thus triggering new source review ( nsr ) requirements .

therefore , any modifications made must be shown to reduce pollutants if nsr is to be avoided .

expenditures to increase efficiency would likely be evaluated on a cost vs. benefits approach , with modifications to improve efficiency varying according to many factors , including the type of fuel burned , and the age and the physical condition of the power plant .

carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) will not be a focus of improvements discussed in this report , as there are no ccs technologies considered as commercially available for full - scale application to the broad majority of existing coal - fired power plants , and epa has stated that it does not expect to require ccs at existing plants .

this report focuses on efficiency improvements to power plants , and discusses retrofits , technologies , and other modifications to facility operations which offer the potential to improve power plant efficiency and reduce co 2 emissions .

some in congress have expressed concerns about the potential impacts on electricity reliability and fuel diversity from retirements of coal plants due to pending and new environmental regulations .

increasing efficiency of coal plants may help to address these concerns by reducing emissions without reducing output .

additionally , congress may want to consider whether such efficiency improvements could be accelerated if these were implemented in a program focused on increasing the efficiency of the coal - fired power plant sector .

for most of the history of power generation in the united states , coal has been the dominant fuel used to produce electricity .

in 2012 , coal was used to fuel approximately 38% of power generation in the united states , as shown in figure 1 .

coal has been the fuel of choice for many decades because of its wide availability , and the relatively low cost of producing electricity in large , coal - burning power plants .

coal's low - priced , high energy content enabled the building of power plants able to take advantage of economies of scale in steam - electric production .

in a steam power plant , coal ( or other combustible fuel ) is burned to provide heat for turning water into steam in a boiler .

the steam is then forced under pressure into a steam turbine - driven generator which produces electricity .

as of 2012 , the u.s. coal - powered generation fleet consisted of 1,337 units with a nameplate capacity of almost 313 gigawatts ( gw ) of generating capacity .

improving the efficiency of existing coal plants could potentially result in large reductions of co 2 emissions per unit of electricity produced .

since ghg emissions from electricity generation are essentially composed of co 2 emissions , improvements in efficiency are a direct means of reducing ghg emissions .

the performance of a power plant can be expressed by a number of measures , including heat rate ( i.e. , the efficiency of conversion from fuel energy input to electrical energy output ) , and thermal efficiency .

in its simplest form , a plant's heat rate ( for a particular period ) can be defined as follows: hr = f / e where , hr = heat rate ( btu / kwh ) f = heat energy input supplied by fuel to the power plant for a period ( btu ) e = energy output from the power plant in a period ( kwh ) since the equivalent btu content of a single kwh of electricity is 3,412 btu , thermal efficiency can be calculated as: te = ( 100 ) ( 3412 ) / hr where , te = thermal efficiency ( % ) as an example , using the average heat rate in 2011 of 10,444 btu / kwh for coal - fired power plants ( i.e. , all coal types ) , the average efficiency for coal - fired plants was 33% .

a lower heat rate represents a more efficient generating unit , since it requires less heat input to generate a kwh of electric energy .

a generating unit can thus improve its efficiency by reducing the fuel it uses relative to a specific amount of electricity generated , thus reducing the amount of co 2 emitted .

a percentage improvement in heat rate is nearly equivalent to an equal percentage improvement in the emissions rate in terms of the change in co 2 emissions .

the difference stems from the small variation in carbon per btu across coal varieties .

the heterogeneity in heat rates across coal - fired generation units can partly be explained by technical characteristics determined at the time of plant construction that cannot be changed without a major overhaul .

this category includes size , age , firing type , and the technology employed .

higher efficiency is generally associated with plants that are used more heavily because efficient units are less costly to operate .

a second factor is how the boiler is used .

the relationship between the heat rate and utilization is nonlinear , as efficiency tends to be lower at very low and very high levels of utilization ... units with lower utilization may be ramped up and down more frequently , which requires additional fuel input as temperature in the boiler fluctuates .

the result could involve efficiency losses at least partly outside the control of plant decision makers .

plant managers control several other factors that affect heat rates .

techniques , management , or technology may improve the efficiency of the plant by targeting the major components of the coal combustion process: oxygen , temperature , and pressure .

excessive deviations in any of these areas may decrease efficiency through waste or shortfalls ...maintenance and performance testing are also critical for identifying and preventing losses .

therefore , in practical terms , a power plant's heat rate can be affected by a number of factors and power plants systems .

heat rate may present one measure of efficiency , but when considering power plant ghg emissions , measuring carbon dioxide emissions per unit of energy output ( i.e. , per kwh or per mwh of generation ) may provide a more useful measure .

each power plant thus presents a unique opportunity when looking at the issue of increasing efficiency , and reducing emissions .

figure 5 illustrates a relationship between efficiency improvement and co 2 emissions ( for cfpps using bituminous coal ) highlighting the lower emissions of higher pressure cfpps .

upgrading from subcritical operation to supercritical steam conditions ( with required pollution technology ) could add at least 20 years to a plant's service life , depending on the regulatory and environmental regime in place .

a subcritical plant could achieve at best 40% efficiency ( on an lhv basis ) , while a supercritical steam plant could potentially achieve an efficiency two points higher and emit 4% less co 2 .

advancing the technology from a supercritical to an advanced ultra - supercritical cfpp could see an efficiency of 46% to 48% , which could mean as much as 18% to 22% less co 2 per mwh generated than an equivalent - sized subcritical pc unit .

however , "[m]ajor plant upgrading involving conversion of subcritical to supercritical or ultra - supercritical ... has seldom progressed beyond studies because of the high cost. .

the overall efficiency of a power plant encompasses the efficiency of the various components of a particular generating unit .

sometimes these systems are unique to a generating unit , while in other instances these systems may be shared between generating units at a power plant site .

this section will summarize the results of several u.s. and international studies which present options for improvements to power plant systems capable of increasing system heat rate efficiency and reducing ghg emissions .

while the focus of this report is improving the efficiency of u.s. coal - fired power plants , studies from the international community are also presented as suggested improvements apply generally to coal - fired power plants .

further , a key report from an asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) working group report laid the groundwork for several u.s and international studies .

as coal - fired power plants age , they lose efficiency .

much of this loss in efficiency is due to mechanical wear on a variety of components resulting in heat losses , as can be seen in figure 6 .

lower power plant efficiency results in more co 2 being emitted per unit of electricity generated .

the mode of operation ( i.e. , base load vs. cyclical ) also has a large effect on efficiency and fuel use .

the options most often considered for increasing the efficiency of cfpps include equipment refurbishment , plant upgrades , and improved o&m schedules .

cost of the improvements is often compared to the expected return in increased efficiency as a primary determinant of whether to go forward with a program .

in 1999 , the apec region was responsible for 59% of the world's carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion .

pulverized coal technologies accounted for 94% of coal - fired capacity in the region .

the 21 countries comprising apec include australia , canada , china , japan , the united states , and russia .

according to an asia - pacific economic cooperation working group ( apwg ) study in 2001 , projects to improve combustion , steam cycle , and o&m required low to medium costs , and these expenditures were predicted to produce as much as a 3.5% net overall efficiency improvement .

these improvements could also result in the largest overall reduction in co 2 emissions of all the scenarios considered by the apwg study , since lower cost improvements were more likely to be adopted .

however , if reduction of carbon intensity is the goal ( measured in grams of co 2 emission per kilowatt - hour of generation ) , the study found that switching of cfpps to biomass ranked highest among the options considered ( as biomass was considered carbon neutral ) , followed by fuel - switching to natural gas .

a subsequent apwg study in 2005 found that many older power plants in the asia - pacific region were operating well below their design efficiency .

however , the study found that replacing the older cfpps with new power plants was not practical because the expenditure for a new plant could not be justified by the improved performance .

instead , efficiency and operational improvements were seen as a possible alternative considering a range of equipment upgrades and refurbishment options to various cfpp systems .

heat rate improvement could potentially be achieved using renewable technologies to either provide heat to reduce heat losses at various points in the steam cycle , or to provide power to the equipment used to curb these heat losses , thus curbing on - site equipment electricity use .

one such hybrid coal - solar power plant is already in operation in the united states , at the xcel cameo generating station in colorado .

the demonstration project is expected to cut the use of coal at the power plant by around two or three percent , and could be scaled up to cut it by 10 percent .

the system works through a series of parabolic trough solar collectors made of glass mirrors .

on sunny days the mirrors concentrate the solar radiation onto a line of receiver tubes filled with a heat transfer fluid ( mineral oil ) .

the solar energy heats the circulating oil to about 300째c ( 575째f ) .

the heated oil is then fed to a heat exchanger where the heat is transferred to water to heat it to around 200째c ( 407째f ) before it enters the boiler .

having hotter water entering the boiler means less coal is needed to heat it and produce the steam that turns the turbine to generate electricity .

alternatively , using biomass has been suggested to co - fire with coal in a cfpp , or to replace coal altogether .

combining the use of biomass with coal can be beneficial , particularly from an environmental standpoint although any such process may have its limitations or drawbacks .

each coal type and biomass feedstock has different characteristics although by combining the two , it may be possible to capitalize on the advantages of each , and minimize their individual disadvantages .

an effective way is via [gasification and production of syngas , a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide] , and useful operating experience has been achieved in a number of large - scale coal - fuelled gasification and igcc plants .. .

it also has the potential to form the basis of systems that combine coal and biomass use with other renewable energy technologies to create clean , efficient energy - production systems .

thus , various hybrid energy concepts , some based on coal / biomass [gasification] , have been proposed or are in the process of being developed or trialed .

some propose to add yet another element of renewable energy to the system , generally by incorporating electricity generated by intermittent renewables such as wind or solar power .

a number also aim to incorporate some form of carbon capture and storage .

as biomass is generally considered carbon neutral , co - firing coal with biomass can provide advantages for electric power generation .

however , using biomass on a large , commercial scale has a number of potential issues .

since the heating value and bulk density of biomass is lower than coal , the necessary volumes to be harvested and handled can be substantial , and the type and availability of different biomass materials tends to vary considerably with location .

a potential source of biomass in the united states could be wastes from the forest products industry .

government regulations , regulatory regimes ( i.e. , competitive markets or traditional cost of service regulation ) , and industry factors ( such as growth or a lack of growth in demand ) all affect the motivation for implementing improvement projects at coal - fired power plants .

these external forces add to the internal evaluation of the costs vs. benefits of improvements for a particular unit .

this section will look at a few of these external forces which may hamper the implementation efficiency projects .

as previously mentioned , epa has been directed by the president to propose guidelines for ghg emissions reduction from existing coal - fired power plants .

the general assumption is that epa will establish some target for emissions on a state or plant - by - plant basis , with companies free to decide how they will achieve the reduction ( i.e. , with efficiency , fuel switching , retirement of older units , priority dispatch for cleaner units , etc .

 ) , and with emissions averaging , banking , and trading of emissions credits playing a role .

within such a system , efficiency improvements can be an important contributor .

while the details of the proposal are unknown at this time , the proposal may take into account a number of factors ( such as the remaining useful life of the existing source ) , and could be less stringent than the proposal for new sources of power plants emissions of ghgs .

power plant efficiency may be another factor which epa may potentially consider in its guidelines for existing sources .

netl observed in its 2010 report that based on a scenario where cfpp generation was constant at the 2008 level , increasing the average efficiency from 32.5% to 36% could reduce u.s. ghg emissions by 175 mmmt per year or 2.5% of total u.s. emissions in 2008 .

netl conceded that barriers existed to achieving a higher average fleet efficiency level , citing the power generation industry's focus on availability ( focused on the profitability of coal - fired generating units ) , inconsistent cost pass through possibilities ( some deregulated areas have cost pass through clauses , and zero or negative incentives in many areas for reduced fuel use ) , fear of triggering new source review , and uncertainty about ghg regulations ( which could lead to very short payback periods for improvements ) .

if power plant efficiency is an option epa proposes for state consideration , the question then may be asked how a fleet - wide improvement program could be achieved in united states .

one possible approach might be to follow netl's suggestion of using the top decile of cfpp efficiency as a benchmark for u.s. fleet efficiency , used with an efficiency frontier .

using statistical methods , benchmarks could be used to improve efficiency of the cfpp fleet .

netl observes that while some improvements could be "relatively inexpensive" ( for example , improved o&m , more frequent or pro - active maintenance ) , other improvements could be "very expensive" ( for example , improvements bundled with a new so 2 scrubber , or turbine overhauls or heat exchanger replacement ) .

but netl notes that "if each plant achieved their maximum efficiency each year , 5% reduction in cfpp carbon dioxide emissions" could result .

according to netl's analysis , retirements of lower efficiency units combined with increased generation from higher efficiency refurbished units , and advanced refurbishments with improved operation and maintenance , would be the key to increasing average fleet efficiency .

efficiency improvements could be incentivized using an efficiency frontier .

the selection of appropriate incentives would then encourage cfpp owners to undertake improvements or retire lower efficiency units .

such incentives could include possible tax rate reductions for cfpp owners matched in some manner to the cost of the improvements , or accelerated book depreciation rates for cost recovery .

penalties could perhaps be used to encourage prompt retirement of the lowest efficiency units .

the incentives could be in place over a defined period of years , with incentives reduced during the period to encourage action sooner rather than later .

the effective period of incentives would have to be sufficiently long enough to allow equipment orders to be satisfied , and simultaneous work to progress at multiple cfpp sites across the country which might seek to make improvements considering equipment lead times and workforce availability .

the benchmark could be revised periodically .

this could allow newer power plants to live out a service life matched to the most efficient operation achievable for a particular type of cfpp , based on industry statistics .

this could allow companies that have made substantial investments in pollution controls an opportunity to recover these investments .

however , epa's expected proposal on standards for ghg emissions from existing coal - fired power plants will be a primary factor in determining whether efficiency improvements will be cost effective in the near term .

the efficiency of coal - fired power plants decreases over time as components and systems degrade with age and use .

good o&m practices can slow down the loss of efficiency , but older power plants will not be as efficient as newer plants with more technologically advanced and newer systems .

but simply replacing old power plants with newer plants is rarely cost effective as the relative increase in power output seldom justifies the cost .

cfpps that are more efficient emit less co 2 per unit of electricity produced because they use less coal .

making improvements to increase the efficiency of cfpps ( while producing the same electrical output ) could result in a significant reduction in co 2 emissions .

according to several of the studies summarized in this report , the major improvements in ghg emissions would likely result from major retrofits in technology , or conversions to natural gas ( or possibly biomass ) as a fuel .

detailed information on the actual cost of efficiency - enhancing improvements is not readily available , as concerns over confidentiality and competitiveness with regard to actual projects has largely prevented the sharing of such information .

the studies referenced in this report largely show relative information on cost ( i.e. , high , medium , low ) , estimate the cost effectiveness of improvements , or mention general cost levels .

the case studies have reported costs of efficiency improvements and actual increases in efficiency for specific power plant .

but these are considered as useful for estimating a range of costs for improvements rather than actual guides for costs , since each power plant has its own design characteristics and maintenance history .

actual cost information would require a technical evaluation , and a cost vs. benefit analysis to obtain reliable cost estimates for the options under consideration , taking into account site - specific conditions .

other potential roles exist for congress .

for example , legislation could use tax incentives to encourage energy efficient upgrades for cfpps which were placed in - service after a certain date .

this would allow newer units with environmental controls to recover the cost of scrubbers and other systems , and allow "newer" units to continue operations over a "reasonable" service life , and recover the cost of environmental improvements .

another approach might be to use a federal energy efficiency standard to accomplish a similar goal as an efficiency frontier , but allow the states to design the program based on local fuel resources , the age of power plants under their jurisdiction , and other criteria defined in legislation .

the efficiency standards could increase over time , and require cfpps not meeting these standards to retire .

deference to state authorities and regional compliance strategies have been suggested by observers with regard to epa's deliberations over ghg reduction for existing cfpps .

state public utilities commissions ( or similar entities ) often require utilities to conduct book depreciation studies ( either in connection with rate cases or independent of rate cases ) .

such studies commonly examine the physical condition of power plants , and the utility's recovery of its investment in electric plant .

federal legislation could tie incentives for efficiency improvements to such studies and direct states to meet individual or regional goals for ghg reduction .

