the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has designated eight of its 11 operating divisions ( agencies ) as components of the u.s. public health service ( phs ) .

the phs agencies are: ( 1 ) the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , ( 2 ) the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) , ( 3 ) the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , ( 4 ) the food and drug administration ( fda ) , ( 5 ) the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , ( 6 ) the indian health service ( ihs ) , ( 7 ) the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and ( 8 ) the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

while the phs agencies all provide and support essential public health services , their specific missions vary .

with the exception of fda , the agencies have limited regulatory responsibilities .

two of them — nih and ahrq — are primarily research agencies .

nih conducts and supports basic , clinical , and translational medical research .

ahrq conducts and supports research on the quality and effectiveness of health care services and systems .

three of the agencies — ihs , hrsa , and samhsa — provide health care services or help support systems that deliver such services .

ihs supports a health care delivery system for american indians and alaska natives .

health services are provided directly by the ihs , as well as through tribally contracted and operated health programs , and through services purchased from private providers .

hrsa funds programs and systems to improve access to health care among low - income populations , pregnant women and children , persons living with hiv / aids , rural and frontier populations , and others who are medically underserved .

samhsa funds community - based mental health and substance abuse prevention and treatment services .

cdc is a public health agency that develops and supports community - based and population - wide programs and systems to promote quality of life and prevent the leading causes of disease , injury , disability , and death .

atsdr , which is headed by the cdc director and included in the discussion of cdc in this report , is tasked with identifying potential public health effects from exposure to hazardous substances .

finally , fda is primarily a regulatory agency , whose mission is to ensure the safety of foods , dietary supplements , and cosmetics , and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , vaccines , medical devices , and other health products .

in 2009 , congress gave fda the authority to regulate the manufacture , marketing , and distribution of tobacco products in order to protect public health .

the programs and activities of five of the phs agencies — ahrq , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa — are mostly authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

while some of fda's regulatory activities are also authorized under the phsa , the agency and its programs derive most of their statutory authority from the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

hrsa's maternal and child health programs are authorized by the social security act ( ssa ) , and many of the ihs programs and services are authorized by the indian health care improvement act .

atsdr was created by the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act ( cercla , the "superfund" law ) .

the primary source of funding for each phs agency is the discretionary budget authority it receives through the annual appropriations process .

ahrq , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa are funded through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( labor - hhs - ed ) appropriations act .

funding for atsdr and ihs is provided through the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies ( interior / environment ) appropriations act .

fda gets its funding through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( agriculture ) appropriations act .

the economic stimulus package enacted in february 2009 — the american reinvestment and recovery act ( arra ) — provided a total of $15.1 billion in supplemental fy2009 discretionary appropriations to five of the phs agencies .

details of the allocation of those funds are provided in appendix a .

almost all of the arra appropriations were designated as two - year funds , available for obligation through the end of fy2010 .

congress has taken a number of recent steps through both the annual appropriations process and the enactment of deficit - reduction legislation to reduce the growth in federal spending .

these actions , which are briefly discussed below , have helped reduce discretionary funding for several phs agencies over the past six years ( i.e. , fy2010-fy2015 ) .

among the five phs agencies that are funded through the labor - hhs - ed appropriations act , only samhsa received funding in fy2015 that was essentially level with the amount it received in fy2010 .

cdc , hrsa , and nih each received a smaller discretionary appropriation in fy2015 than they had received in fy2010 .

similarly , ahrq's discretionary appropriation in fy2015 was less than the amount of set - aside funding the agency received in fy2010 .

with the exception of nih , which is funded almost entirely by discretionary appropriations , the decline in discretionary funding for the other three agencies ( i.e. , ahrq , cdc , and hrsa ) has been offset by the receipt of mandatory aca funds .

fda and ihs , neither of which receives discretionary funding through the labor - hhs - ed appropriation act , have seen their appropriations increase over the six - year period fy2010-fy2015 .

both agencies have also witnessed a steady increase in funding from other sources ; user fees at fda , and third - party collections at ihs .

the remainder of this report consists of seven sections , one for each phs agency beginning with ahrq .

each section includes an overview of the agency's statutory authority and principal activities , and a brief summary of the agency's funding over the period fy2010-fy2015 .

this material is accompanied by a detailed funding table showing the fy2010-fy2015 funding levels and the fy2016 budget request for the agency .

the amounts in the funding tables in this report are taken from the departmental and agency budget documents submitted to the appropriations committees , as well as agency operating plans .

specific documents are listed in the source note under each table .

the funding tables are formatted in a similar , though not identical , manner .

the formatting generally matches the way in which each agency's funding is presented in the congressional budget documents .

each table shows the funding for all the agency's budget accounts and , typically , for selected programs and activities within those accounts .

these amounts are summed to give the agency's total , or program level , funding .

at the bottom of the table any user fees , set - aside funds , aca funds , and other nondiscretionary amounts are subtracted from the program level to give the agency's discretionary budget authority ( i.e. , annual discretionary appropriations ) .

the tables for ahrq , cdc , hrsa , and samhsa include non - add entries — italicized and in parentheses — to indicate the contribution of funding from sources other than the agency's discretionary appropriations to specific accounts .

almost all of the cdc accounts are funded with discretionary appropriations plus amounts from multiple other sources ( see table 4 ) .

the use of a dash in the funding tables generally means "not applicable. .

either the activity or program was not authorized or there was no mandatory funding provided for that fiscal year .

in contrast , a zero usually indicates that congressional appropriators had chosen not to appropriate any discretionary funds that year or , in the case of the fy2016 budget request , that no discretionary funding was requested .

it is important to keep in mind that the phs agency funding tables that appear in budget documents and appropriations committee reports , as well as the tables in this report , show only the amount of evaluation set - aside funds received .

they do not reflect the amount of funding assessed on agency accounts .

as a result , the funding tables for the phs agencies subject to an assessment ( i.e. , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa ) give a somewhat distorted view of their available budgetary resources .

this effect is particularly significant in the case of nih .

as mentioned earlier , nih is assessed approximately $700 million annually , and until fy2015 the agency received $8 million each year in set - aside transfers .

while the funding table for nih shows receipt of set - aside funds , which count towards the agency's overall program level funding , the amounts shown for each agency account have not been reduced to reflect the assessment .

thus , nih appears to have about $700 million more than is in fact the case .

note that the funding tables show the post - sequestration amounts for the accounts that were subject to sequestration in fy2013-fy2015 .

the amounts shown for the fy2016 request do not reflect sequestration .

samhsa is the lead federal agency for increasing access to behavioral health services .

it supports community - based mental health and substance abuse treatment and prevention services through formula grants to the states and u.s. territories and through competitive grant programs that fund states , territories , tribal organizations , local communities , and private entities .

samhsa also engages in a range of other activities , such as technical assistance , data collection , and workforce development .

samhsa and most of its programs and activities are authorized under title v of the phsa , which organizes samhsa in three centers: center for substance abuse treatment ( csat ) center for substance abuse prevention ( csap ) center for mental health services ( cmhs ) each center has general statutory authority , called programs of regional and national significance ( prns ) , under which it has established grant programs for states and communities to address their important substance abuse and mental health needs .

phsa title v also authorizes a number of specific grant programs , referred to as categorical grants .

samhsa's two largest grant programs are separately authorized under phsa title xix , part b .

the community mental health services block grant falls within cmhs .

the full amount of the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant falls within csat , although no less than 20% of each state's block grant must be used for prevention .

in addition to the three statutorily defined centers , samhsa's budget reflects a fourth category , "health surveillance and program support," for other activities such as collecting data , providing statistical and analytic support , raising public awareness , developing the behavioral health workforce , and maintaining the national registry of evidence - based programs and practices .

the last comprehensive reauthorization of samhsa and its programs occurred in 2000 as part of the children's health act , which also added "charitable choice" provisions allowing religious organizations to receive funding for substance abuse prevention and treatment services without altering their religious character .

since 2000 , congress has expanded some of samhsa's programs and activities without taking up comprehensive reauthorization .

although authorizations of appropriations for most of samhsa's grant programs expired at the end of fy2003 , many of these programs continue to receive annual discretionary appropriations .

from fy2010 through fy2015 , samhsa's program - level funding has generally hovered around $3.6 billion , dropping to $3.4 billion in fy2013 due to sequestration and rebounding to $3.6 billion in fy2014 ( see table 9 ) .

the current ( fy2015 ) distribution of funding across cmhs ( 30% ) , csat ( 60% ) , csap ( 5% ) , and health surveillance and program support ( 5% ) overstates the amount allocated to substance abuse treatment and understates the amount allocated to substance abuse prevention because csat's funding reflects the entire amount of the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant , including the 20% set - aside for prevention .

relative to fy2015 funding , the fy2016 request would increase program - level funding by 1% while decreasing discretionary budget authority by 2% ; it would make up the difference with increased funding from the set - aside and pphf transfers .

american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) : fy2009 supplemental appropriations through arra , congress appropriated a total of $22.4 billion in supplemental fy2009 discretionary appropriations for health and human services programs administered by hhs .

of that total amount , $15.1 billion was provided directly to , or allocated for , programs and activities administered by the phs agencies ( see text box below ) .

in most instances the funding was to remain available for obligation through the end of fy2010 ( i.e. , september 30 , 2010 ) .

essentially all the arra discretionary funds provided to hhs have been obligated .

community health center fund aca section 10503 established a community health center fund ( chcf ) to provide supplemental funding for community and other health centers and the national health service corps ( nhsc ) .

the law provided annual appropriations to the chcf totaling $11 billion over the five - year period fy2011 through fy2015 .

of that total , $9.5 billion is for health center operations and the remaining $1.5 billion is for the nhsc .

table b - 1 shows the amounts appropriated for each fiscal year as well as the post - sequestration levels for fy2013-fy2015 .

chcf funds are awarded to the various types of health centers that are supported by the federal health center program .

those include community health centers and migrant health centers , as well as facilities that serve the homeless and residents of public housing .

sequestration of chcf funding for community health centers and migrant health centers is capped at 2% , whereas chcf funding for the other types of facilities ( i.e. , health centers for the homeless and for public housing residents ) and for the nhsc is fully sequestrable at the applicable rate for nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending ( see table 2 ) .

the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) appropriated two more years of funding to the chcf .

for both fy2016 and fy2017 , macra provided $3.6 billion for health center operations and $310 million for the nhsc .

table b - 1 shows the amounts for fy2016 .

while chcf funding may have been intended to supplement — not supplant — annual discretionary appropriations for the health center program and the nhsc , these mandatory funds have partially supplanted discretionary funding for the health center program and entirely replaced discretionary funding for the nhsc ( see table 6 ) .

prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) aca section 4002 established the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) , to be administered by the hhs secretary , and provided it with a permanent annual appropriation .

under the aca , pphf's annual appropriation would increase from $500 million for fy2010 to $2 billion for fy2015 and each subsequent fiscal year .

however , the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 amended the aca by reducing the pphf appropriation from fy2013 through fy2021 as part of a package of offsets to partly cover the costs of the law .

the pphf annual appropriation is now $1 billion through fy2017 , and thereafter will increase in increments to $2 billion for fy2022 and each subsequent fiscal year .

the hhs secretary is instructed to transfer amounts from the pphf to agencies for prevention , wellness , and public health activities .

the funds are available to the secretary at the beginning of each fiscal year .

the administration's annual budget sets out the intended distribution and use of pphf funds for that fiscal year .

the secretary determined the distribution of pphf funds for fy2010 through fy2013 .

for fy2014 and fy2015 funds , congress explicitly directed the distribution of pphf funds , prohibiting the secretary from making further transfers .

as discussed earlier in the report , the pphf appropriation is fully sequestrable at the applicable percentage rate for nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending ( see table 2 ) .

sequestration is applied to the entire appropriation by the secretary before funds are transferred to the agencies .

the distribution of pphf funds to hhs agencies for fy2010 through the fy2016 president's budget proposal is presented in table c - 1 .

further details regarding pphf distributions to ahrq , cdc , hrsa , and samhsa are provided in the respective agency budget tables in the body of this report .

for fy2013 , the secretary transferred almost half of available pphf funds to cms for aca implementation , as shown in table c - 1 .

this transfer reduced the pphf funds that had been provided to some of the phs agencies from what they had received for fy2012 .

along with the sequestration of discretionary funding in fy2013 , the loss of pphf funds that year had a significant effect on cdc's budget for fy2013 .

in determining the transfer of pphf funds for fy2010 through fy2013 , the secretary funded a mix of pre - existing programs and activities , and programs and activities newly authorized under the aca .

in directing the distribution of fy2014 and fy2015 pphf funds , congress in most cases provided pphf funds to pre - existing programs and activities .

patient - centered outcomes research trust fund section 6301 ( e ) of the aca established the patient - centered outcomes research trust fund ( pcortf ) to support comparative clinical effectiveness research at both hhs and the patient - centered outcomes research institute ( pcori ) .

the law provided annual funding to the pcortf over the period fy2010-fy2019 from the following three sources: ( 1 ) annual appropriations ; ( 2 ) fees on health insurance and self - insured plans ; and ( 3 ) transfers from the medicare part a and part b trust funds .

specifically , the aca appropriated the following amounts to the pcortf: ( 1 ) $10 million for fy2010 ; ( 2 ) $50 million for fy2011 ; and ( 3 ) $150 million for each of fy2012 through fy2019 .

in addition , for each of fy2013 through 2019 , the aca appropriated an amount equivalent to the net revenues from a new fee that the law imposes on health insurance policies and self - insured plans .

for policy / plan years ending during fy2013 , the fee equals $1 multiplied by the number of covered lives .

for policy / plan years ending during each subsequent fiscal year through fy2019 , the fee equals $2 multiplied by the number of covered lives .

finally , transfers to pcortf from the medicare part a and part b trust funds are calculated by multiplying the average number of individuals entitled to benefits under medicare part a , or enrolled in medicare part b , by $1 ( for fy2013 ) or by $2 ( for each of fiscal years 2014 through 2019 ) .

for each of fy2011 through fy2019 , the aca requires 80% of the pcortf funds to be made available to pcori , and the remaining 20% of funds to be transferred to the hhs secretary for carrying out phsa section 937 .

of the total amount transferred to hhs , 80% is to be distributed to ahrq .

table d - 1 shows the allocation of pcortf funds through fy2016 .

fda user fee authorization .

