dynamic scoring ( or dynamic revenue estimating ) for tax legislation has been an issue of interest for at least the past 25 years .

house rule 13 has required , since 2003 , that the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) provide a macroeconomic impact analysis of legislation to amend the internal revenue code , or a statement explaining why it is not calculable ; the first analysis was in 2003 .

the current senate budget resolution ( s.con.res .

8 ) includes a similar provision requiring the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , with the assistance of the jct , to prepare a supplemental estimate incorporating the feedback effects into a cost estimate for legislation with provisions affecting revenues that have a revenue impact of $5 billion or more in any fiscal year .

these analyses are not part of the official score , but rather provide projected feedback effects , although some may argue that feedback effects should be included in revenue estimates .

currently , both the house and the senate tax - writing committees are considering tax reform legislation that would broaden the base by limiting deductions .

some have advocated a revenue - neutral tax reform that allows fully offsetting rate reductions and some a tax reform that also raises revenue .

an important issue of debate is the expected effect on the overall economy from a reform of the tax code .

many uncertainties arise with respect to dynamic scoring , which depend on the type of model used , the behavioral responses built into the models , and assumptions about activities of other agents or supplemental policies that are necessary to solve some types of models .

the complexity is expanded in the case of tax reform , because base broadening can also have effects on effective tax rates that could offset part or all of the behavioral effects due to changes in statutory rate reduction .

this report first explains dynamic scoring , including the types of effects incorporated and the types of models used , as well as what groups conduct or have conducted macroeconomic analysis of tax changes .

the following section discusses the specific issues associated with tax reform .

the final section discusses general issues surrounding the use of various models and reviews the empirical evidence on supply side responses ( labor supply and savings or investment ) and how these effects are incorporated in current models used by jct , cbo , the treasury department , and academic researchers .

the discussion of economic modeling is necessarily more technical than that in most crs reports .

the first section , therefore , provides an overview with a less technical summary of the analysis and findings in this report .

the main body of the report follows .

dynamic scoring , as a general term , is revenue estimation that accounts for behavioral changes .

when referring to tax legislation , the term dynamic revenue estimating is also used .

the legislative requirements cited above , however , have a narrower effect since many behavioral responses are already included in conventional revenue estimates .

the rules commonly referred to as requiring a dynamic score require macroeconomic effects , incorporating the effects of legislative changes on aggregate economic output .

dynamic scoring as used in this report refers to incorporating those macroeconomic effects .

it is often discussed in connection with revenue legislation because tax revisions may cause "supply side" effects ( changes in labor supply and savings ) due to changes in effective average and marginal tax rates .

dynamic scoring normally employs models of the aggregate economy .

in some of these models there is a single rate of return and a single type of saving and supply of capital ; changes in taxes which affect the rate of return directly or indirectly can lead to additional savings .

these models typically do not address certain features of the corporate tax .

although corporate tax revenues are relatively small compared to individual tax revenues , corporate changes could have significant effects on the overall rate of return .

aggregate economy models capture these effects on savings rates .

corporate taxes , however , may also have more immediate and larger effects on capital , because they may affect flows of capital to and from the rest of the world .

this process could occur more quickly than the effects ( if any ) on increased domestic saving .

most aggregate models have relatively primitive ( if any ) adjustment for this effect , although corporate models that focus separately on international capital flows exist .

several government organizations have prepared dynamic scores or macroeconomic analyses of effects that would permit estimates of dynamic feedback effects .

in addition , a number of academic researchers have constructed models that estimate macroeconomic effects .

the senate budget resolution provision was included in the anticipation of tax reform .

some argue tax reform should be revenue neutral , and the house budget resolution for fy2014 ( h.con.res .

25 ) takes this position .

others believe that it should raise revenue , as in the senate budget resolution for fy2014 ( s.con.res .

8 ) .

some earlier proposals would have cut taxes along with reform , generally by making the 2001-2003 tax cuts permanent ; these proposals would probably be close to revenue neutral currently because most of these tax cuts have since been made permanent .

a revenue neutral , or largely revenue neutral , tax reform that lowers the rate and broadens the base is unlikely to have a large effect on the economy .

it could contract , rather than expand , the economy , depending on the design .

all of the effects that might be considered in a dynamic estimate , including short run stimulus , long - run crowding out or in of investment through deficits , and supply side responses , would likely be eliminated or dampened in a revenue neutral tax reform .

tax reform may not be revenue neutral , so that stimulus and crowding out effects could be part of the macroeconomic analysis .

even a revenue neutral tax reform could affect marginal tax rates which could generate supply side effects .

this section discusses issues that arise when a tax revision decreases or increases revenue or alters effective marginal tax rates .

the following discussion addresses whether stimulus or crowding out effects should be considered and whether the various supply side models are appropriate .

it also reviews the empirical evidence on behavioral responses and how they compare with those in some of the current models .

as noted briefly in the overview , there are several reasons that short run stimulus effects , which cause a tax cut to lose less revenue than a static score and a tax increase to raise less revenue , should not be considered in dynamic revenue scoring in general , even in models where these effects can be considered .

the short run stimulus effect affects aggregate demand through increased spending due to tax cuts .

this increased spending increases output by re - employing unemployed resources ( workers who have lost their jobs and idle capital ) .

as some workers become employed and increase their own spending and profits rise , the additional income introduces new spending , which in turn leads to additional production .

the successive rounds of output effects are called multipliers .

these effects only occur in an underemployed economy ( otherwise the stimulus increases the price level ) and they are transitory because eventually the economy would have returned to full employment without the stimulus .

there are a number of reasons that this effect might be inappropriate to consider in dynamic estimation .

the most basic argument is that changes in the tax code shouldn't depend on the fiscal timing , as tax changes can be hard to reverse .

a permanent tax cut should , it may be argued , not be viewed more favorably because it was enacted in a recession .

a second reason for not including these effects , is that they also occur with spending changes .

moreover , spending multipliers are typically more powerful than tax cut multipliers because a part of tax cuts is not spent .

if the purpose of the change is to stimulate the economy , then that decision would be better informed by comparing tax cuts with spending increases , rather than considering the effects of tax cuts alone .

in a sense , dynamic estimates are already accounted for when multipliers for different spending and tax cuts are estimated .

third , the magnitude and even existence of a stimulus effect depends on assumptions about the behavior of the country's central bank , the federal reserve system .

the federal reserve can take measures to offset a fiscal stimulus with a monetary contraction or a fiscal contraction with a monetary expansion to keep output constant .

they can also fully accommodate the change by keeping interest rates constant and strengthening the stimulus or contraction , or they can do anything in between .

if , however , the federal reserve has a fixed objective for output , fiscal policy would simply be one more factor to counteract in their policies and a tax cut or tax increase would not affect output .

when the jct does dynamic estimates , it generally includes a case where the federal reserve offsets the policy , which is helpful in interpreting the contribution of these transitory effects .

there is a somewhat more compelling case that the effects of tax changes on debt should be considered , since , taken in isolation , one could consider the tradeoff to be between financing spending through taxes or borrowing .

in addition , if the claim is made that a tax cut will largely pay for itself , then analyzing it as a stand - alone policy including both supply side effects and the effects on crowding out from debt might be appropriate .

the counter - argument to this view is that spending cuts have the same types of effects on debt as revenue increases , so that it may not be appropriate to consider them only for taxes .

if dynamic scoring is considered for both spending and tax changes , including crowding out might be more appropriate .

the main uncertainty about the effects of debt is the extent to which debt can be financed by foreigners .

if all of the debt was financed by foreigners there would be no crowding out and no effect on revenues at least within the budget horizon .

note that the intertemporal models ( ramsey infinite horizon and olg life - cycle ) cannot be solved without some resolution of the debt although there can be effects in the interim .

a temporary debt that is resolved eventually with transfers has no crowding out effect in the interim in the ramsey model because it is offset by private saving .

although there is little disagreement that incorporating supply side responses when analyzing tax changes would contribute , in theory , to evaluating legislative proposals , the case is less clear when these projections provide an uncertain or unrealistic picture of expected effects .

the solow model is straightforward and easily can be used to calculate the expected magnitude of feedback effects .

intertemporal models , in particular , have results that are driven by assumptions embedded in the nature of the model , but which appear unrealistic and have no empirical support in some cases .

the solow model uses labor , capital and technology to explain economic growth , and in particular to explain observable data such as the capital labor ratio .

that is , it began as a model that could explain observations , much as the keynesian is - lm models were developed to explain the great depression .

the solow growth model was easily adapted to examining tax changes by making the labor supply a function of after tax wages and the savings rate a function of the after tax rate of return .

a simple version of this model , presented in the appendix , can be used to illustrate the magnitude of expected feedback effects .

although the model abstracts from specific features of the tax system , it roughly represents current taxes with a 25% income tax .

the results suggest that a 20% reduction in marginal tax rates on labor taxes would increase output in the short run by around 0.5% to 1% and revenue feedback effects would be around 3% to 7% ( assuming the capital stock is fixed , a fairly reasonable short run assumption ) .

this estimate uses a labor supply elasticity of 0.1 and 0.2 , similar to the elasticities used by jct and cbo ( as discussed subsequently ) .

these feedback effects are relatively minor .

the feedback effects for capital income are somewhat more complex , because it takes a period of time to achieve them .

for example , if the capital stock is growing at 3% due to savings , even a 100% increase in investment ( either from savings or from capital inflows ) would increase the capital stock by only 3% .

for growth in the capital stock arising from savings , one simulation showed that by the fifth year ( the midpoint of the budget horizon ) only 9.6% of the final adjustment in the capital stock had occurred .

to illustrate the possible feedback effects , table 1 uses a 0.1 and 0.2 labor supply elasticity along various savings rate elasticities to derive the long run steady state .

the first two savings elasticities are 0.0 and 0.4 .

a zero savings elasticity is a central tendency from the literature that used aggregate time series data to estimate the elasticity ; 0.4 is towards the larger positive estimates in that literature .

an infinite elasticity is provided to show maximum potential long run effects ( that is , savings must eventually rise or fall to return to the initial after - tax return ) .

these longer run effects are not very different from the short run effects when the savings supply elasticity is zero .

for example , the feedback from a labor income tax cut is 4% to 9% rather than 3% to 7% .

larger savings elasticities can eventually lead to more significant feedback effects , although none is large enough to fully offset the revenue loss .

for budget horizon estimates , it is important to note that a solow growth model takes a long time to reach the steady state .

effects from labor tax changes in the budget horizon are already close to the long - run steady state .

when capital income tax cuts were involved , the effects in the budget horizon tend to be small relative to the long - run steady state ( when an effect occurs ) .

in a study of capital income tax cuts with a 0.4 elasticity , on average in the first five years ( the mid - point of the budget horizon ) only about 10% of the adjustment was complete , and by year 25 only about a third .

strictly speaking , an infinite elasticity would imply immediate adjustment , but such a large change in the savings rate is not plausible , and this is one reason some economists found this type of model to account for savings responses unsatisfactory .

table 2 shows the output effects for a 20% tax cut , so some idea of the magnitude of output effects might be gained .

jct has found slightly larger effects for rate cuts in their meg model ( controlling for deficit and stimulus effects ) with an average feedback effect of 9% to 10% in the first five years .

their model is , however , not a pure solow model , but a combination of a solow and olg model .

the model discussed above is a closed economy .

the capital stock might change more quickly with an open economy where investment is not constrained by a savings response .

the effects would depend on whether the capital income tax is residence based ( where the foreign investor is not subject to tax , such as a tax on dividends or interest ) or source based ( the corporate income tax where the foreign investor is subject to tax ) .

in the latter case , the maximum effect assuming perfectly mobile capital would be the same as the capital stock elasticity at infinity for a small country with perfect product substitution and a source based tax .

however , that extreme case is unlikely to occur , since estimates suggest the investment substitution elasticity is closer to 3 .

moreover , the united states is a large country , products are imperfect substitutes , and taxes are a combination of source based and residence based .

all of these factors would reduce the effects .

one study of a ten percentage point decrease in the corporate tax rate ( a partial cut in capital income taxes ) suggested an output increase of less than 0.2% for an elasticity of 3 .

this tax cut was a slightly larger percentage cut than the one in table 1 and table 2 .

although the solow model provided a labor supply response in a way that was consistent with standard theory about consumer choices between consumption and leisure within a time period , many economists were dissatisfied with the treatment of savings responses .

a simple savings elasticity cannot be derived from underlying utility functions .

intertemporal models were developed to conform to fundamental economic theory about consumer choice by incorporating a utility function to generate labor and savings supply responses .

in these models , consumers choose consumption and leisure over time .

some issues arise about intertemporal models of either type , and some are peculiar to either the ramsey infinite horizon , or life - cycle olg models .

some of the initial intertemporal models held labor constant and attempted to study saving in that way .

however , modelers also wanted to incorporate labor supply .

these models produce results that may be theoretically elegant but are difficult or impossible to support with empirical research , particularly when labor supply can be shifted intertemporally .

moreover , the theoretical requirements of these models require some very strong assumptions about individuals' information .

in a typical intertemporal model of either type , individuals have perfect foresight and perfect information ( they know how wages and rates of return will change over time for the economy as a whole for an infinite time period of time or a very long time ) .

intertemporal models , however , can be constructed to include uncertainty , as is the case with the cbo olg model , which assumes wage shocks and uncertain lifetimes .

in this type of model , individuals have precautionary savings which is less responsive to changes in the rate of return .

it is difficult , if not impossible , to incorporate the various institutional rigidities in the labor and savings markets .

individuals in these models can generally enter and leave the work force without penalty , for example , even though in reality leaving the work force may make re - entry at the same wage more difficult .

they can change hours even though for many jobs a fixed work week , such as a 40 hour week , is the norm .

they can borrow and lend without constraints and at the same rate ( although some models have introduced borrowing constraints for some agents who cannot borrow ) .

also , intertemporal models cannot permit a permanent deficit that leads to unlimited growth in the debt - to - gdp ratio ; a way to deal with the deficit must be incorporated in the modeling exercise .

thus an intertemporal model cannot be used to examine a tax cut or tax increase ; it must be a tax cut or increase and something else , such as a spending change or a future change in taxes , or a lump sum payment , each producing a different result .

intertemporal models also presume a certain type of behavior with respect to savings behavior that may not characterize actual behavior .

agents in these models look ahead and base their current savings on all of the future periods in their life ( even up to infinity ) .

but many individuals either cannot or will not behave that way .

for example , some individuals are young and have no assets or cannot borrow , and if they would like to consume more than their income at this stage of their life , they cannot , so they save nothing and only change consumption when income goes up .

some individuals do not have enough information or knowledge to operate by some type of "rule - of - thumb," such as saving a fixed dollar amount or a fixed share of income .

others may be at a stage where they want to build a rainy day fund for precautionary purposes , or may be saving for a target ( such as enough to make a down payment on a house ) .

some of these alternative models of savings are discussed by elmendorf .

as noted above , the cbo olg model includes risk and precautionary savings , along with age related borrowing constraints .

there are also issues specific to each type of model .

since individuals do not live an infinite period of time , the infinite horizon , or ramsey , model version of the intertemporal model appears on its face to be unrealistic .

it can only be justified as a depiction of actual individuals' choices rather than as the prescriptive planning model it was originally developed as , if individuals are assumed to take into account the welfare of their descendants ( who in turn consider the welfare of their descendants , who in turn consider their descendants , and so forth ) .

in general , there is no marriage in these models which could have implications for bequests ; agents grow through an asexual reproduction process ; in addition , there is no allowance for those without children .

the long run elasticity of savings is infinite , so that the after tax return always returns to its original value .

it is for this reason that the model is inconsistent with an open economy .

the olg life - cycle model seems more realistic , although lack of marriage and the presence of childless agents in the models currently used still have potential implications for the savings response ( since these may affect bequests ) .

the olg model , at least in some forms , allows those who are retired to return to the labor force again , without accounting for the unlikelihood of returning to the work force after many years of retirement .

this feature appeared in the original auerbach - kotlikoff model .

some models , however , have a fixed retirement age , including those of john diamond .

the importance of this feature varies with the type of tax revision , and can be very important in a reform that replaces income taxes with consumption taxes because the loss in purchasing power of income from retired individuals causes them to return to the labor market to restore income through an income effect .

some of these aspects can be altered .

researchers have had some success in incorporating uncertainty into models , which can account for some rainy day saving which responds differently from saving for retirement or bequests .

the congressional budget office olg model is of this type , although the magnitude of the effect is not clear .

with consistent parameters that produce the same income and substitution elasticities for labor supply , the effect of a permanent tax cut on wages is similar in solow and intertemporal models .

however , the effect of a change in the tax on capital income is different because it will elicit a labor supply response to a change in the tax rate on savings .

the change in the timing and intergenerational distribution of taxes when income taxes are replaced by consumption taxes can also have important effects on labor supply , as noted above .

even in the same model , projections can differ depending on the parameters or elasticities of the model .

before examining the effects in models , a brief review of the empirical evidence is in order .

this evidence includes standard labor supply elasticities ( that relate labor supply and savings to permanent wage differences ) , savings elasticities , intertemporal substitution elasticities , and frisch elasticities ( intertemporal substitution of labor ) .

the first two are relevant to the solow model , while all enter into or can be derived in intertemporal models .

the elasticities discussed in this subsection are estimates of the labor supply response to a permanent wage change ( such as one that would arise from a permanent tax cut or increase ) .

that type of supply response is incorporated in all of the dynamic models with supply side effects .

the frisch intertemporal elasticity discussed below is a different type of elasticity .

as noted earlier , the labor supply response to a change in wage is uncertain in direction because it is the result of a positive elasticity of substitution and a negative elasticity of income .

a large body of evidence suggests the labor supply response to increases in wages is small , varies across workers , and can be negative for men .

this small response appears to reflect both income and substitution elasticities that are small , so that even if a tax change substantially lowers marginal relative to average rates ( the first affecting substitution and the second affecting income ) , the response would be small .

this evidence includes historical observation , cross section econometric studies , and estimates from experiments .

much of the interest and challenge is estimating responses related to the behavior of married women , where a large fraction of this group does not participate in the labor market .

studies of married women have produced larger , although varying responses .

in recent decades , however , as the participation of married women in the labor market has increased , their responses have declined and have become more like those of men .

a recent survey of labor supply responses of men indicated that labor supply was largely inelastic .

the mean ( average ) of the studies was 0.06 and the median was 0.03 .

the studies indicated substitution elasticity with a mean of 0.31 and a median of 0.13 .

the income elasticity had a mean of - 0.15 and a median of - 0.12 .

a working paper by researchers at the congressional budget office reviewed recent research and indicated a substitution elasticity for men from 0.1 to 0.3 , with an income elasticity of 0.0 to - 0.1 .

married women had substitution elasticities from 0.2 to 0.4 , with the same income elasticity range .

for the work force as a whole a substitution elasticity of 0.1 to 0.3 was indicated .

one point should be noted about labor supply responses: if labor supply is very responsive in either direction , then it is difficult to explain why labor market participation rates and hours for men have been so constant over a long period of time when both real pre - tax wages and tax rates have been changing .

moreover , it is even more difficult to expect a large positive response when historically the rise in real wages in the latter part of the 19 th century and early part of the 20 th century has been associated with a reduction in the work week .

 ( women have increased their participation , largely during the 1970s and 1980s , but this change may reflect technological advances in household production , declining fertility , and changes in cultural attitudes. ) .

the cbo olg model assumes a zero labor supply elasticities ( income and substitution effects offset each other ) which is compatible with a model where wage rates grow indefinitely .

models that do not have a zero labor supply response have to assume some time dependent change in tastes for leisure versus consumption to be compatible .

note that while labor supply elasticities are entered directly into solow type models , they have to be derived from intertemporal models , given the standard form of the utility function ( the mathematical expression that yields the tradeoff between consumption and leisure ) and depend on the time endowment .

a much more limited literature on savings elasticities developed during the late 1970s and 1980s .

these studies used aggregate data in the economy on savings rates and rates of return to estimate the savings elasticity .

the evidence generally showed small , possibly negative savings responses .

although elasticities as large as 0.4 and 0.6 had been found , later studies showed these effects were sensitive to minor specification changes .

in general , the evidence suggests savings is not responsive to rates of return ( a zero elasticity ) .

partly because of the growing interest in intertemporal models , researchers began to study intertemporal substitution elasticities rather than the effect of rates of return on saving rates .

the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ( ies ) measures the percentage change in the ratio of consumption in two periods divided by their relative prices .

for comparing two adjacent periods , the price in the second period relative to the first is ( 1 / ( 1+r ) ) ( which is the discount factor for money in the second period , where r is the after tax rate of return ) .

thus , the percentage change in price is the change in r divided by ( 1+r ) .

the ies is the primary driver of savings responses that arise from shifting consumption to the future , and contributes to the labor supply effect due to intertemporal shifting of leisure .

empirical studies have looked at changes in macroeconomic consumption aggregates in some cases and have used individual consumption behavior in others to estimate the elasticity .

the pioneering study of intertemporal substitution elasticities was by robert hall , who found that the elasticity was extremely small , could be zero , was statistically insignificant and was no more than 0.2 .

early surveys of the value led to the use of elasticities of 0.25 to 0.33 .

most subsequent studies produced elasticities below 0.5 , although some very large ones were estimated .

recently a large meta - analysis ( an analysis that combines data from many studies ) of estimates of the ies across many countries found an overall elasticity of 0.5 for the world on average and 0.6 for the united states was prepared .

about half the 169 studies were based on u.s. data .

the authors cautioned that the estimates were aimed at comparing across countries and were too large in value because of publication bias .

publication bias is a problem widely recognized in many fields .

basically if theory indicates an elasticity should be positive , and the estimate is negative , peer reviewers are less likely to recommend publication , editors are less likely to publish , and researchers , expecting the unlikelihood of publishing , tend not to submit their articles ( which often involve a fee ) , or even prepare a working paper .

yet , when a large number of estimates have been made , because of the fundamental theory of statistical estimation , some would be negative ( particularly if the true value is low ) .

publication bias also suggests that estimates of the income and substitution elasticities are probably too large in absolute value .

one of the co - authors of this meta - analysis subsequently published the basic ( worldwide ) results after correcting for estimated publication bias .

the correction indicates that the elasticity for macro aggregate studies is zero ( as hall originally found ) .

in the basic case ( without selecting across studies for other characteristics ) the elasticity for micro studies ( which were about a quarter of the studies ) was 0.22 .

he also reported that the elasticity for micro studies of asset holders was 0.36 .

his preferred estimate with various other characteristics selected was 0.33 for asset holders .

in general , an ies for asset holders would be only appropriate if the model identified a separate group of liquidity constrained consumers .

for a model without that feature the elasticity for asset holders would be too high .

if the macro elasticities were considered as well as micro , then an ies of zero to 0.2 might be in order .

note also that other types of estimates discussed in this section , including the estimates of standard labor substitution elasticities already reviewed and the intertemporal labor supply elasticities discussed subsequently , may also be affected by publication bias , since they included only estimates in the direction expected by theory .

there are two caveats about the empirical evidence on the ies for consumption .

the first is that the estimates have considered periods that are close together , but the elasticity in models is applied over many periods of time and is determined by a utility function that assumes a constant elasticity of substitution .

most of the effect on savings from a change in the tax rate on capital income arises from reducing current consumption to shift it to these periods further into the future .

yet , basic economic theory suggests elasticities are higher for closer substitutes , and close together periods would be expected to be closer substitutes than further apart periods .

thus the ies estimate should be an upper bound .

the second , and perhaps more important , concern for effects in the budget horizon , is that due to the nature of the utility function , leisure also responds to changes in the rate of return , which then generates a significant short run labor supply response .

no empirical evidence supports this response , which can dominate the effects when taxes on capital income are cut deeply .

ballard , a discussant of the intertemporal model simulations carried out by the jct stated "any simulation model that generates a large elasticity of labor supply with respect to the interest rate is shooting in the dark. .

ballard believes that the controlling of the response of labor supply to interest rates is crucial to modeling and that this can be achieved , in part , via the time endowment ( limiting the available supply of leisure ) .

the frisch elasticity , which estimates the response of workers to changes in the wage rate over time , is not likely to be of importance in an analysis of a permanent tax change .

it is , however , a parameter that has been estimated and can be compared with the implied elasticities in the intertemporal models .

as is the case with standard labor supply estimates , it is calculated from other parameters in intertemporal models .

there are two types of estimates .

some are from micro data studies that examine individual behavior over time .

these elasticities tend to be small , on the whole , at least for men .

there are also estimates from aggregate micro data , which tend to be large , usually above 1 or 2 .

these macroeconomic estimates are largely based on variations in hours and wages over the business cycle .

they rest on the assumption that unemployment during recessions is voluntary , while most models of business cycles consider workers who lose their jobs or have their hours reduced are largely involuntarily unemployed or underemployed .

assuming some or most of unemployment is involuntary , these estimates overstate the frisch elasticity .

the micro data studies largely concentrate on the response of hours of work and examine the response with profiles of wages and hours over time .

both show an inverted u shape , with fewer hours when young and when old , and lower wages when young and old , respectively , but the shapes are quite different , which leads to lower elasticities .

turning to the microeconomic data , keane also surveyed the frisch elasticity studies for men for hours of work .

he lists 13 studies with a mean elasticity of 0.85 .

the estimate , however , was greatly influenced by one outlier ( of 6.25 ) ; with that study excluded , the mean was 0.4 .

the median value was 0.31 although six of the studies had values clustered between 0.03 and 0.17 , while the others varied substantially .

cbo researchers recently examined the frisch estimates .

they relied on microeconomic evidence .

as discussed in their paper , the few studies of frisch elasticities for married women tend to be higher than those of men .

the elasticity estimates for women also appear to be declining , consistent with other work that shows married women's labor supply response is becoming more like that of men .

the paper also reviews labor force participation elasticities , where studies have been focused on those close to retirement .

overall , the authors suggest a range of the frisch elasticity from 0.27 to 0.53 , with a central estimate of 0.4 .

neither of these studies reference ball , who found a zero frisch elasticity .

for keane's summary , including this study would reduce the mean to 0.34 and the median to 0.17 .

one of the most important , and yet often largely overlooked , parameters that affect the labor supply response in intertemporal models used to analyze taxes is the time endowment .

because choices are made with a utility function where individuals choose leisure and consumption , leisure demand has to be translated into labor supply , and the correspondence between those two drives the relationship .

a larger time endowment , which allows a larger amount of leisure , causes all of the labor supply elasticities to be larger .

if this measure is set independently , there are no obvious guides to how big it should be .

a 40 hour work week is 24% of the total hours in a week , and the leisure share is 76% .

there is , however , a biological need to sleep .

if a 40 hour week is assumed , and 8 hours per day are assigned to sleep , the share of leisure would be 64% .

however , workers may have an embedded lunch hour , and spend some necessary time commuting ( which is like working , in that it provides benefits such as lower housing prices ) , household activities , and care of family members .

the american time use survey indicates that the ratio of leisure to the sum of leisure and work is 43% for men aged 35 to 44 and 47% for women in the same age range .

these numbers tend to be relatively steady throughout the primary working age of 25 to 54 for both groups .

on average men between ages 35 and 44 work 42 hours a week and women work 29 hours ( reflecting some of those who are not in the work force ) .

women , however , spend much more time than men on house work and care of family members .

another way of considering this issue is that if it were assumed that the ratio of a leisure to hours available for a full time worker is 0.5 , then that person would be effectively able to hold two jobs ( work 80 hours a week ) which would imply 10 to 12 hour work days every day .

if it were assumed that up to another half time job could be taken , then a ratio of 0.33 would be appropriate .

the first study by auerbach and kotlikoff set the time endowment at 5,000 hours a year , which would lead to a leisure share of time at 0.6 assuming working for 40 hours for 50 weeks ( 2,000 hours ) .

in another early study , fullerton and rogers set the time endowment at 4,000 hours , which would suggest a share of 0.5 .

according to current data average hours are 42.5 for those who usually work full time and 38.5 for all workers .

neither study had a discussion of the basis for their choice .

current or recently used models range from a 0.3 to a 0.6 ratio of leisure to hours available .

this section examines the estimates used in the models ( primarily jct , cbo , and treasury ) .

to summarize the review , the evidence suggests that the labor income elasticity is between 0.0 and minus 0.1 , the substitution elasticity between 0.0 and 0.3 , total labor supply elasticity less than 0.3 , the savings rate elasticity around zero but no more than 0.4 if positive , the intertemporal substitution elasticity should be 0.2 or less , and the frisch elasticity 0.5 or less .

note that except for the intertemporal substitution elasticity none of these estimates have been adjusted for publication bias , and thus would probably be smaller in absolute value .

table 3 shows the values in the solow models .

the labor income and substitution elasticities in all three models are consistent with the empirical estimates noted above .

the treasury study is low on the elasticities for labor income and substitution effects ; it is also toward the high end on the savings elasticity .

all of these estimates are inside the ranges suggested above , with a labor substitution elasticity of less than 0.3 .

note , however , that even a limited difference can have an impact , so that a change that cut marginal and average rates the same amount would have twice the effect in the cbo model as in the jct model .

note also that the jct model is not a pure solow model , but rather has an intertemporal model of consumption over time .

the elasticities in the intertemporal model must be derived in some cases .

the parameters that are directly entered into a model that has a utility function composed of leisure and consumption , are the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ( over time ) , the intratemporal substitution between leisure and consumption , and leisure as a share of time ( which is set by the value of coefficients on leisure and consumption in the utility function ) .

to convert leisure demand into labor supply , the substitution elasticity and income elasticity for leisure ( which is one because of the nature of the utility function ) must be multiplied by the ratio of leisure to hours available ( assuming there is no other non - labor income ) .

the frisch elasticity is the ratio of leisure to labor , multiplied by a weighted average of the intertemporal and the intratemporal substitution elasticities ( with the weights the shares of leisure and consumption ) .

the other intertemporal elasticity of labor supply ( the change in labor as the relative price of future consumption changes through changes in the rate of return ) is the ratio of leisure to labor , multiplied by the intertemporal substitution elasticity .

table 4 reports both these direct and derived elasticities for the jct , cbo , and treasury models along with assumptions made in three academic studies of taxation by one or both of the authors of the diamond - zodrow olg model .

note that only one model in table 4 is a ramsey model ( the treasury model ) .

all of the intertemporal elasticities are large compared with the empirical evidence .

as indicated in table 4 , in contrast to the solow models the implied labor substitution elasticities are higher than those empirically estimated in the cbo , the treasury ramsey model and the diamond tax reform .

a large part of the reason for this high elasticity is the large leisure share of time , although they also tend to have larger substitution elasticities .

all of the income elasticities are too large in absolute value and all of the models except cbo have a backward bending labor supply ( in contrast to the solow models ) .

the largest absolute values are in the treasury ramsey and diamond tax reform model , with the lowest in the jct and diamond zodrow housing study .

since the form of the utility function forces the income elasticity of demand for leisure to be one , these values are driven by the leisure share of time .

compared to empirical estimates , the frisch elasticity is too high in the treasury ramsey model , and in a general range in the rest of the models .

finally , the last elasticity , the intertemporal labor supply response to the interest rate should probably be close to zero since there is no evidence supporting any response .

they are largest in the treasury models and the diamond tax reform study .

is it possible to make choices that would lead to better elasticities ? .

it would require using the time endowment as a tool to fit the model to evidence , as suggested by ballard .

for example , set the intertemporal elasticity at 0.2 , consistent with the evidence .

set the intratemporal substitution elasticity at 1.5 and the leisure share of hours at 0.15 .

then the labor substitution elasticity would be 0.225 , the income elasticity would be - 0.15 , and there would be a slight positive elasticity of total labor supply .

the frisch elasticity would be 0.23 ( using labor and leisure shares as proxies for shares of consumption and leisure ) , at the low end , but reasonable considering publication bias , and the elasticity of labor with response to price change would be 0.026 , small enough not to be very troubling .

note that the cbo model is a model with uncertainty .

generally , uncertainty should lead to precautionary savings that is not sensitive to the interest rate , and a lower savings response .

economists were attracted to intertemporal models because they were dissatisfied with the ad hoc treatment of savings in solow models .

however , intertemporal models are far less transparent , and modelers appear in some cases to make little attempt to connect the elasticities associated with labor supply to the ones found in empirical evidence .

the jct model used in the past has come close but , as illustrated , it is possible to come even closer to matching the empirical evidence , while at the same time minimizing "shooting in the dark" with a labor supply response to the interest rate .

jct also incorporates life - cycle elements in their meg model that do not involve labor supply responses to rates of return .

nevertheless , the assumption of equal substitution elasticities between consumption across far apart periods means that these models still rest on unproven , and probably unreasonable assumptions about the elasticity of substitution between consumption amounts that are ten or twenty years apart .

there is a question of whether intertemporal models do more harm than good , at least with respect to the feedback effects during the budget horizon , especially when parameter choices may induce a large labor supply response to the rate of return .

intertemporal modelers presenting the background on their models sometimes report the first two values in table 4 but no measure of the leisure share of time , which makes it impossible to evaluate on the basis of their published work .

sometimes even the minimal information on elasticities is not provided .

 ( jct and cbo report all their relevant assumptions. ) .

without the parameters to understand the models ( and particularly without information on the time endowment ) , these models become impossible to evaluate or compare .

consider a model which incorporates a labor supply based on an estimated elasticity of e. in that case , with l as labor , w as wages and t as the tax rate on wages ( denoting a "d" as a change , so that dl is a small change in l and dl / l is a percentage change in l ) , the labor supply can be defined as: ( 1 ) dl / l = e ( dw / w – dt / ( 1-t ) ) this model assumes that e is positive , so labor rises with an increase in w and falls with an increase in t. also note that the response is not to a percentage change in t , but to a percentage change in the after tax share , ( 1-t ) .

with this information , a simple revenue feedback effect can be estimated .

revenue from the tax is twl and the change in revenue is: ( 2 ) d ( twl ) = dt ( wl ) + tw ( dl ) holding wages constant ( this assumption will subsequently be relaxed ) , and substituting from ( 1 ) into ( 2 ) , the ratio of the second term in ( 2 ) to the first ( the feedback effect ) is: ( 3 ) ( twdl ) / ( ( dt ) wl ) = - et / ( 1-t ) assuming a tax rate of 25% and a labor supply elasticity of 0.1 to 0.2 , the feedback effect ranges from 3.3% to 6.6% .

the feedback effect is larger the larger the initial tax and the larger the elasticity .

a decrease in labor supply looking only at the labor market would be expected to raise wages which would affect the wage base and also have a feedback effect on labor .

the rise in wages and the contraction in labor would also increase the rate of return to capital .

this in turn could cause an increase in the capital stock ( either from savings or from capital flows from abroad ) .

to address these effects in the short run , the model would also require a production function which shows how labor and capital can be combined .

every model has a "numeraire" or a fixed value since economic effects depend on relative , rather than absolute , values .

a sensible numeraire for this model is the overall price level , p. changes in prices are a weighted average of the wage and rate of return depending on their share of income .

setting the share of capital income as a , and denoting the rate of return as r and the capital stock as k ( to keep the model simply , depreciation is not included and income shares reflect net product ) : ( 4 ) dp / p = a ( dr / r ) + ( 1-a ) dw / w = 0 finally consider a common production function ( a cobb douglas ) that has the characteristic that income shares are fixed , so that a is a constant and: ( 5 ) rk / wl = a / ( 1-a ) when this equation is differentiated to convert it into percentage changes ; ( 6 ) dr / r +dk / k - dw / w - dl / l= 0 if k is constant , substitute from ( 4 ) to eliminate dr / r .

from equation ( 1 ) : ( 7 ) ( td ( wl ) ) / ( dtwl ) = [e ( 1-a ) t] / [ ( 1-t ) ( 1+ae ) ] the feedback response from the labor tax , assuming a is 0.25 , is smaller .

rather than 3.3% to 6.6% , it is 2.4% to 4.8% .

if capital income is also subject to tax , then the effects of the rise in r needs to also be calculated and taken into account .

if taxed at the same rate , the result is [eat] / [ ( 1-t ) ( 1+ae ) ] , which is 0.8% to 1.6% .

adding both responses = [et] / [ ( 1-t ) ( 1+ae ) ] .

as this example indicates , with an across the board tax the feedback effects are not much different incorporating these general equilibrium effects ( 3.2% and 6.4% rather than 3.3% and 6.6% ) .

these results can also be used to show increases in output .

in the case where the capital stock is fixed , the percentage change in labor for a given percentage change in the after tax share is the same as the feedback effect in ( 3 ) but since labor is only a part of output , it would be multiplied by the output share ( 0.75 ) .

the result is the same as the ratio in ( 7 ) .

thus a 20% decrease in the tax rate would increase output , with an elasticity of 0.1 , by 2.4% times 0.2 , or 0.5% percent .

for the 0.2 elasticity the result would be 1% .

the previous short run model had a fixed capital stock and three variables , the rate of return r , the wage rate w and the labor supply , l. a solow growth model allows ( if it is a closed economy ) growth over time in capital and feedback effects .

in the long run , that permits a change in capital .

capital can grow not only because of a change in savings rate but also because increased labor income generates capital to go along with it even if the savings rate does not change .

in the long run steady state , additional variables , output ( q ) and the savings rate ( s ) have to be added .

 ( 8 ) dq / q = adk / k + ( 1-a ) dl / l which indicates that the percentage change in output is a weighted average of the percentage changes in capital and labor .

in addition the savings rate is determined by the after tax return , where t k is the tax rate on capital income .

 ( 9 ) ds / s = es ( dr / r - dt k / ( 1-t k ) ) finally , in the steady state savings equals investment , ( 10 ) gk = sq where g is a constant exogenous growth rate of population and technology .

thus , ( 11 ) dk / k = ds / s + dq / q these results are shown in table 1 and table 2 , for various elasticities .

the feedback effects , which all have the same denominator: 1+ae+ ( 1-a ) es , and are all multiplied by t / ( 1-t ) have the following numerators: ( a ) labor tax change with general income tax in place: e ( 1+es ) ( b ) capital income tax change with general income tax in place: es ( 1+e ) ( c ) income tax change ( on capital and labor ) : ( 1-a ) e ( 1+es ) +aes ( 1+e ) output effects can also be calculated for the solutions to the change in labor and capital as ( 1-a ) dl / l+adk / k .

