this report provides answers to 20 frequently asked questions regarding contractors and healthcare.gov , the federal online health insurance portal called for by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

over 50 contractors , including cgi federal and quality software services , inc. ( qssi ) , helped in building the site , which was reportedly largely unusable when it first became available to the public on october 1 , 2013 , and has been the subject of ongoing work since then .

exactly what went wrong in terms of healthcare.gov's rollout has been explored in several congressional hearings , and is under investigation by the department of health and human services inspector general .

litigation between the contract parties over costs or damages is also possible .

the questions and answers in the report are organized into three broad categories addressing ( 1 ) the processes whereby the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) selected vendors ; ( 2 ) the terms of the vendors' contractual relationships with the government ; and ( 3 ) potential amendments to federal procurement law that , some commentators suggest , could help prevent issues of the sort experienced with healthcare.gov .

the questions in this report are those that happen to have been frequently asked of the congressional research service by congressional staffers .

the inclusion of a particular question , or the exclusion of another question , should not be taken to indicate that particular factors did—or did not—contribute to the problematic rollout of healthcare.gov .

in addition , answers to these questions must often be provided in general terms , in part , because specific language in the parties' contracts may be subject to multiple interpretations and has not been construed by any court .

in addition , the parties' conduct in the course of performing the contract—the details of which are still emerging—can affect their rights .

for example , the government could potentially be found to have waived certain rights that the contract's plain language would appear to grant to it by engaging in conduct that warrants an inference that it has relinquished the right .

the authors of this report rely upon third - party investigations of the facts and circumstances surrounding healthcare.gov , and additional information may emerge regarding topics discussed herein .

there is also a video , crs wvb00013 , contractors and healthcare.gov: background in brief , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , that addresses certain of these questions .

some commentators have suggested that making federal procurements of information technology ( it ) more like private sector procurements of it , in terms of consideration of risk and use of modular contracting methods , could help prevent situations like healthcare.gov .

currently , part 39 of the far directs agencies to "analyze risks , benefits , and costs" before entering into a contract for it .

risks associated with schedules , cost , technical feasibility , dependencies between new projects and other projects or systems , and program management , among others , are specifically recognized ; and agencies are instructed to apply appropriate techniques to manage and mitigate such risks .

suggested techniques include modular contracting , among other things .

part 39 also designates contracting and program officials as "jointly responsible" for managing and controlling risk when selecting projects and during program implementation .

part 39 also reiterates the requirement , initially found in the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , that executive agencies , "to the maximum extent practicable," use modular contracting—that is , use one or more contracts to acquire information technology systems in successive , interoperable increments—for the acquisition of "major system of information technology. .

in addition , part 39 ( 1 ) indicates that agencies may use modular contracting to acquire non - major systems of it ; ( 2 ) suggests how acquisitions of it systems may be divided into smaller increments ; ( 3 ) requires contracting officers to choose "appropriate" contracting techniques that facilitate the acquisition of subsequent increments ; and ( 4 ) encourages contract award , "to the maximum extent practicable," within 180 days after the solicitation's issuance in order to avoid obsolescence .

there would seem to be some opportunities to expand upon the current framework , since the risk management techniques addressed in part 39 are generally encouraged , not required .

similarly , modular contracting is only required , "to the maximum extent practicable," with "major systems" of it .

it is not required with major systems when its use is deemed not to be practicable by the procuring agency , or when acquiring non - major systems .

 ( major systems are "combinations of elements," whose cost exceeds certain monetary thresholds or which are designated as such by agency heads , that "will function together to produce the capabilities required to fulfill a mission need." ) .

however , given that consideration of risk and modular contracting is currently , at a minimum , encouraged , it is unclear that merely requiring these things , in and of itself , would necessarily suffice to ensure that agencies effectively deploy any required techniques .

an agency that erred significantly in any required risk assessment could potentially still end up with the same difficulties that cms experienced with healthcare.gov .

some commentators have suggested that problems like those experienced with healthcare.gov could potentially be avoided if federal agencies made greater use of performance based acquisition ( pba ) , an approach to acquisition structured around the results to be achieved , rather than the manner in which work is performed .

pba has been widely recognized as having certain benefits ( eg , lessening performance risk , removing the need for detailed specifications or process descriptions ) , and a statute enacted in 2000 established a "preference" for the use of performance - based contracts and orders in the acquisition of services by executive agencies .

the services acquisition reform act ( sara ) of 2003 , as amended , expanded on this preference by granting agencies temporary authority to treat performance - based contracts and orders for services as if they were contracts for commercial items , provided certain conditions were met .

subpart 37.6 of the far provides further guidance about how agencies are to develop performance work statements , performance standards , and quality assurance surveillance plans .

among other things , the far prescribes that , in developing performance work statements , agencies must , "to the maximum extent practicable," ( 1 ) describe the work in terms of the desired results , rather than how the work is to be accomplished or the number of hours ; and ( 2 ) enable assessment of work performance against measurable performance standards , among other things .

the far similarly requires that performance standards be measurable and structured to permit assessment of the contractor's performance , and that quality assurance surveillance plans meet the requirements of subpart 46.4 of the far .

however , despite general agreement on the potential benefits of pba , and statutes and regulations promoting pba , agencies have made arguably little use of it , and the key question seems to be how agencies can be brought to make greater use of pba .

further , even with pba , an agency that failed to adequately describe its desired results to its vendors—or that kept changing its desired results over time—could potentially still be at risk of performance failures .

some have suggested that the problems with heathcare.gov arose , at least in part , because cms drew upon the standard pool of government vendors and did not work with innovative start - ups or entities widely known for their commercial it products .

further , according to these commentators , executive agencies , like cms , are limited in their ability to work with commercial firms because federal contracting processes are too "dated" and "inflexible," and / or agencies impose too many government - specific terms upon vendors as conditions of their contracts .

the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) of 1994 established a "preference" for the acquisition of "commercial items" by requiring , among other things , that executive agencies define their requirements , "to the maximum extent practicable," "so that commercial items ... may be procured," or "to the extent that commercial items suitable to meet the executive agency's needs are not available , nondevelopmental items other than commercial items may be procured. .

the federal acquisition reform act ( fara ) of 1996 and the service acquisition reform act ( sara ) of 2003 subsequently expanded on this preference , including by exempting acquisitions of commercial items from a number of standard requirements and contract terms .

however , the application of these authorities has proved controversial , with some suggesting that agencies have relied upon the authorities to their own detriment ( eg , by paying higher prices because they did not obtain certified cost or pricing data from the vendor ) , and , particularly since 2003 , congress has specifically extended certain requirements to commercial vendors .

other commentators , however , have objected to what they perceive as the "erosion" of the commercial item authorities .

facilitating increased dealings with commercial vendors in the context of it procurement could potentially be complicated insofar as it implicates this broader debate .

further , current law focuses primarily upon the acquisition of commercial items , not the use of commercial vendors , per se .

there may be cases where facilitating the acquisition of commercial items also promotes use of commercial vendors ; however , there may be other cases where this is not so .

some commentators have suggested that cms's decision to rely , in part , on an id / iq contract awarded in 2007 in implementing healthcare.gov contributed to the problematic rollout because only vendors who held that contract could be considered , and other vendors—including new and potentially innovative ones—were excluded .

as previously noted , id / iq contracts generally permit the government to issue orders for whatever quantities of supplies or services it needs , whenever during the term of the contract it needs them ; and there is a preference that such contracts be awarded to multiple vendors , each of whom must generally be given a "fair opportunity to be considered" for orders .

congress expressly authorized executive agencies to use id / iq contracts in 1994 , when it enacted the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) .

among other things , fasa requires that solicitations for id / iq contracts "include ... a statement of work , specifications , or other description that reasonably describes the general scope , nature , complexity , and purposes of the services or property to be procured under the contract. .

this requirement was imposed to address concerns that , by giving solicitations for id / iq contracts broad scopes , agencies could use the resulting contracts "routinely to obtain a wide range of [supplies and services] without meaningful competition," and the far subsequently imposed similar requirements upon id / iq contracts themselves .

however , despite this requirement , commentators have expressed concern about id / iq contracts with arguably broad scopes , or apparently tenuous relationships between the work required under the contract and that contemplated by particular orders , including in the case of healthcare.gov .

in addition , the overall guidance on the "appropriate use" of id / iq contracts—which the national defense authorization act for fy2000 required to be developed —provides only that agencies "should use" id / iq contracts "when a recurring need is anticipated. .

some have wondered about requiring it vendors to post performance bonds , as some states did when contracting for it in the 1990s .

bonds rely upon third - parties—known as sureties—to ensure that the government still receives performance , or is appropriately compensated , if the initial vendor fails to perform .

a federal statute , the miller act of 1935 , as amended , generally requires that construction contractors post performance bonds on federal contracts .

however , the miller act does not apply to non - construction contractors , and the far directs that "[g]enerally , agencies shall not require performance ... bonds for other than construction contracts. .

pursuant to the far , such bonds may be required only for non - construction contracts exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold ( generally $150,000 ) "when necessary to protect the government's interest," such as when ( 1 ) government property or funds are to be provided to the contractor for use in performing the contract or as partial compensation ; ( 2 ) the government desires assurance that a successor in interest to a contractor is financially capable ; ( 3 ) substantial progress payments are made before delivery of end items starts ; or ( 4 ) contracts are for the dismantling , demolition , or removal of improvements .

requiring performance bonds could potentially help ensure uninterrupted performance under it contracts because the surety generally must arrange for completion of the contract , or compensate the government , if the contractor fails to fulfill its obligations .

such a requirement could also reduce the possibility that a contractor performing work for the government will default because of insolvency , since sureties generally issue bonds only to contractors who are in good financial standing .

however , neither interruption of performance nor default due to insolvency appears to have been directly at issue in the case of healthcare.gov , and requiring performance bonds could limit the number of vendors willing and able to compete for federal contracts , thereby increasing costs .

express warranties were also used by state governments during the 1990s when procuring it , and some have wondered about the possibility of requiring similar warranties of performance in federal it contracts in the wake of healthcare.gov .

currently , per the far , the "use of warranties"—or promises or affirmations given by a vendor regarding the nature , usefulness , or condition of the supplies , or the performance of services , furnished under the contract—"is not mandatory" in federal contracts .

however , the far authorizes agencies to use warranties in specific acquisitions when such use is "appropriate" and approved in accordance with agency procedures .

whether a warranty is seen as appropriate depends upon various factors , including ( 1 ) the nature and use of the supplies and services ( eg , their complexity and function , the potential harm to the government if the item is defective ) ; ( 2 ) the costs arising from the contractor's charge for accepting the deferred liability created by the warranty , and the government's cost in administering and enforcing the warranty ; ( 3 ) the government's ability to enforce the warranty ; ( 4 ) trade practice ; and ( 5 ) whether the contractor's charge for the assumption of added liability may be offset by reducing the government's quality assurance requirements .

the far also encourages reliance on commercial warranties for the repair and replacement of commercial items where "appropriate and in the government's best interest. .

requiring express warranties as to certain it systems may seem appealing , particularly in light of the apparent performance failures of certain components of healthcare.gov .

however , as the far itself suggests , the use of an express warranty typically increases contract costs , as vendors "charge for accepting the deferred liability created by the warranty. .

thus , across - the - board requirements for specific express warranties for it could potentially result in the government incurring costs that are not commensurate with the benefits received from the warranty , particularly if the government's ability to enforce the warranty is limited .

in addition , it is important to note that the government's ability to recover costs or damages for a vendor's unjustified failure to deliver supplies or services that materially satisfy contractual requirements is generally not contingent upon the presence of an express warranty .

some commentators have suggested that improved recording and consideration of information about vendors' performance under federal contracts could help agencies avoid dealings with vendors who have experienced performance problems in the past and , so the thinking goes , may be more likely to experience such problems in the future .

currently , under the far , executive agencies ( 1 ) are generally required to evaluate vendors' performance on contracts and orders valued in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold ( generally $150,000 ) at least annually and at the time when work on a contract or order is completed ; and ( 2 ) must consider past performance or some other "non - cost evaluation factor" when selecting vendors in negotiated procurements .

the far also prescribes certain aspects of the vendor's performance that must , "at a minimum," be included in performance evaluations , and defines the five adjectival ratings—from "exceptional" through "unsatisfactory"—that agencies are to use in describing performance .

aspects of performance to be addressed include the quality of the product or service ; cost control ; schedule and timeliness ; management or business relations ; subcontracting with small businesses ; and other applicable factors ( eg , late payment of subcontractors ) .

the far's requirements as to consideration of past performance in source selection , in contrast , are arguably more limited , with agencies generally having discretion in defining what constitutes past performance for purposes of the procurement ; determining what performances qualify as recent and relevant ; and establishing the weight to be given to past performance and other factors , such as cost or price .

contracting officers are also generally free to draw their own inferences regarding contractors' past performance from the sources they consult , so long as the conclusions are reasonable .

this framework could potentially be modified in an attempt to further standardize agency evaluations of contractors' past performance , or to require that agency evaluations be considered in specific ways in source selection .

however , agency evaluation and consideration of vendor's past performance were not designed to remove all risk from the procurement process .

rather , they were intended to permit agencies to make more informed decisions about whether potential performance risks may be offset by other factors ( eg , lower price ) .

in addition , certain amendments to the current requirements could conceivably decrease the number of potential vendors—and , thus , increase costs—unless there were mechanisms whereby agencies could differentiate between vendors with different types and degrees of performance problems , and vendors could demonstrate that they have overcome prior performance problems .

some have suggested that performance problems , such as those experienced by cgi federal's predecessor firm , american management systems , should be given greater consideration not only in source - selection decisions , but also in determinations as to responsibility and exclusion .

as previously noted , executive agencies are generally prohibited from entering a contract with a prospective vendor who has not been found to be affirmatively responsible based on criteria that include whether the vendor has a "satisfactory performance record. .

the far further provides that vendors that are , or recently have been , "seriously deficient in contract performance"—as evidenced by delinquent performance , delivery of nonconforming items , poor management or technical judgment , or failure to correct production problems , among other things —generally "shall be presumed to be nonresponsible. .

past failure to apply sufficient tenacity and perseverance to perform acceptably is also said to be "strong evidence of nonresponsibility," and failure to meet the quality requirements of the contract is described as a "significant factor" in determining satisfactory performance .

responsibility determinations are , however , intended to address only the risks of nonperformance on specific contracts , not to exclude "poor performers" from all dealings with federal agencies .

a separate process , involving debarment , is used for purposes of exclusion , and agencies could potentially be found to have impermissibly engaged in de facto debarment if they were to intentionally or effectively use the responsibility determination process to preclude a vendor from any dealings with the government .

subpart 9.4 of the far , in turn , expressly authorizes an agency to debar a contractor after finding , by a preponderance of the evidence , a "violation of the terms of a government contract or subcontract so serious as to justify debarment. .

such violations can include willful failure to perform in accordance with the contract's terms ; or a history of failure to perform , or unsatisfactory performance of , one or more contracts .

contractors must generally be given notice and an opportunity for a hearing prior to being debarred , particularly when the debarment is based upon agency findings , rather than convictions or civil judgments .

moreover , any debarment under the far—including for serious violations of the terms of a government contract—is discretionary , not mandatory .

it is to be imposed "only in the public interest for the government's protection and not for purposes of punishment. .

executive agencies , in general , have recently been criticized by some members of congress and the public for their limited use of their discretionary authority to debar , particularly on performance - related grounds .

however , some agencies reportedly have established procedures whereby vendors whose contracts are terminated for default —that is , for failure to perform as required by the contract—are automatically referred to the appropriate officials for potential debarment .

all agencies could be required to do this .

however , particularly given the frequent disputes between vendors and agencies over who was , in fact , responsible for performance problems , such a requirement could potentially increase the amount of litigation , as vendors seek to have terminations for default be found to be improper and converted into terminations for convenience .

also , a vendor that experiences significant performance failures on only one contract , due to exceptional circumstances , may pose no performance risks to other agencies .

it has been widely noted that cms essentially served as the lead system integrator ( lsi ) for healthcare.gov , managing the assembly of component systems developed and tested by various vendors into a single system ; and some have questioned whether cms had the in - house capabilities to effectively perform this role .

nothing in current law either required cms to serve as the lsi , or prohibited it from doing so .

congress enacted legislation in 2006 and 2008 that imposed certain limits on the use of lsis by the department of defense ( dod ) , partly due to concern that agencies' use of lsis may give vendors "discretion to make program decisions. .

however , these restrictions only apply to dod , and then only in acquisitions of "major systems. .

the restrictions do not apply to civilian agencies , like cms , or even to dod procurements that do not involve major systems .

congressional and public concern about the use of lsis by dod could , however , potentially have influenced cms's decision not to use an lsi with healthcare.gov .

earlier debates over the use of lead system integrators centered , in part , upon whether such entities may perform functions that are inherently governmental ( i.e. , functions that , as a matter of federal law and policy , must be performed by government employees and cannot be contracted out ) , or closely associated with inherently governmental functions .

further , guidance issued by the obama administration in 2011 regarding functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions requires that agencies , among other things , ( 1 ) give special consideration to having federal employees perform the work ; ( 2 ) have the resources to give "special management attention" to the contractor's performance ; and ( 3 ) take steps to "limit or guide" contractors' exercise of discretion .

use of an lsi here could potentially have helped clarify responsibility when healthcare.gov failed to perform as required after its rollout , and would have meant that cms only had to oversee the performance of one vendor , as opposed to more than 50 .

however , any agency deficiencies in contract administration arguably remain as salient when there is one contractor—tasked with assembling the work of other vendors—as they are when there are multiple contractors .

