on april 10 , 2013 , president obama submitted his fy2014 budget request .

the request included a total of $45.4 billion for agencies funded through the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill , including $315 million for the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

on july 23 , 2013 , the house committee on appropriations ( hereinafter "the house committee" ) reported the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2014 ( h.r .

2786 ; h.rept .

113-172 ) .

h.r .

2786 would have provided $38.1 billion for agencies funded through the house fsgg appropriations subcommittee .

in addition , the cftc would have received $194.6 million through the fy2014 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

2410 , h.rept .

113-116 ) .

total fy2014 funding in the house bill would have been $38.3 billion , about $7.1 billion below the president's fy2014 request .

on july 25 , 2013 , the senate committee on appropriations ( hereinafter "the senate committee" ) reported its financial services and general government appropriations act , 2014 ( s. 1371 ; s.rept .

113-80 ) .

s. 1371 would have provided $44.3 billion for fsgg agencies , including $315 million for the cftc , which would have been $1.1 billion below the president's fy2014 request .

table 1 reflects the status of fsgg appropriations measures at key points in the appropriations process .

prior to the beginning of fy2014 , congressional action occurred on an interim continuing resolution ( cr ) that would have provided continuing appropriations for projects and activities for which authority existed during the previous fiscal year .

h.j.res .

59 was introduced on september 10 , 2013 , and passed the house on september 20 .

on september 27 , 2013 , the senate passed h.j.res .

59 with an amendment .

subsequent actions to resolve differences between the house and senate , which included the consideration of various house amendments to that senate amendment , were unsuccessful .

no other interim crs that broadly covered the previous fiscal year's projects and activities received congressional action at that time .

because none of the 12 regular appropriations bills for fy2014 were enacted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year , a funding gap commenced on october 1 , 2013 .

congressional action on fy2014 appropriations between october 2 and october 15 was generally limited to a number of narrow crs to provide funding for certain programs or classes of individuals .

on october 16 , 2013 , the senate passed a previously passed bill , h.r .

2775 , with an amendment that , in part , provided interim continuing appropriations for the previous fiscal year's projects and activities , and retitled h.r .

2775 as the continuing appropriations act , 2014 .

later that same day , the house agreed to the senate amendment to h.r .

2775 .

the cr was signed into law on october 17 , 2013 ( p.l .

113-46 ) , thus terminating the funding gap that same day .

with some routine exceptions , p.l .

113-46 provided budget authority through january 15 , 2014 .

under p.l .

113-46 , most fsgg accounts were funded at the same level as they were for fy2013 .

however , there were exceptions to this general approach , which are often referred to in appropriations argot as "anomalies. .

the anomalies identified in p.l .

113-46 included: section 125 provided appropriations for "the judiciary — courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services — salaries and expenses" at a rate of operations of $4,820,181,000 , with an amount not to exceed $25,000,000 to be available for transfer between accounts to maintain minimum operating levels .

section 126 provided appropriations for "the judiciary — courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services — defender services" at a rate for operations of $1,012,000,000 .

section 127 provided that the district of columbia may expend local funds under the heading "district of columbia funds" for such programs and activities under title iv of h.r .

2786 as reported by the house committee on appropriations .

the rate of spending is to be the rate set forth under "district of columbia funds — summary of expenses" as included in the fiscal year 2014 budget request act of 2013 ( d.c. act 20-127 ) , as modified as of the date of the enactment of this joint resolution .

on january 15 , 2014 , the house amended a previously passed bill , h.r .

3547 , renaming it the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , and passed it again on a vote of 359-67 .

the senate took up the amended bill on january 16 , 2014 , passing it on a vote of 72-26 .

the president signed h.r .

3547 into law as p.l .

113-76 on january 17 , 2014 .

total fy2014 fsgg funding in p.l .

113-76 was $42.3 billion , about $2.2 billion below the president's fy2014 request .

the fsgg appropriations were enacted as division e of p.l .

113-76 .

in lieu of a report on h.r .

3547 , the chairman of the house committee on appropriations submitted an explanatory statement , printed in the congressional record for january 15 , 2014 , henceforth referred to as "explanatory statement , consolidated appropriations act , 2014. .

the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures in early 2007 .

each chamber created a new financial services and general government subcommittee .

in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee comprised primarily agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. .

in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) .

in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee was a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees .

the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba .

in addition , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , the judiciary , housing and urban development , and related agencies were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee .

as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate but not in the house , where it is under the agriculture subcommittee .

the fsgg appropriations bill includes funding for the department of the treasury , the executive office of the president ( eop ) , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and more than two dozen independent agencies .

for these five segments of the fsgg appropriations bill , table 2 lists the enacted amounts for fy2013 prior to the sequester under the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , the president's fy2014 request , amounts recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees for fy2014 , and the fy2014 enacted amounts .

this section examines fy2014 appropriations for the treasury department and its operating bureaus , including the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

the treasury department performs a variety of critical functions .

these include guarding the nation's financial system against a variety of illicit activities ( such as money laundering and terrorist financing ) , collecting tax revenue and enforcing tax laws , managing and accounting for federal debt , administering the federal government's finances , regulating certain financial institutions , and producing and distributing coins and currency .

the fsgg appropriations bill provides funding for all but three offices under the eop .

the white house , the office of management and budget , and the office of national drug control policy are among the eop offices funded through fsgg appropriations .

table 4 lists the amounts for fy2013 prior to the sequester , the president's fy2014 request , amounts recommended by the house and senate fsgg appropriations bills for fy2014 , and the level of funding provided through p.l .

113-76 .

as a co - equal branch of government , the judiciary presents its budget to the president , who transmits it to congress unaltered .

the fy2014 judiciary budget request totaled $7.22 billion .

table 5 lists the pre - sequester amounts for fy2013 , the president's fy2014 request , amounts recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees for fy2014 , and enacted amounts for fy2014 .

the authority for congressional review and approval of the district of columbia's budget is derived from the constitution and the district of columbia self - government and government reorganization act of 1973 ( the home rule act ) .

the constitution gave congress the power to "exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever" pertaining to the district of columbia .

in 1973 , congress granted the city limited home rule authority and empowered citizens of the district to elect a mayor and city council .

however , congress retained the authority to review and approve all district laws , including the district's annual budget .

as required by the home rule act , the city council must approve a budget within 56 days after receiving a budget proposal from the mayor .

the approved budget must then be transmitted to the president , who forwards it to congress for its review , possible modification , and approval .

district of columbia appropriations acts typically include the following three components: 1 .

special federal payments appropriated by congress to be used to fund particular initiatives or activities of interest to congress or the administration .

2 .

the district's operating budget , including funds to cover the day - to - day functions , activities , and responsibilities of the district government ; enterprise funds that provide for the operation and maintenance of district government facilities or services that are entirely or primarily supported by user - based fees ; and long - term capital outlays such as road improvements .

district operating budget expenditures are paid for by revenues generated through local taxes ( sales and income ) , federal funds for which the district qualifies , and fees and other sources of funds .

3 .

general provisions are typically the third component of the district's budget reviewed and approved by congress .

these provisions can be grouped into several distinct but overlapping categories , with the most predominant being provisions relating to fiscal and budgetary directives and controls .

other provisions include administrative directives and controls , limitations on lobbying for statehood or congressional voting representation , congressional oversight , and congressionally imposed restrictions and prohibitions related to social policy .

both the president and congress may propose financial assistance to the district in the form of "special federal payments" in support of specific activities or priorities .

table 6 lists the pre - sequester amounts for fy2013 , the president's fy2014 request , the district of columbia's fy2014 request , the amounts recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees for fy2014 , and the final fy2014 enacted amounts .

the fsgg appropriations bill provides funding for more than two dozen independent agencies performing a wide range of functions .

these functions include the management of federal real property ( gsa ) , the regulation of financial institutions and markets ( sec and cftc ) , and mail delivery ( usps ) .

table 7 lists the pre - sequester amounts for fy2013 , the president's fy2014 request , the amounts recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees for fy2014 , and the fy2014 enacted amounts .

the financial services and general government appropriations act includes general provisions applying government - wide .

most of the provisions continue language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years because congress has decided to reiterate the language rather than making the provisions permanent .

an administration's proposed government - wide general provisions for a fiscal year are generally included in the budget appendix .

new provisions proposed in the fy2014 budget , and whether they were included in h.r .

2786 as reported , s. 1371 as reported , or p.l .

113-76 , follow .

as reported by the committees , h.r .

2786 and s. 1371 contained different provisions regarding restrictions governing u.s travel to cuba .

the house version would have tightened restrictions on travel by prohibiting funding for any additional authorization of people - to - people exchanges during the fiscal year , while the senate version would have eased restrictions on travel by authorizing a new general license for professional travel related to disaster prevention , emergency preparedness , and natural resource protection .

ultimately , however , p.l .

113-76 did not include any of the cuba provisions from the house or senate versions of the bill .

restrictions on travel to cuba have been a key and often contentious component of u.s. efforts to isolate cuba's communist government for much of the past 50 years .

over time there have been numerous changes to the restrictions and for five years , from 1977 until 1982 , there were no restrictions on travel .

restrictions on travel to cuba are part of the cuban assets control regulations ( cacr ) , the overall embargo regulations administered by the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

first issued in 1963 , the cacr have been amended many times over the years to reflect changes in policy , and remain in force today .

in 2009 , the obama administration eased restrictions for family travel , and in 2011 the administration further eased travel restrictions for religious and educational activities , including people - to - people travel .

at present , eight categories of travelers may travel to cuba under a general license , which means that there is no need to obtain special permission from ofac .

this includes those visiting close relatives in cuba ; full - time journalists ; full - time professionals conducting professional research ( of a noncommercial , academic nature ) or attending conferences sponsored by international professional organizations or associations ; faculty , staff , and students of accredited u.s. graduate and undergraduate degree - making institutions engaged in educational activities ; members and staff of religious organizations engaged in a full - time program of religious activities ; and travel related to licensed sales of agricultural , medical , and telecommunications products .

in addition , 15 categories of travelers engaging in a variety of activities , including educational , religious , and humanitarian activities and people - to - people exchanges may be eligible for specific licenses .

applications for specific licenses are reviewed and granted by ofac on a case - by - case basis .

the specific licenses for people - to - people travel are generally issued for one year to organizations that sponsor and organize such trips .

as reported by the house committee , h.r .

2786 included a provision in section 124 that would have prohibited fy2014 funding used "to approve , license , facilitate , authorize , or otherwise allow" travel - related or other transactions related to nonacademic educational exchanges ( i.e. , people - to - people travel ) to cuba set forth in 31 cfr 515.565 ( b ) ( 2 ) of the cacr .

the committee report to the house bill contended that this category of travel violates the prohibition on travel related to tourist activities set forth in the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 .

the report also maintained that the stated purpose of people - to - people travel — to promote the cuban people's independence from cuban authorities — "cannot be accomplished through itineraries that mainly feature interactions with representatives of a dictatorship that actively oppresses the cuban people , nor can it be accomplished through itineraries that do not require meetings with pro - democracy activists or independent members of cuban civil society. .

in contrast , the obama administration has defended such travel , maintaining that it helps build connections between the cuban and american people in order to give cubans the support and tools they need to move forward independent of the government .

according to assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs roberta jacobson , "the administration's travel , remittance and people - to - people policies are helping cubans by providing alternative sources of information , taking advantage of emerging opportunities for self - employment and private property , and strengthening civil society. .

the house bill had a second cuba provision in section 125 that would have required a treasury department report within 90 days of the bill's enactment with information for each fiscal year since fy2007 on the number of travelers visiting close relatives in cuba ; the average duration of these trips ; the average amount of u.s. dollars spent per family traveler ( including amount of remittances carried to cuba ) ; the number of return trips per year ; and the total sum of u.s. dollars spent collectively by family travelers for each fiscal year .

as reported by the senate committee , s. 1371 included a provision in section 628 that would have provided for a new general license for travel - related transactions for full - time professional research ; for attendance at professional meetings if the sponsoring organization was a u.s. organization ; and for the organization and management of professional meetings and conferences in cuba if the sponsoring organization was a u.s. professional organization and if the travel was related to disaster prevention , emergency preparedness , and natural resource protection , including for fisheries , coral reefs , and migratory species .

this provision would have expanded the current general licenses available for professional research and meetings in cuba that allow full - time professionals to conduct professional research in their areas ( with certain conditions ) , attend professional meetings or conferences in cuba organized by an international professional organization , and attend professional meetings for commercial telecommunications transactions ( 31 cfr 515.564 ) .

key policy staf .

